                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            THE RETURN TO PROTECTIONISM

                                     Pablo D. Fajgelbaum
                                     Pinelopi K. Goldberg
                                      Patrick J. Kennedy
                                     Amit K. Khandelwal

                                      Working Paper 25638
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25638


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           March 2019, Revised October 2019




Huifeng Chang, Jett Pettus, and Brian Pustilnik provided excellent research assistance. We thank
the Editor, Pol Antràs, and five anonymous referees. We thank Kyle Bagwell, Paul Krugman,
Jonah Rockoff, Alan Spearot, Bob Staiger, and seminar participants at various seminars for
helpful suggestions. We thank Andres Rodriguez-Clare, Andrew Bernard, and Linda Tesar for
their conference discussions. We acknowledge funding from the National Science Foundation
(NSF Grant 1529095). Kennedy acknowledges financial support from the National Science
Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program. Khandelwal acknowledges support from
The Council on Foreign Relations International Affairs Fellowship in International Economics,
and thanks the World Bank for their hospitality. Goldberg is currently Chief Economist of the
World Bank Group. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily represent the views of the World Bank Group or the National Bureau of
Economic Research. All errors are our own.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Pablo D. Fajgelbaum, Pinelopi K. Goldberg, Patrick J. Kennedy, and Amit K.
Khandelwal. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
The Return to Protectionism
Pablo D. Fajgelbaum, Pinelopi K. Goldberg, Patrick J. Kennedy, and Amit K. Khandelwal
NBER Working Paper No. 25638
March 2019, Revised October 2019
JEL No. F1

                                           ABSTRACT

After decades of supporting free trade, in 2018 the U.S. raised import tariffs and major trade
partners retaliated. We analyze the short-run impact of this return to protectionism on the U.S.
economy. Import and retaliatory tariffs caused large declines in imports and exports. Prices of
imports targeted by tariffs did not fall, implying complete pass-through of tariffs to duty-inclusive
prices. The resulting losses to U.S. consumers and firms who buy imports was $51 billion, or
0.27% of GDP. We embed the estimated trade elasticities in a general-equilibrium model of the
U.S. economy. After accounting for tariff revenue and gains to domestic producers, the aggregate
real income loss was $7.2 billion, or 0.04% of GDP. Import tariffs favored sectors concentrated in
politically competitive counties, and the model implies that tradeable-sector workers in heavily
Republican counties were the most negatively affected due to the retaliatory tariffs.


Pablo D. Fajgelbaum                               Patrick J. Kennedy
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
University of California, Los Angeles             University of California at Berkeley
Bunche Hall 8283                                  Evans Hall
315 Portola Plaza                                 Berkeley, CA 94720
Los Angeles, CA 90095                             patrick.kennedy@berkeley.edu
and NBER
pfajgelbaum@gmail.com                             Amit K. Khandelwal
                                                  Graduate School of Business
Pinelopi K. Goldberg                              Columbia University
Yale University                                   Uris Hall 606, 3022 Broadway
Department of Economics                           New York, NY 10027
37 Hillhouse Ave.                                 and NBER
P.O. Box 208264                                   ak2796@columbia.edu
New Haven, CT 06520-8264
and NBER
penny.goldberg@yale.edu
I       INTRODUCTION
    After more than a half-century of leading efforts to lower international trade barriers, in 2018
the U.S. enacted several waves of tariff increases on specific products and countries. Import tariffs
increased from 2.6% to 16.6% on 12,043 products covering $303 billion (12.7%) of annual U.S.
imports. In response, trade partners imposed retaliatory tariffs on U.S. exports. These counter-
measures increased tariffs from 7.3% to 20.4% on 8,073 export products covering $127 billion (8.2%)
of annual U.S. exports.
    This return to protection is unprecedented in the post-war era due to the sizes of the countries
involved, the magnitudes of the tariff increases, and the breadth of tariffs across sectors. What
were the short-run impacts on the U.S. economy? Classical trade theory dictates that the effects
depend on the incidence of tariffs. Consumers and firms who buy foreign products lose from higher
tariffs. Reallocations of expenditures into or away from domestic products induced by the U.S.
and retaliatory tariffs may lead to changes in U.S. export prices relative to import prices—that
is, terms-of-trade effects—and generate tariff revenue. The trade war may also have distributional
consequences across sectors, and therefore across regions with different patterns of specialization.
    Very little is known about tariff incidence, despite its central role in policy analysis. In this
paper, we first estimate the impacts of tariffs on U.S. trade quantities and prices. We estimate a
U.S. demand system that accommodates reallocations across imported varieties (defined as country-
product pairs), across imported products (defined as 10-digit Harmonized System product codes),
and between imported and domestic products within a sector (defined as a 4-digit NAICS industry
code). We combine this system with foreign export supply curves for each variety. The estimation
leverages the property that if changes in tariffs are uncorrelated with demand and supply shocks,
then a tariff can be used to simultaneously instrument both the import demand and foreign export
supply curves.1 We exploit panel variation at the variety level, and aggregate tariffs to construct
instruments that identify elasticities of substitution at the product and sector levels. Tests for
pre-existing trends, tariff anticipation, and an event-study framework validate using tariffs as a
source of identification.
    We find large declines in imports when the tariffs were implemented. Imports of varieties
targeted by U.S. tariffs fell on average 31.7%; imports of targeted products fell 2.5%; and imports
in targeted sectors fell 0.2%. The event study reveals no differential change in before-duty import
prices between targeted and untargeted source countries exporting the same product. These results
imply that we cannot reject horizontal foreign export supply curves. We estimate elasticities of
substitution across origins (i.e., varieties) within a product, across imported products, and between
domestic goods and imports within a sector of 2.53, 1.53, and 1.19, respectively.
    On the export side, we find that retaliatory tariffs resulted in a 9.9% decline in U.S. exports
within products. We estimate a roughly unitary elastic foreign demand for U.S. varieties (1.04), and
also find complete pass-through of retaliatory tariffs to foreign consumers. As with the import side,
    1
    This estimation approach was first applied by Romalis (2007) to study the effects of NAFTA and recently
formalized by Zoutman et al. (2018).


                                                    1
we demonstrate that these elasticities are not confounded by pre-existing trends or anticipation of
the retaliations.
    The findings imply complete pass-through of tariffs to duty-inclusive import prices, a finding
that is systematic across products with heterogeneous characteristics. The resulting real income
loss to U.S. consumers and firms who buy imports can be computed as the product of the import
share of value added (15%), the fraction of U.S. imports targeted by tariff increases (13%), and the
average increase in tariffs among targeted varieties (14%). This decline is $51 billion, or 0.27% of
GDP.
    The previous results have two important caveats. First, our analysis considers short-run effects,
but relative prices could change over longer horizons. Second, our estimation controls for country-
time and product-time effects, and therefore is unable to capture import price declines due to
relative wage changes across countries or sectors.2 In other words, the results do not imply that
the U.S. is a small open economy unable to affect world prices, as terms-of-trade effects could have
occurred through wage adjustments at the country-sector level.
    We combine the previously estimated parameters with a supply side model of the U.S. economy
to gauge some of these effects. The model imposes upward sloping industry supply curves in the
U.S. and predicts changes in sector-level prices in the U.S. due to demand reallocation induced
by tariffs. We impose perfect competition, flexible prices, and flexible adjustment of intermediate
inputs. To assess regional effects, we assume immobile labor and calibrate the model to match
specialization patterns across U.S. counties.3 In the model, U.S. tariffs reallocate domestic demand
into U.S. goods, raising total demand and therefore U.S. export prices, while retaliatory tariffs
have the opposite effect. These price changes are qualitatively consistent with suggestive evidence
that U.S. tariffs led to increases in the PPI and that sector-level export prices fell with retaliatory
tariffs.
    We obtain a ballpark estimate of the aggregate and regional effects of the 2018 tariff waves. We
estimate producer gains of $9.4 billion, or 0.05% of GDP. Adding up these gains, tariffs revenue, and
the losses from higher import costs yields a short-run loss of the 2018 tariffs on aggregate real income
of $7.2 billion, or 0.04% of GDP. Hence, we find substantial redistribution from buyers of foreign
goods to U.S. producers and the government, but a small net loss for the U.S economy as a whole
(which is not statistically significant at conventional levels after accounting for the parameters’
standard errors). While we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the aggregate losses are zero,
the results strongly indicate large consumer losses from the trade war. If trade partners had not
retaliated, the economy would have experienced a modest (and also not statistically significant)
    2
      Influential work by Bagwell and Staiger (1999) demonstrates that trade agreements serve to deal with terms-of-
trade externalities.
    3
      Our model-based calculations abstract from imperfect competition in international transactions, although incor-
porating variable markups would imply incomplete pass-through, which we do not observe. We measure input-output
linkages at the 4-digit industry level observed in BEA IO tables and impose unitary elasticities as in Caliendo and
Parro (2015). The aggregate impacts could be larger under tariff uncertainty (Handley and Limão, 2017) or different
assumptions on the input-output structure (Antràs and De Gortari, 2017; Baqaee and Farhi, 2019). See Freund et al.
(2018), Altig et al. (2018) and Bellora and Fontagné (2019) for analyses that incorporate some of these forces in the
context of the 2018 trade war.


                                                         2
gain of $0.5 billion.
    The small net effect also masks heterogeneous impacts across regions driven by patterns of
specialization across sectors. If capital and labor are regionally immobile—a reasonable assumption
over this short time horizon—sectoral heterogeneity in U.S. and foreign tariffs generates unequal
regional impacts. Our counterfactuals imply that all counties experienced reductions in tradeable
real wages. Using the model, we find a standard deviation of real wages in the tradeable sectors
across counties of 0.5%, relative to an average decline of 1.0%.
    We show that U.S. import protection was biased toward products made in electorally compet-
itive counties, as measured by their 2016 Presidential vote share, suggesting a potential ex ante
electoral rationale for the pattern of tariffs increases. This structure of U.S. protection is consistent
with the view that trade policies determined by electoral competition tend to favor voters who
are likely to be closer to an indifference point between candidates (Mayer, 1984; Dixit and Lon-
dregan, 1996; Grossman and Helpman, 2005). In contrast, retaliations disproportionately targeted
agricultural sectors, which tend to be concentrated in Republican-leaning counties. The model-
based results suggest that tradeable-sector workers in heavily Republican counties were the most
negatively because of this pattern of tariff retaliations.
    A large literature studies the impacts of changes in trade costs or foreign shocks through empir-
ical and quantitative methods (e.g., Eaton and Kortum (2002), Arkolakis et al. (2012) and Autor
et al. (2013)). We focus instead on trade policy, and on tariffs in particular, since they are the
primary policy instrument of the 2018 trade war.
    One approach to studying the impacts of trade policy uses ex post variation in tariffs across sec-
tors to assess impacts on sectors (e.g., Attanasio et al. 2004), regions (e.g., Topalova (2010), Kovak
(2013), and Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (2017)), firms (e.g., Amiti and Konings (2007), Goldberg et al.
(2010), and Bustos (2011)), or workers (e.g., Autor et al. (2014) and McCaig and Pavcnik (2018)).
A complementary approach uses quantitative models to simulate aggregate impacts of tariffs, such
as the Nash equilibrium of a global trade war (Ossa, 2014) or regional trade liberalizations (e.g.,
Caliendo and Parro (2015) and Caliendo et al. (2015)).4
    A key challenge in the empirical literature is to address the potential endogeneity of tariff
changes, and we devote significant attention to these concerns in our analysis. In quantitative
models, the parametrization of how trade volumes change with trade policy plays a key role, and
we use the observed changes in tariffs to estimate these trade elasticities.5
    Finally, our finding of complete pass-through deserves some discussion.6 Amiti et al. (2019)

   4
      Goldberg and Pavcnik (2016) and Ossa (2016) survey the recent literature studying the impacts of trade policy.
   5
      Some papers use time-series variation in tariffs to estimate trade elasticities; e.g., see Romalis (2007), Spearot
(2013) and Spearot (2016). Hillberry and Hummels (2013) and Head and Mayer (2014) review alternative approaches
typically used to estimate demand elasticities, including gravity estimates of the relationship between trade and prices
or proxies of marginal costs (e.g., Eaton and Kortum (2002), Atkin and Donaldson (2015), Simonovska and Waugh
(2014) and Donaldson (2018)) or GMM identification via heteroskedasticity of supply and demand shocks (e.g.,
Feenstra (1994) and Broda et al., 2008). Our elasticities are lower than those obtained from cross-sectional variation
but in the range of estimates from time series estimation (see Hillberry and Hummels 2013).
    6
      The few papers studying the impact of tariffs on import prices include Irwin (2014) for U.S. sugar duties in late
19th and early 20th centuries, Winkelmann and Winkelmann (1998) for 1980’s tariff reductions in New Zealand, and


                                                           3
and Cavallo et al. (2019) also find complete tariff pass-through to border prices in this trade war,
and Flaaen et al. (2019) estimate high tariff pass-through to retail prices for washing machines.
Yet, a large literature has estimated incomplete pass-through, in particular for exchange rates
(e.g., Goldberg and Knetter, 1997). An exception is Feenstra (1989), who finds symmetry in the
pass-through between tariffs and exchange-rate movements. Several hypotheses could reconcile
our findings with the exchange rate pass-through literature. The persistence of the tariff shocks
may cause before-duty import prices to eventually decline as time elapses. Our results are also
consistent with incomplete exchange rate pass-through if import prices are sticky and denominated
in dollars (Gopinath et al., 2010). Inspecting the precise mechanism underlying the complete tariff
pass-through finding deserves further exploration in future research.
     The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section II summarizes the data used
for the analysis. Section III outlines the demand-side framework that guides the estimation of
the elasticities and discusses the identification strategy. Section IV presents the empirical results.
Section V presents the model-based aggregate and distributional effects. Section VI concludes.


II     DATA AND TIMELINE
     This section describes the data, provides a timeline of key events, and presents an event study of
the impact of tariffs. The details about the dataset construction are available in Online Appendix
A.

II.A     Data
     We build a monthly panel dataset of U.S. statutory import tariffs using public schedules from the
U.S. International Trade Commission (USITC). Prior to 2018, USITC released annual “baseline”
tariff schedules in January and a revised schedule in July. In 2018, by contrast, USITC issued 14
schedule revisions, reflecting a rapid series of tariff increases. These ad-valorem tariff increases were
predominantly set at the 8-digit Harmonized System (HS) level, and swiftly implemented within
1-3 weeks following a press release by the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative.7 As we work
with monthly data and the tariffs were implemented in the middle of months, we scale the tariff
increases by the number of days of the month they were in effect.
     We compile retaliatory tariffs on U.S. exports from official documents released by the Ministry
of Finance of China, the Department of Finance of Canada, the Office of the President of Mexico,
and the World Trade Organization (covering the EU, Russia, and Turkey). These tariffs were also
entirely ad valorem and went into effect shortly after the announcement dates. To construct the
retaliatory tariffs, we use the annual WTO database of Most Favored Nation (MFN) tariff rates,
and compute the retaliatory tariff rate for each country-product as the sum of the MFN rate and


Feenstra (1989) for U.S. duties on Japanese compact trucks in the 1980s.
    7
      We ignore a small number of changes in import tariffs in 2018:1, 2018:7, and 2019:1 that are the result of
pre-existing treaty commitments. Thus, we use only the tariff changes due to the trade war as identifying variation.


                                                         4
the announced tariff rate change. We measure export tariffs at the HS-6 level, since HS-8 codes
are not directly comparable across countries. As with the import tariffs, we scale the retaliations
based on the day of the month they go into affect.
    We use publicly-available monthly administrative U.S. import and export data from the U.S.
Census Bureau that record values and quantities of trade flows at HS-10 level, which we refer to
as products.8 Country-product pairs are referred to as varieties. Our sample period covers 2017:1
to 2019:4, and covers the universe of HS-10 codes and countries. For imports, we directly observe
the value of duties collected. Unit values are constructed as the ratio of values to quantities, and
duty-inclusive unit values are constructed as (value + duties)/quantity. We do not observe the
duties collected by foreign governments on U.S. exports, so we construct duty-inclusive unit values
for exports as the unit value multiplied by (one plus) the ad valorem retaliatory statutory rate.
    We define sectors as NAICS-4 codes. We use the Federal Reserve G17 Industrial Production
Index as a measure of domestic sector output, and the BLS PPI, MPI and XPI indices of producer
prices, import prices and export prices, respectively. These sector-level panels are available at
monthly frequency. We use the 2016 Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) annual “use” tables from
the national input-output (I-O) accounts to construct I-O linkages between sectors.
    To analyze regional exposure we use the Census County Business Patterns (CBP) database,
which provides annual industry employment and wage data at the county-by-sector level for all non-
farm sectors. For county-level data covering the farm sector, we use the BEA Local Area Personal
Income and Employment database. From both data sources, we use 2016 data to compute the
industry employment share of each county. Finally, we obtain county-level demographic statistics
from the 2016 five-year American Community Survey and county-level voting data from the U.S.
Federal Election Commission.

II.B     Timeline
    Table I provides a timeline of events, and Figure I plots the tariff increases. Panel A of Table
I reports the total scope of affected imports, and shows that U.S. import tariffs targeted 12,043
distinct HS-10 products. In 2017, these imports were valued at $303 billion, or 12.7% of imports.
The average statutory tariff rate increased from 2.6% to 16.6%. An important feature of these
tariffs is that they were discriminatory across countries, which allows us to exploit variation in
tariff changes across varieties within products.9
    The first wave of tariff increases began in February 2018, when the U.S. increased tariffs on
$8 billion of solar panel and washing machine imports. A second wave of tariffs, implemented
in March 2018, targeted iron, aluminum, and steel products. The largest tranches of import
tariffs targeted approximately $247 billion worth of imports from China. In March 2018 the U.S.

   8
     These data are available at https://usatrade.census.gov/.
   9
     The U.S. authorized the tariffs through Section 201 of the Trade Act of 1974, Section 301 of the Trade Act of
1974, and Section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962. These laws permit the president to apply protectionist
measures under different justifications, including “serious injury” to domestic industries, threats to national security,
or retaliations for allegations of unfair trade practices.


                                                           5
implemented tariffs on approximately $50 billion of Chinese imports, and the scope and value
of targeted products on China expanded with subsequent tariffs waves implemented in July and
September. Rows 5-7 indicate that tariffs on China targeted 11,207 imported products worth $247
billion, and increased tariffs, on average, from 3.0% to 15.5%. A total of 48.8% of imports from
China were targeted with tariff increases.
    Panel B of Table I reports the retaliatory tariffs imposed on U.S. exports by trade partners.
Canada, China, Mexico, Russia, Turkey, and the E.U. enacted retaliatory tariffs against the U.S.,
and collectively these retaliations covered $127 billion (8.2%) of annual U.S. exports across 7,763
products. The average statutory tariff rate on these exports increased from 7.3% to 20.4%.

II.C    Structure of Protection across Sectors
    Table II reports summary statistics for targeted import and export varieties across NAICS-
3 codes. For imports, we report the number of targeted HS-10 products and varieties, and the
means and standard deviations of tariff increases across targeted varieties within NAICS-3 codes.
In sectors where only China was targeted, the number of targeted products equals the number of
targeted varieties. The table also reports the corresponding statistics for the retaliatory tariffs on
U.S. exports.
    The table conveys three facts. First, U.S. sectors that receive the most protection are primary
metals, machinery, computer products, and electrical equipment and appliances. These sectors
contain a large share of intermediate inputs, comprise a large share of targeted varieties and prod-
ucts, and saw steep tariff increases relative to most other sectors.10 Second, U.S. trade partners
concentrated retaliatory tariffs on different sets of products and sectors; the sector-level correlation
between import and retaliatory tariffs is 0.46. For example, retaliatory tariff increases on U.S.
agriculture exports are on average more than double the U.S. tariff increases in the crop, fishing,
and beverage and tobacco sectors. Third, column 5 shows that the mean tariff increases on targeted
import varieties are similar across sectors, and column 6 shows that the standard deviation of U.S.
tariff changes within sectors is low (and most often, zero).
    Since Johnson (1953), an extensive literature on optimal tariffs has argued that governments
can maximize national income by setting higher tariffs on sectors with more inelastic foreign export
supply, and Broda et al. (2008) offer empirical support. However, the tariff changes observed in
the 2018 trade war are highly similar across sectors. Online Appendix Figure A.1 illustrates this
point by plotting the distribution of tariff changes for targeted varieties. The left panel shows
that, during the trade war, the U.S. applied only five tariff rate changes to targeted varieties: 10%,
20%, 25%, 30%, and 50%. Virtually all varieties (99.8%) were hit with either 10% or 25% tariff
changes. The right panel shows that most of the retaliatory rate increases were concentrated at
10% or 25% as well. These patterns suggest that neither the U.S. nor retaliating countries were
  10
     Online Appendix Table A.1 provides a breakdown of the targeted products by final versus intermediate goods.
For this table, we manually construct a match HS-10 products to BLS Consumer Price Index product codes. This
match suggests that 87% of targeted products within these sectors are intermediate goods (in value), compared to
72% of targeted products in all other sectors.


                                                       6
likely driven by a terms-of-trade rationale, since in that case we would expect tariff changes to
vary across sectors. Online Appendix Figure A.2 plots average 2018 sector-level tariff rates against
the foreign export supply elasticities estimated by Broda et al. (2008) and reveals a negative (and
statistically insignificant) relationship (the correlation is -0.10).
   This lack of variation across sectors also suggests that the tariff changes are unlikely to have been
driven by sector-specific interest groups. Explanations in this tradition argue that sectors make
political campaign contributions and engage in costly lobbying activities to secure import protection
from policymakers (Grossman and Helpman, 1994; Goldberg and Maggi, 1999). However, these
explanations also rely on variation in protection across sectors. Online Appendix Figure A.3 plots
financial campaign contributions made to candidates for the U.S. House of Representatives in the
2016 election against tariff changes at the sector-level, and reveals a negative, rather than a positive,
correlation. While this evidence is only suggestive, it appears unlikely that campaign contributions
were the main determinant of the U.S. tariff structure in the trade war.

II.D    Event Study
   We visualize the impacts of the tariff war on trade using an event-study framework. To assess
impacts, we compare the trends of targeted varieties (those directly affected by a tariff increase) to
varieties not targeted in the following specification:
                               6
                               X                               6
                                                               X
 ln yigt = αig + αgt + αit +          β0j I (eventigt = j) +          β1j I (eventigt = j) × targetig + igt . (1)
                               j=−6                            j=−6

This specification includes variety (αig ), country-time (αit ) and product-month (αgt ) fixed effects.
Varieties targeted by tariffs are captured by the targetig dummy. The inclusion of αgt fixed effects
implies that the β1j coefficients are identified using variation between targeted and non-targeted
varieties within product-time. The event time coefficients are captured by the indicator variables.
In these specifications, we assign the event date of targeted varieties to be the nearest full month
to the actual event date, using the 15th of the month as the cutoff date.11 Non-targeted varieties
within the same HS-10 product as a targeted variety are assigned the earliest event date within
that product code. For all other non-targeted varieties, we assign the event date to be the earliest
month of a targeted variety within the same NAICS-4 sector. If a non-targeted variety does not
share the same NAICS-4 as any targeted varieties, we sequentially use NAICS-3 and NAICS-2
codes, and otherwise assign the event month to be the earliest month of the trade war (February
2018 for imports, and April 2018 for exports). We bin event times ≥ 6 together and exclude event
time ≤ −7. For import outcomes, standard errors are clustered by country and HS-8, since these
are generally the levels at which the tariffs are set.12 For export outcomes, standard errors are
clustered by HS-6 and country; here, we use HS-6 because that is the finest level at which product

  11
      The event date varies by both product and country since some varieties within the same product code are
targeted before others. For example, the U.S. imposed steel tariffs on Canada, Mexico, and the EU three months
after imposing steel tariffs on other countries.
   12
      In a small number of cases, tariffs vary within HS-8 codes at the HS-10 level. See Online Appendix A.


                                                       7
codes are comparable across countries and the level at which we code the retaliatory tariffs. We
plot the β1j dummies that capture the relative trends of targeted varieties.
    Figure II reports the impacts on imported varieties. The top two panels trace the impact of
tariffs on import values and quantities, and the bottom panels show the effects on unit values,
both exclusive and inclusive of duties. Upon impact, we detect large declines in imports. Import
values decline on average by 20% and quantities decline by 23%.13 In the bottom-left panel, before-
duty unit values do not change. However, duty-inclusive unit values increase sharply for targeted
varieties. These two panels provide initial evidence of complete pass-through of the tariffs to import
prices at the variety level.
    The event study also addresses concerns of tariff anticipation that would complicate the elasticity
estimates. The figure reveals anticipatory effects occurring before the tariff changes, but they
are quantitatively small. Hence, the concern that importers shifted forward their purchases in
order to avoid paying tariffs is mild. Below, we further assess tariff anticipation through dynamic
specifications.
    Figure III reports the impacts of the retaliatory tariffs on U.S. exports. The patterns are
similar to what we observe for imports. We find that, at the month of implementation, export
values decline on average by 24% and quantities fall by 25%. Again, we observe no change in the
before-duty unit values, suggesting complete pass-through of the retaliatory tariffs to foreigners’
imports of U.S. varieties. We also observe no clear pattern of anticipation for U.S. exports.


III     TRADE FRAMEWORK AND IDENTIFICATION
    We now describe the trade framework that guides the estimation. We defer supply-side and
general-equilibrium assumptions to Section V.

III.A     U.S. Import Demand
    There are S traded sectors corresponding to 4-digit NAICS sectors (collected in the set S and
indexed by s). Within each traded sector, aggregate demand (from producers and consumers) is
structured according to a 3-tier CES demand system. In the upper nest there is differentiation
between domestic and imported goods. Within each of these two nests of sector s there are Gs
products (collected in the set Gs and indexed by product g) corresponding to an HS-10 level of
aggregation. Within the nest of imported products, varieties are differentiated by country of origin.
The U.S. trades with I countries (collected in the set I and indexed by country i).


  13
     The figure reveals a temporary increase in import values and quantities in event period +2 for targeted varieties.
In Online Appendix B we show that this increase is driven by imports in December 2018 as a result of a September
2018 announcement that the U.S. would increase tariffs on $200 billion of already-targeted Chinese varieties from
10% to 25% on January 1, 2019. A plausible reason why we observe large anticipation effects only in this instance is
that, unlike in previous U.S. tariff waves, the January 2019 tariff escalation was announced long in advance and was
perceived to be credible given the previous tariff waves. The U.S. ultimately implemented this threat in May 2019,
which is beyond our sample period.


                                                          8
    The CES utility functions and price indexes are presented in Online Appendix C. This structure
gives U.S. import demand in each tier as a function of prices. The value of imports in sector s is:
                                                    PM s 1−κ
                                                                         
                                PM s Ms = Es AM s            ,                             (2)
                                                     Ps
where Es are aggregate U.S. expenditures in sector s from both final consumers and firms, AM s
is an import demand shock, PM s is the import price index defined in equation (C.7) in Online
Appendix C, and Ps is the sector price index defined in equation (C.5).
    The value of imports for product g in sector s is
                                                           pM g 1−η
                                                                             
                                p M g m g = P M s Ms a M g          ,                          (3)
                                                           PM s
where aM g    is an import demand shock and pM g is the import price index of product g defined in
equation (C.8).
    Finally, the quantity imported of product g’s variety from country i is:
                                                                       !−σ
                                                               pig
                                            mig = mg aig                      ,                                    (4)
                                                              pM g
where aig is a demand shock and pig is the domestic price of the variety ig. The U.S. imposes
ad-valorem tariffs τig on the CIF price p∗ig , so the domestic price is:
                                                pig = (1 + τig ) p∗ig .                                            (5)
    The previous demand equations depend on three elasticities: across imported varieties within
product (σ), across products (η), and between imports and domestic products within a sector (κ).14

III.B     Foreign Export Supply and Import Demand
    Trade partners are represented with export-supply and import-demand curves at the variety
level. We allow for import price effects of U.S. trade policy through potentially upward sloping
foreign export supply. The inverse foreign export supply curve is:
                                                                   ∗
                                                   p∗ig = zig
                                                           ∗
                                                              mωig ,                                               (6)
       ∗ is a foreign marginal cost shifter that could also include a bilateral iceberg trade cost.
where zig
The parameter ω ∗ is the inverse foreign export supply elasticity. It is a key determinant of the
effects of U.S. trade policy, as it drives the magnitude of the reduction in foreign prices when U.S.
tariffs are imposed. Before-duty import prices p∗ig fall more sharply the larger is ω ∗ .
    Each foreign country demands a quantity xig of U.S. exports of good g. Foreign import demand

   14
      This demand system is also used by Broda et al. (2008). In our setting, it is motivated by the available monthly
public data: variety- and product-level imports and exports, and sector-level domestic production data. With this
nesting structure, it is sufficient to observe the import shares of expenditures within each sector s to estimate the
elasticities and implement counterfactuals. It does not require information on import shares within each product g,
which are not observed in publicly available data but would be required under alternative nesting assumptions. A
potential shortcoming is that the imports mg of any particular product g in sector s impact the domestic expenditures
of that same product only through sector-level shifters. Inverting the order of the top two nests does not matter
for the estimation of the lowest tier elasticities (σ, σ ∗ and ω ∗ ), and it would not matter for the implementation of
counterfactuals if κ and η were equal.


                                                          9
for U.S. varieties is similar to (4) on the U.S. side, but with a potentially different demand shifter
and demand elasticity:
                                                                          −σ∗
                                          xig = a∗ig               ∗
                                                              1 + τig pX
                                                                       ig           ,                                 (7)
where xig is the U.S. exports of product g to country i, pX
                                                          ig is export price received by exporters,
 ∗ is the ad valorem tariff set by country i on U.S. exports of good g, and a∗ is a foreign demand
τig                                                                          ig
shock.

III.C     Identification
    This section discusses the identification strategy for the elasticities and its potential threats.

III.C.1     U.S. Import and Foreign Export Variety Elasticities (σ, ω ∗ )

    We use variation in U.S. import tariffs to estimate the variety import demand and export supply
elasticities simultaneously. The strategy of identifying two elasticities with one instrument was
applied by Romalis (2007) in a trade context and studied by Zoutman et al. (2018) in the context
of applications to public finance. Intuitively, tariffs create a wedge between what the importer pays
and what the exporter receives. A tariff shifts down the demand curve for any given price received
by the exporter, tracing the supply curve. Similarly, a tariff shifts up the supply curve for any
given price paid by the consumer, tracing the demand curve. Hence, data on changes in prices,
tariffs, and quantities is sufficient to trace both the demand and supply curves simultaneously.
    Adding a time subscript and log-differencing over time, equations (4) and (6) can be written as:
                                            m     m     m
                               ∆ ln migt = ηgt + ηit + ηis − σ∆ ln pigt + εm
                                                                           igt ,                                      (8)
                                               p∗        p∗        p∗                          ∗
                               ∆ ln p∗igt =   ηgt   +   ηit   +   ηis   + ω ∗ ∆ ln migt +   εpigt ,                   (9)
                          y                                       y
where, y = {p∗ , m}, the ηgt are product-time fixed effects, the ηit are country-time fixed effects,
         y
and the ηis are country-sector fixed effects (s is the sector of product g). For now, suppose that
tariffs are uncorrelated with unobserved import demand and export supply shocks entering in the
residuals, an issue we return to at the end of this sub-section. Then, the import demand elasticity
σ is identified by instrumenting the duty-inclusive price ∆pigt with the tariff ∆τigt in (8). The
export supply ω ∗ is identified by instrumenting imports with ∆τigt in (9).15

III.C.2     Product Elasticity (η)

    The elasticity η across products is identified by aggregating variety-specific tariffs to the product
level. From (3), adding a time subscript and log-differencing over time, we have
                                 ∆ ln sM gt = ψst + (1 − η) ∆ ln pM gt + εM gt ,                                     (10)
                   pM gt mgt
where sM gt ≡      PM st Mst   is the import share of product g in sector s.                          The parameter ψst ≡
− (1 − η) ∆ ln (PM st ) is a sector-time fixed effect that controls for the overall sector import price
  15
     Our model assumes flexible prices and abstracts from sticky prices, so we interpret ω ∗ as the slope of the supply
curve.


                                                               10
index, and εM gt is a residual that captures the imported product demand shock. The elasticity
η can be estimated from a regression of changes in import expenditure shares of product g on
sector-time fixed effects and changes in the import price index pM gt .
    We build the import price index from the variety-level data accounting for the entry and exit
of varieties by applying the variety correction from Feenstra (1994). Combining (C.8) and (4) we
obtain the following exact expression for the change in the product price index:
                                                                                                                           !
                    1                            ∗                             1                               Sg,t+1 (Cgt )
                                sigt e(1−σ)∆ ln(pigt (1+τigt ))+∆ ln aigt  −
                             X
   ∆ ln pM gt    =     ln                                                        ln                                         ,   (11)
                   1−σ      i∈C
                                                                              1−σ                               Sg,t (Cgt )
                                              gt

where sigt is the share of continuing variety i in all continuing varieties, Cgt is the set of continuing
imported varieties in product g between t and t + 1, and Sg,t (C) is the share of the varieties in the
set C in the total imports of product g at time t.16 The price index includes two pieces from the
estimation in the previous step: the estimated σ and the residuals, which reflect mean-zero demand
shocks ∆ ln (aigt ).
    According to our model, the change in the product price index pM gt is correlated with the
unobserved demand shock εM gt . Using the same logic applied at the previous stage that tariffs are
uncorrelated with demand shocks, we can instrument ∆ ln pM gt using the tariffs. Since using value
weights may induce mechanical correlations with the left-hand side of equation (10), we construct
an instrument that is a simple average of changes in tariffs across the continuing varieties:
                                                                                                  
                                                                      1 X ∆ ln(1+τigt ) 
                                              ∆ ln ZM gt       = ln  C      e            ,                                      (12)
                                                                     Ngt i∈C
                                                                                     gt

where     C
         Ngt   is the number of continuing varieties in product g between t and t + 1.

III.C.3        Import Elasticity (κ)

    We further aggregate to the top tier within a sector to estimate the elasticity κ between domestic
and imported products within sectors. The import expenditures PM st Mst defined in (2), relative
to the expenditures in domestically produced goods PDst Dst , are a function of the import price
index PM st relative to the price index of domestically produced goods PDst , defined in equations
(C.7) and (C.6):
                            PM st Mst                          PM st
                                                                                                    
                     ∆ ln             = ψs + ψt + (1 − κ) ∆ ln       + εst .              (13)
                            PDst Dst                           PDst
The fixed effects and residual components capture demand shocks. We proceed analogously to the
previous step to construct the sector import price index, PM st , and to instrument by aggregating
product-level tariff instruments. The import price index of sector s changes according to:
                                                                                              
                                                                                            s (C s )
                                                                                           St+1
                             1                                                      1
                                                                                                                        
                                           sgt e(1−η)∆ ln pgM t +∆ ln(agM t )  −                   t
                                      X
            ∆ ln PM st    =     ln                                                     ln    s (C s ) ,                         (14)
                            1−η      g∈C s                                        1 − η     St    t
                                                       t



                                                                P
                        pigt migt                              0
                                                                           pi0 gt mi0 gt
  16
       I.e., sigt ≡ P                         and Sg,t (C) ≡ Pi ∈C                         .
                              pi0 gt mi0 gt                                pi0 gt mi0 gt
                    i0 ∈Cgt                                        i0 ∈I




                                                                            11
where sgt is the import share of continuing product g in continuing products imported in sector s,
Sts (C) is the share of the products in the set C in imports of sector s at time t, and Cts is the set of
continuing imported products in sector s between t and t + 1.
   We construct ∆ ln PM st using the residuals εM gt = ∆ ln (agM t ) estimated from (10). We instru-
ment for the relative price of imports, ∆ ln (PM st /PDst ), using simple averages:
                                                                           
                                                        1 X ∆ ln ZgM t 
                                    ∆ ln ZM st   ≡ ln  C        e       ,                          (15)
                                                       Nst g∈C s
                                                              t

                                                                        C is the number of continuing
where ZM st is the instrument defined in (12) at the product level and Nst
products in sector s between t and t + 1.

III.C.4    Foreign Import and U.S. Export Variety Elasticities (σ ∗ , ω)

   The foreign import demand is estimated using an analogous equation to (8). We consider how
U.S. exports respond to retaliatory tariffs. From (7), decomposing the log-change of the foreign
                                           x , a country-time effect η x , a country-sector effect η x ,
demand shifter into a product-time effect ηgt                         it                            is
and a residual εxigt , we obtain:
                                                                              
                                   x
                      ∆ ln xigt = ηgt    x
                                      + ηit    x
                                            + ηis − σ ∗ ∆ ln             ∗
                                                                    1 + τigt pX      x
                                                                              igt + εigt ,          (16)
where pX                                                                             ∗
       igt is the before-duty price observed in the U.S. If the retaliatory tariffs τigt are uncorrelated
with foreign import demand shocks εxigt , we can identify σ ∗ by instrumenting the change in the
duty-inclusive price, pX∗     X         ∗
                       igt ≡ pigt (1 + τigt ), with the change in retaliatory tariffs.
   We estimate the U.S. variety inverse export supply curve using a specification analogous to (9):
                                          p     p     p                  p
                             ∆ ln pX
                                   igt = ηgt + ηit + ηis + ω∆ ln xigt + εigt ,                      (17)
where ω is the inverse export supply elasticity to each destination from the U.S., after controlling
for the fixed effects. We instrument for changes in exports with the changes in retaliatory tariffs.

III.C.5    Threats to Identification

   There are three main identification threats when using tariffs to estimate the elasticities.
   First, the simultaneous identification of demand and supply requires that the tariff affects
importers’ willingness to pay. If importers can evade the tariff or do not base their demand on
duty-inclusive prices, the tariffs will not cause inward shifts of the import demand curve. In our
setting, we do not believe either concern is of first order. While sales taxes may not be salient to
consumers because retail prices are quoted in before-tax prices (e.g., Chetty et al. 2009), tariffs are
paid at the border and importers observe the after-tariff prices. Tariff evasion is a larger concern
in developing countries (e.g., Sequeira 2016).
   Second, as previously mentioned, we require that tariff changes are uncorrelated with unobserved
import demand and export supply shocks. The system of equations is estimated in first differences
and controls flexibly for unobserved demand and supply shocks at each step, which mitigates this
concern. The event study figures suggest that targeted import and export varieties were not on


                                                         12
statistically different trends prior to the war. In the next section, we implement additional checks
for pre-trends that support this key identification assumption.
    Third, importers may have anticipated looming tariffs in the months before implementation.
If they shifted forward their imports, this could bias the elasticities because of a mismatch in the
timing of imports and tariff changes.17 The event study suggests that tariff anticipation is not a
concern, and in the next section we implement dynamic specifications that allow lags and leads of
tariffs to test formally for anticipation effects.
    The identification strategy is not threatened if the tariff changes reflect differences in prefer-
ences for redistribution towards specific sectors between the policymakers elected in 2016 and the
previous policymakers. Rather, the identification only requires those changes in preferences to be
uncorrelated with unobserved shocks to demand and supply over the time period in which the tariff
changes take place.


IV      ESTIMATION
    This section addresses threats to identification, presents the elasticity estimates, and examines
the robustness of the results.

IV.A      Pre-existing Trends
    To identify the elasticities, tariff changes must be uncorrelated with import demand and export
supply shocks. The event studies suggest that targeted varieties were not on different trends
prior to the trade war. We further assess concerns about pre-trends by correlating import and
export outcomes before the 2018 trade war—values, quantities, unit values, and duty-inclusive unit
values—with the subsequent tariff changes.
    We compute these outcomes as the average monthly change in 2017 and regress them against
the changes in the import tariff rates between 2017 and 201818
                               ∆ ln yig,2017 = αg + αis + β∆ ln(1 + τig ) + ig .                              (18)
These regressions control for HS-10 product (αg ) and country-sector (αis ) fixed effects, since the
estimating equations derived in Section III.C.1 exploit tariff variation controlling for these fixed
effects. Standard errors are clustered by country and HS-8 (for imports) or HS-6 (for exports).
    The top panel of Table III reports the pre-trend tests for imports. We do not observe any sta-
tistically significant relationship across import outcomes, suggesting that targeted import varieties
were not on differential trends prior to the war. The bottom panel reports the analogous results


  17
      Coglianese et al. (2017) emphasize this point in the context of estimating the demand for gasoline.
  18
      We examine pre-trends between the start of the Trump Administration in 2017:1 and 2017:12, which pre-dates
the first round of the trade war by two months. Online Appendix Table A.2 reports tests for pre-existing trends over
a longer time horizon by correlating average monthly outcomes between 2013:1 and 2017:12 with the tariff changes
during the war. There is no evidence that the import tariff and retaliatory changes were biased towards import or
export trends over this longer horizon.


                                                        13
for U.S. export outcomes and show a similar pattern: pre-war export trends are uncorrelated with
retaliatory tariffs.

IV.B      U.S. Imports and Foreign Exports at the Variety Level
    This subsection estimates the elasticity of variety import demand and foreign export supply
following the approach described in Section III.C.1.
    Table IV reports the responses of U.S. imports to the tariff changes. Columns 1-4 of Table IV
report the results of regressing the four outcomes –values (p∗ m), quantities (m), unit values (p∗ ),
and duty-inclusive unit values (p)– on the tariffs. Each specification is run in first-differences and
includes fixed effects for product-time, country-time and country-sector. The specification exploits
variation in variety-level tariffs over time to identify the elasticities while controlling for seasonality,
time-varying country factors (such as exchange rates), and country-sector time trends. Standard
errors are two-way clustered by country and HS-8.
    Column 1 shows that import values drop sharply with tariff increases. Column 2 shows that
the decline in import values is closely matched by a commensurate decline in quantities.
    Column 3 indicates no impact of tariff increases on before-duty unit values. This is the key
result providing evidence that the incidence of import tariffs is borne by the U.S. economy, which
is consistent with the event study in Figure II.19 The reduced-form regressions suggest a complete
pass-through of tariffs to duty-inclusive import prices.
    We report the variety import demand and foreign export supply elasticities {σ, ω ∗ } using the
IV equations in (8) and (9) in columns 5-6. Column 5 reports the supply curve elasticity ω̂ ∗ ; the
first stage is column 2. The coefficient is small and imprecisely estimated, ω̂ ∗ = −0.002 (se 0.05).
This estimate implies that we cannot reject a horizontal supply curve and supports the reduced-
form evidence of complete pass-through. Column 6 reports the estimated import demand elasticity
σ; the first stage is column 4. The estimate implies σ̂ = 2.53 (se 0.26). The bootstrapped 90%
confidence interval, formed from 1000 samples, is [1.75, 3.02]. With these elasticities, using the
solution to the system of supply and demand equations (8) and (9) in columns 5-6, the average
change in import values of targeted varieties is:

                                                   1 + ω̂ ∗
                           ∆ ln p∗igt migt = − σ̂               ∆ ln (1 + τigt ) = 31.7%.
                                                    1 + ω̂ ∗ σ̂ |
                                                   | {z }
                                                                       {z      }
                                                                     12.5%
                                                       2.54




  19
     The elasticity of the duty-inclusive unit value in column 4 is not one plus the coefficient in column 3 because
the duty-inclusive value pig is computed using actual duties collected by U.S. customs rather than imputing from the
statutory rate. Columns 1 to 4 of Table A.3 report regressions of the variables in columns 2 to 5 on the applied tariff
instrumented by the statutory rate. It also reveals complete tariff pass-through. In these regressions, the coefficient
on duty-inclusive prices (column 5) is one plus the coefficient on the before-duty price (column 4) and the coefficient
on import quantities (column 3) is very close to the estimated σ in column 4 of Table IV.


                                                          14
IV.C      Product Level Imports
    Table V presents estimates of the product elasticity (η) from equation (10), following the steps
described in Section III.C.2. The procedure aggregates the import data to the product-time level,
and the regressions are run in first differences controlling for sector-time pair fixed effects, as
dictated by the model. Standard errors are clustered at the HS-8 level. We construct the price
index from equation (11) using σ̂ = 2.53 and the demand shocks from the import variety demand
equation from column 6 of Table IV. We build the instrument ∆ ln ZgM t using (12).
    Column 1 regresses the change in product shares, ∆ ln (sM gt ), on the instrument ∆ ln ZM gt
(i.e., the reduced form). Higher product-level tariffs lower the product import share. Column 2
reports the first-stage, a regression of the duty-inclusive product-level price index ∆ ln (pM gt ) on
the instrument. The sign is consistent with higher tariffs raising the product price index. Column
3 reports the IV estimate which regresses the change in product shares on the change in the
instrumented price index. The estimate implies η̂ = 1.53 (se 0.27). The bootstrapped confidence
interval for η, which accounts for the variance of σ̂ and the demand shocks from the lowest tier, is
[1.15, 1.89].
    The reduction in imports of targeted products implies that imports from untargeted origins did
not fully offset import declines from targeted origins. Hence, re-routing of imports or reallocation of
producers to untargeted countries does not seem to be a first-order force over the time horizon that
we consider. We also find that import tariffs did not lower before–tariff product-level prices. We
construct the before-duty product-level price index using (11) but excluding duties. This before-
duty product-level price index includes a Feenstra variety correction, so it accounts for reallocations
towards new source countries. Regressing that index against the tariff instrument ∆ ln ZgM t with
sector-time fixed effects yields a positive coefficient of 0.91 (se 0.40).
    We complement this product-level analysis with a reduced-form approach that does not rely on
the CES nesting structure. Online Appendix Table A.8 regresses the product-time fixed effects from
the variety-level regressions on the product-time component of variety-level tariffs. Consistent with
the previous results, we find a decline in product-level imports of targeted products, suggesting that
re-routing is not an important concern, and no statistically significant decline in the before-duty
import price, suggesting complete pass-through at the product level.20
    Using this elasticity and the average change in product-level statutory import tariffs, these
estimates imply that import values for targeted products within imported sectors fell, on average,
2.5% across targeted products. This number is the average change in import values for targeted
products obtained from ∆ ln pM gt mgt = − (η̂ − 1) ∆ ln ZgM t , where η̂ = 1.53 and ∆ ln ZgM t = 4.7%.




   20
     Flaaen et al. (2019) argue that, in response to discriminatory anti-dumping duties of 2012 and 2016, producers
of washing machines reallocated products to untargeted countries with lower marginal costs. Our estimate of the
elasticity of substitution within products (σ̂ = 2.53) is far from perfect substitution. As we have argued, we also find
a decline in the import share of targeted products, and no decline in the before-duty product-level import prices.


                                                          15
IV.D        Sector Level Imports
   Table VI reports estimates of the sector elasticity (κ) following the steps described in Section
III.C.3. The regressions control for sector and time fixed effects, and cluster standard errors at the
sector level. As shown in (13), estimating this elasticity requires data on changes in imports and
domestic expenditures at the sectoral level.
   The monthly change in U.S. expenditures in domestically produced goods, ∆ ln (PDst Dst ), is
not directly observed. We measure it as the difference between the changes in sectoral production
and exports. We also need data on the price index of domestically produced goods, ∆ ln (PDst ).
We assume that the change in the price index of domestically produced goods equals the change in
PPI, ∆ ln pst , plus a mean-zero shock: ∆ ln PDst = ∆ ln pst + ∆ ln εPst .21 Then, we can implement
equation (13) using the PPI instead of the consumer price index of domestically produced goods,
which we do not observe. Hence, our specification uses ∆ ln (PM st /pst ) instead of ∆ ln (PM st /PDst )
in (13). The change in the price index, ∆ ln PM st , is constructed from (14) using the estimated σ̂
and η̂ from the previous two steps, and the demand shocks constructed from these regressions.
   Column 1 is the reduced form specification that projects relative imports on the instrument,
column 2 is the first stage and column 3 is the IV estimate. The coefficient is negative, suggesting
that price propagation of the tariff through input-output linkages is strong and causes the domestic
PPI to increase, but is noisy. The estimate implies a statistically significant κ̂ = 1.19 (se 0.49). The
bootstrapped confidence interval for κ̂, which takes into account the estimated {σ̂, η̂} and demand
shocks from the previous stages, is [0.89, 1.71].
   Using this elasticity and the average change in sector-level statutory import tariffs, these esti-
mates imply that import values for targeted across targeted sectors fell, on average,0.2%. This
                                                                                            
                                                                                                      PM st Mst
number is the average change in import values for targeted sectors obtained from ∆ ln                 PDst Dst    =
               stat , where κ̂ = 1.19 and ∆ ln Z
(1 − κ̂) ∆ ln ZM st                              gM t = 1.0%.


IV.E        U.S. Exports at the Variety Level
   This subsection implements the analysis in Section III.C.1. These regressions examine the
change in U.S. export outcomes, at the variety level, in response to changes in retaliatory tariffs.
The regressions include product-time, destination-time and destination-sector fixed effects, and
cluster standard errors by destination country and HS-6.
   We first report regressions of the four export outcomes on the retaliatory tariffs in columns 1-4
of Table VII. We observe a statistically significant decline in both export values and quantities. In
column 3 we find no evidence that the retaliatory tariffs, on average, caused U.S. exporters to lower
(before-duty) product level unit values. Rather, column 4 implies that the duty-inclusive export
price rises approximately one-for-one with the tariff.
   Column 5 reports the IV regression that estimates the U.S. export supply curve at the variety
level. This is the analog to the variety level supply curve (6) on the export side. The first stage is

  21
       This assumption is consistent with the production structure we assume in the general equilibrium model.


                                                         16
column 2. The estimate is imprecisely measured and we cannot reject the null that foreigners face
a horizontal U.S. export supply curve. Column 6 reports the IV estimate of equation (16). The
first-stage is column 4. We estimate σ̂ ∗ = 1.04 (se 0.32). The bootstrapped confidence interval is
[0.73, 1.39].
    Using the estimated elasticity and the average change in retaliatory tariffs, these estimates
imply that U.S. export values for varieties targeted by trade partners fell, on average,9.9%. This
                                                                                               
number is the average change in export values for targeted varieties obtained from ∆ ln pX
                                                                                         igt xigt =
                                          
−σ̂ ∗ ∆ ln 1 + τigt
                ∗                   ∗
                    where ∆ ln 1 + τigt = 9.5%.

IV.F      Robustness Checks
    This section explores the robustness of the results. We first assess concerns that underlying
trends or tariff anticipation bias the estimates. We also explore heterogeneity across sectors, com-
pare the pass-through of tariffs to unit values at different time horizons, and examine how the
results change with alternative sets of fixed effects.

IV.F.1        Trends and Dynamic Specifications

    Section IV.A documents that pre-existing trends and anticipation effects are unlikely to threaten
our identification. In this section, we provide further evidence that the elasticities are not sensitive
to concerns over pre-existing trends or anticipation effects.
    The first robustness check controls for trends through panel fixed effects. We re-estimate the
variety-level specifications to include variety fixed effects and report the analog to Table IV in
Table A.4 and the analog to Table VII in Table A.6. We assess long-run trends by re-estimating
the specifications with variety fixed effects using data from 2013:1 to 2019:4 in Tables A.5 and
A.7. The results are essentially unchanged and remain consistent with the prior evidence that
pre-existing trends are unlikely to be confounding factors.
    The second concern is that importers may have anticipated the changes in tariffs and shifted
their purchasing decisions forward to avoid the duties. This would imply that, even though tariffs
have real impacts on trade, regressions identified from contemporaneous changes in tariffs may
produce biased elasticities. We check for anticipatory and delayed effects by allowing for leads and
lags in variety-level reduced-form regressions:
                                             m=6
                                             X
                                                    y
          ∆ ln yigt = αgt + αit + αis +            βm [ln (1 + τig,t−m ) − ln (1 + τig,t−1−m )] + igt ,       (19)
                                            m=−6

where we allow for leads and lags up to six months before and after the tariff changes.22
    Figure IV reports the cumulative estimated coefficients for import values, quantities, unit val-
ues, and duty-inclusive unit values. The results reveal no quantitatively large patterns of tariff

  22
      Since the dynamic specification requires a balanced panel in event time, we replace missing leading and lagged
tariff changes with zeros, and include indicators for those missing values. This is equivalent to assuming that the
price of a variety does not change when we do not observe it in the data.


                                                        17
anticipation. Additionally, the results show no evidence of before-duty price declines occurring
after the tariffs are implemented. Finally, the cumulative magnitudes displayed in the figure are
quantitatively similar to the reduced form estimates from the static regressions. These results re-
assure us that the elasticities are not biased due to anticipation effects, and that the variety-level
pass-through findings.
   The bottom panel of Figure IV reports the results for exported varieties. In this specification,
we do find some evidence of tariff anticipation as U.S. export values increase in the month before
tariffs change; however, we do not observe this pattern for export quantities. We also do not observe
cumulative declines in before-duty export prices occurring as time elapses after the retaliations are
implemented.

IV.F.2    Heterogeneity

   The baseline specifications impose common elasticities across sectors. However, these specifica-
tions potentially mask variation in the tariff pass-through result. For example, we may expect more
differentiated products or less competitive sectors to exhibit less-than-complete pass-through. We
may also expect demand elasticities to depend on inventories and whether goods are durable, which
may allow buyers to postpone sales more easily. Other product characteristics, such as variation in
price stickiness or stocks of inventories, could also induce heterogeneous pass-through.
   In this subsection, we explore this potential heterogeneity by focusing on the complete pass-
through finding at the variety level. To do so, we implement reduced-form specifications that regress
changes in the import (export) unit values on changes in import (retaliatory) tariffs, controlling for
product-time, country-time and country-sector fixed effects. Each specification interacts the tariff
change with different measures of product or sector characteristics that have been used widely in
the literature.
   Online Appendix Table A.9 reports results from interacting the tariff changes with three dif-
ferent classifications of final versus intermediate goods. The top panel examines the pass-through
of the import tariffs to import unit values, and the bottom panel examines pass-through of the re-
taliatory tariffs to U.S. export unit values. Column 1 uses the Broad Economic Categories (BEC)
classification that categorizes sectors according to their end use. Column 2 uses an indicator for
whether or not the HS product matches an entry line item in the BLS Consumer Price Index (CPI).
Column 3 uses an indicator for whether each HS-10 product description contains the word “part” or
“component”. While each classification is imperfect, the results do not show statistical differences
between final and intermediate goods.
   Online Appendix Table A.10 examines interactions across 11 different measures of product or
sector characteristics that have been used in the literature: 1) quality ladders from Khandelwal
(2010); 2) markups estimated by De Loecker et al. (2018); 3) the coefficient of price variation; 4)
elasticities of substitution estimated by Broda and Weinstein (2006); 5) trade elasticities estimated
by Caliendo and Parro (2015); 6) contract intensity measured by Nunn (2007); 7) inverse frequency
of price adjustments from micro-data tabulated by Nakamura and Steinsson (2008) (a higher value


                                                 18
indicates less frequent price adjustments); 8) measures of industry upstreamness by Antràs et al.
(2012); 9) inventory to sales ratios constructed from Census data; 10) differentiation developed
by Rauch (1999); and, 11) an indicator for durable goods using the BEC classifications. The top
panel reports the results for imports. The pattern across the 11 different metrics, along with the
previous table, suggests that there is no meaningful heterogeneity in the complete pass-through
result, at least with respect to the characteristics we have examined. Online Appendix Table A.11
reports the results for export unit values. We again find no systematic evidence of heterogeneity
with respect to observable characteristics.

IV.F.3    Horizons

    The variety-level complete pass-through results may be a short-run phenomenon. We assess
the incidence of the tariffs at different time horizons by aggregating the data to the 2-month, 3-
month, and 4-month level, taking first differences, and re-implementing the reduced-form regression
specifications. The results for before-duty import and export unit values are reported in Online
Appendix Table A.12, with the baseline estimates from the monthly data replicated in column 1
of each panel. Even at these medium-term frequencies, we do not observe downward pressure on
before-duty unit values in response to the tariff changes.

IV.F.4    Alternative Fixed Effects

    Our baseline set of fixed effects — that is, product-time, country-time and country-sector fixed
effects — control for potentially confounding import demand and export supply shocks. However,
if the trade war induces global or country-specific general equilibrium responses to wages, these
fixed effects may mask tariff pass-through effects in our regressions. Online Appendix Table A.13
reports the elasticity of before-duty unit values against the tariff changes controlling for different
sets of fixed effects to explore this possibility. The top panel reports the import results and the
bottom panel reports the export results, and column 1 of each panel reports the baseline estimates
to facilitate comparisons across the alternate specifications. We do not observe any impact of
the tariff on before-duty unit values across 8 different sets of fixed effects, some of which exclude
country-time or product-time fixed effects, in both the import and export data. We also extract
the country-time αit fixed effect in the baseline specification and regress them against monthly
exchange rates, and do not find a statistically significant relationship (estimate is 0.11 (se 0.19)).
We also do not find a relationship between the country-time fixed effects and exchange rate changes
for China (estimate is 0.04 (se 0.04)).


V     AGGREGATE AND REGIONAL IMPACTS
    Before turning to the full model in the next section, it is instructive to perform a few back-of-
the-envelope calculations using the estimated parameters to gauge the magnitude of the aggregate
impacts of the trade war.

                                                 19
    First, given complete tariff pass-through, the first-order approximation to the impact on U.S.
consumer surplus is the product of three terms: the import share of value added (15%), the fraction
of U.S. imports targeted by tariff increases (13%), and the average import price increase among
targeted varieties (14%). This calculation implies buyers of imports lost in aggregate 0.27% of
GDP, or $50.8 billion at an 2016 annual basis.
    Second, under some assumptions the elasticities can be used to compute the impact on aggregate
real income. Specifically, in the absence of changes in both U.S. import and export prices, starting
from free trade, and provided the environment satisfies neoclassical assumptions, the (second-order)
approximation to the aggregate equivalent variation is 1/2 (∆m)0 ∆τ , where ∆m is the change in
the vector of imports and ∆t is the change in per-unit import tariffs. Using the estimates for
the changes in variety-level imports estimated in Section IV.B, and assuming that the fixed-effects
in those regressions are unresponsive to the tariffs, this calculation yields a real GDP loss of $11
billion, or 0.059% of GDP.23
    These approximations are computed assuming complete tariff pass-through. However, our em-
pirical analysis at the variety level does not rule out terms-of-trade effects through changes in prices
at the country or sector levels. Also, these calculations do not consider the impacts of retaliatory
tariffs. We now combine the previously estimated parameters with a supply side of the U.S. econ-
omy. The model imposes upward sloping industry curves and predicts changes in sector level prices
in the U.S. due to the demand reallocation induced by import and retaliatory tariffs. Through
this channel, it generates additional aggregate and regional effects not captured by the previous
measurements.

V.A      General Equilibrium Structure
    We use a static general equilibrium model of the U.S., imposing strong assumptions such as
perfect competition, flexible prices, and an input-output structure with unitary elasticities. We
implement counterfactuals that keep constant the wages in foreign countries.
    The U.S. is divided into R counties (collected in the set R and indexed by r). In each region
r there are Lr workers. In addition to the traded sectors there is one non-traded sector. Traded
sectors are freely traded within the U.S. but face trade costs internationally.24 Consumption in
county r results from maximizing aggregate utility,
                                                               X
                                          βN T ln CN T,r +           βs ln Csr ,                                  (20)
                                                               s∈S
where CN T,r is consumption of a homogeneous non-traded good, Csr is consumption of tradeable

  23
      Baqaee and Farhi (2019) show that, under these assumptions,
                                                               P P this   P back of the envelope is also the effect on
real GDP. In terms of our previous notation, we compute 21 s g∈Gs i p∗gi mgi ∆ ln mgi ∆τgi , where the change in
imports of product g from country i is ∆ ln mgi = −σ̂∆ ln (1 + τgi ) with σ = 2.53. Using the error in the estimation
of σ̂, the 90% bootstrap confidence interval around this aggregate loss is [-$13.1b,-$7.6b].
   24
      The assumption of free internal trade sidesteps the need to pin down the location of production of HS-10 products
within the U.S., for which we do not have data. It also ensures that the aggregate import demand system that we have
previously estimated is consistent with the model we use for simulations. Caliendo et al. (2017) combine input-output
linkages with internal trade costs in a quantitative analysis of the U.S. economy.


                                                          20
sector s, and the β’s add up to 1. The price of the non-traded good is PN T,r and the price index
of sector s is Ps .
    Production of tradeable goods in each sector-region uses workers, intermediate inputs, and a
fixed factor (capital and structures). Since we are looking at short-run outcomes we assume that
the primary factors of production, capital and labor, are immobile across regions and sectors, but
intermediate inputs can be freely adjusted. We also consider the implications of perfect labor
mobility across sectors.25 The domestic production of tradeable sector s in region r is
                                                           !αI,s               !αL,s
                                                    Isr               Lsr
                                       Qsr = Zsr                                       ,                                    (21)
                                                    αI,s              αL,s
where Zsr is local productivity, Isr is a bundle of intermediate inputs, and Lsr is the number of
workers. The production share of the fixed factor is αK,s ≡ 1 − αI,s − αL,s . Intermediate inputs in
                                                                                                  0
sector s are also aggregated using a Cobb-Douglas technology. We let αss be the share of input s0
in total sales of sector s. The cost of the intermediates bundle used by sector s is:
                                                                  0
                                                      Y         αs /αI,s
                                               φs ∝           Ps0 s        .                                                (22)
                                                      s0 ∈S
The owners of fixed factors choose the quantities Isr and Lsr to maximize profits Πsr . Letting ps
be the producer price in tradeable sector s and wsr be the wage per worker in sector s and region
r, the returns to the fixed factors are:
                                                                                                 1
                                                                      α        α           !
                                                            φs I,s wsrL,s                      1−αK,s
                           Πsr   = max ps Qsr − (1 − αK,s )               Qsr                           ,                   (23)
                                   Qsr                          Zsr
                                                                                       P
giving the supply curve and the national supply in sector s, Qs =                          r∈R Qsr .        Non-traded output in
region r uses labor: QN T,r = ZN T,r LN T,r , where LN T,r is the employment in the non-traded sector
in region r.
    Production by sector and region, defined above in (21), is allocated across products at a constant
marginal rate of transformation. Letting qg be the national output of good g in sector s, the
feasibility constraint for products in sector s is:
                                              X qg
                                                      = Qs ,                                                                (24)
                                             g∈G
                                                   zg
                                                      s

where zg is a product-level productivity shock. We assume this production structure because we
observe employment by region at the sector level (NAICS-4 in our data) but not at the product
level (HS-10 in our data). The model equilibrium does not pin down where each good g is produced,
and this information is not needed to implement counterfactuals.26
    Assuming perfect competition, the price of the domestically produced variety of good g is
        ps
pDg =   zg .   Given iceberg costs δig , the price faced by importer country i of product g is pX
                                                                                                ig = δig pDg .




  25
      The system of equilibrium conditions in changes in Online Appendix D.2 is defined for both immobile and mobile
labor.
   26
      This product-level supply structure is consistent with the export variety elasticity ω = 0 estimated in Section
IV.E.


                                                           21
Hence, market clearing in the U.S. variety of product g implies
                                                     −η                                           −σ∗
                                               pDg
                                                                                           
                                                                     δig a∗ig             ∗
                                                               X
                         qg = (aDg Ds )                    +                         1 + τig pX
                                                                                              ig          ,       (25)
                                               PDs             i∈I       |               {z           }
                               |          {z           }
                                                                                        xig
                                          dg

where dg is the U.S. demand of product g resulting from the CES structure in Online Appendix C,
where aDg is a demand shock, Ds is the aggregate U.S. consumption of domestic goods in sector s
defined in (C.2), and PDs is the price index of domestically produced goods defined in (C.6). xig
is the foreign import demand defined in (7).
    To close the model, we assume that labor income and profits are spent where they are generated.
Total tariff revenue R is distributed to each region in proportion br equal to its national population
share. We allow for aggregate income D derived from ownership of foreign factors, owned by region
r also in proportion to its population. By aggregate accounting, D equals the trade deficit. Final
consumer expenditures in region r therefore are27
                                                     X                    X
                         Xr = wN T,r LN T,r +              wsr Lsr +            Πsr + br (D + R) .                (26)
                                                     s∈S                  s∈S
    A general equilibrium given tariffs consists of import prices p∗ig , U.S. prices pDg , traded wages
wsr , non-traded wages wN T,r , and price indexes (Ps , PDs , PM s , pM g , φs ) such that: i) given
these prices, final consumers, producers, and workers optimize; ii) local labor markets clear for
every sector and region, international markets clear for imports and exports of every variety, and
domestic markets for final goods and intermediates clear; and iii) the government budget constraint
                                                      ∗ and a∗ in (6) and (7) are taken as given.
is satisfied. The foreign demand and supply shifters zig     ig


V.B      Implementation
    To compute the impacts of the tariffs we derive a system of first-order approximations to the
impact of tariff shocks around the pre-war equilibrium. Since the U.S. predominantly increased
tariffs on varieties with initially zero tariffs, we use a higher-order approximation to the change
in tariff revenue. The system is fully characterized by equations (D.3)-(D.19) in Online Appendix
D.2. In response to a simulated shock to U.S. and foreign tariffs, the system gives the change
in every outcome as a function of the elasticities {σ, σ ∗ ,nω ∗ , η, κ} estimated from
                                                                                      o
                                                                                        tariff variation
                                                                                                              0
in Section IV, the preference and technology parameters βN T , βs , αL,s , αI,s , αss , distributions of
sales and employment across sectors and counties, and imports and exports across varieties. We
obtain the non-estimated parameters and variables from input-output (IO) tables from 2016 (the
most recent year before the tariff war for which this information is available), the 2016 County
Business Patterns database, and the customs data we used in the estimation. Online Appendix
D.3 describes the implementation and parameterization in more detail.28

   27
      We now have an explicitPexpression for
                                           P the P aggregate demand shifters Es entering previously in the import
demand defined in (2): Es = r∈R βs Xr + r∈R s0 ∈S αss0 ps0 Qs0 r . The first term adds up the regional expenditures
of final consumers, and the second term adds up the regional expenditures of producers in each sector.
   28
      Under the “hat algebra” of Dekle et al. (2008), the outcomes depend on endogenous variables in exact relative
changes. Our solutions are a special case of Baqaee and Farhi (2019).


                                                               22
V.C     Impact of Tariffs on U.S. Prices
   We now explain the mechanisms through which U.S. and retaliatory tariffs induce price effects
in the general-equilibrium model. Since we consider the short run impact of tariffs, we assume
no primary factor mobility across sectors and regions. Sector-level quantities only change with
intermediate inputs. As a result, the sector-level supply of U.S. goods is upward-sloping with the
price. At the sector level, the price of U.S. goods is determined by the intersection between the
U.S. supply resulting from (23) and its world demand (from both the U.S. and foreign countries)
resulting from adding up the right-hand side of (25) over all varieties within a sector.
   The U.S. experiences a terms-of-trade gain in a sector if the price of products in that sector
(some of which are exported) increases compared to the price of its imports. U.S. and foreign tariffs
affect these prices by shifting world demand. When the U.S. imposes a tariff on the imports of
a particular product from some origin (e.g., wooden kitchen tables from China), U.S. consumers
reallocate to the U.S. variety of that product. This reallocation increases the world demand for
U.S. production in this sector, and reduces world demand for foreign production. Hence, there is
a terms-of-trade gain in the furniture sector. Similarly, when a foreign country imposes tariffs on
U.S. varieties, foreign consumers reallocate away from U.S. production, lowering the price in the
sector where foreign tariffs are imposed.
   The extent of these price changes due to tariffs depends on the elasticities of both U.S. and
foreign demands, which we have estimated, and on the the sector-level elasticities of U.S. supply,
which we have imposed through the model assumptions and the calibration. Online Appendix D.4
discusses in more detail the determinants of sector-level prices in the general equilibrium model.
   The terms-of-trade effects implied by the model operate at the sector level, and are therefore
not captured by our previous empirical analysis. Qualitatively, these terms-of-trade effects are
corroborated by an analysis of sector-level producer, export, and import price indexes published
by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Online Appendix Table A.14 reports regressions of each price
index on a simple average of import and retaliatory tariffs within sector. The table shows that: i)
the PPI increases with sector-level import tariffs; ii) U.S. export prices fall with retaliatory tariffs;
and iii) there are no impacts of the tariffs on sector-level import prices, which is consistent with
the evidence in the previous empirical sections and with our model assumptions.

V.D     Aggregate Impacts
   We use the model to quantify the impacts of the tariff war. For each primary factor (capital
and labor), the equivalent variation is the change in income at initial prices (before the tariff war)
that would have left that factor indifferent with the changes in tariffs that took place. Adding up
the equivalent variations across all primary factors (capital and labor in each region), we obtain the
aggregate equivalent variation EV , or change in aggregate real income. This term can be written




                                                   23
as a function of initial trade flows and price and revenue changes (Dixit and Norman, 1980):
                                      EV = −m0 ∆pM + x0 ∆pX +∆R                                                            (27)
                                                |       {z     }      | {z }
                                                    EV    M            EV   X

where m is a column vector with the imported quantities of each variety before the war, x collects
the quantities exported of each product to each destination, ∆pM are changes in duty-inclusive
import prices, and ∆pX are changes in export prices.29 EV M is the increase in the duty-inclusive
cost of the pre-war import basket, EV X is the increase in the value of the pre-war export basket,
and ∆R is the change in tariff revenue. The pre-tariff war levels of imports and exports in (27)
are directly observed, while the estimated model gives the responses of import and export prices
to the simultaneous change in U.S. and retaliatory tariffs.
   The top panel of Table VIII shows each of the components of EV in response to the 2018
U.S. and retaliatory tariff waves of the trade war. The first row of each panel reports the mon-
etary equivalent on an annual basis at 2016 prices and the second row reports numbers relative
to GDP. The point estimates are calculated using the model elasticities estimated in Section IV,
{σ̂ = 2.53, η̂ = 1.53, κ̂ = 1.19, ω̂ ∗ = −0.002, σ̂ ∗ = 1.04}, and bootstrapped confidence intervals are
computed for each component using the 1,000 bootstrapped parameter estimates.
   The first column, which reports EV M , shows that U.S. buyers of imports lost in aggregate $51
billion (0.27% of GDP). Since our estimation finds a foreign supply elasticity ω ∗ very close to zero,
this number remains very close (but not identical since ω ∗ is not exactly zero) to the number we
reported at the beginning of this section. Using the error around our parameter estimates, we can
reject the null hypothesis that EV M is zero.
   The second column shows the EV X component. This second term depends on the export price
changes implied by the general equilibrium model. Export prices increase if the reallocation of
domestic and foreign demand into U.S. goods induced by tariffs is stronger than the reallocations
away from these goods. As discussed in the last subsection, the intensity of these reallocations
depend on the combination of the estimated elasticities and the supply-side model assumptions.
   We estimate a (statistically significant) increase of EV X of $9.4 billion (0.05% of GDP). This
aggregate number equals a model-implied 0.7% increase in the export price index times a 7.4%
observed share of exports of manufacturing and agricultural sectors in GDP. Since import prices
essentially do not change, these export price changes mean terms-of-trade improvements at the
country level. The model predicts a 0.1% average (nominal) wage increase for tradeable-sector
workers in the U.S. relative to its trade partners.
   The final component of the decomposition is the increase in tariff revenue. The model matches
a tariff revenue share of 0.2% of GDP and yields an increase in tariff revenue of $34.3 billion, or
0.18% of GDP. This increase is larger than the $29.1 billion increase in actual tariff revenue between
2017 and 2018. It is not exactly the same because the model isolates the revenue increases solely
from tariffs (as opposed to other shocks).
   These numbers imply large and divergent consequences of the trade war on consumers and
  29
       In our previous notation, m0 ∆pM ≡                             mig ∆pig and x0 ∆pX ≡                          xig ∆pX
                                            P       P          P                              P     P          P
                                            s∈S         g∈Gs    i∈I                           s∈S       g∈Gs   i∈I         ig .



                                                               24
producers. However, the effects approximately balance out, leading to a small aggregate loss for
the U.S. as a whole. Column 4 sums the three components of EV to obtain the aggregate impacts of
the war on the U.S. economy. We estimate an aggregate loss of $7.2 billion, or 0.04% of GDP. While
we cannot reject the null that the aggregate losses are zero, we can conclude that the consumer
losses from the trade war were large.30
    The second panel reports the aggregate outcomes of a hypothetical scenario where foreign trade
partners did not retaliate against the U.S. In this scenario, the export price index would have
increased by 1.2% and the aggregate impact would have resulted in a modest gain to the U.S.
economy of $0.5 billion (also not statistically significant). The difference operates through export
prices: by lowering demand for U.S. exports, our computations imply a 75.9% larger producer gains
without retaliation.

V.E      Regional Impacts
    We now examine the distributional impacts of the trade war across regions. Tariffs raise the price
of consumption for everyone, but also benefit workers in protected sectors through the producer
and export price increases we previously discussed. At the same time, tariffs increase the costs of
intermediate inputs, which were heavily targeted (see Online Appendix Table A.1) and are used
more intensively by some regions than others. The ultimate regional impact also depends on the
structure of the retaliatory tariffs.
    We examine real wages implied by the model. There are three reasons why we do not examine
county-level wages directly. First, monthly earnings data are available only at the sector level and
for a subset of sectors. Second, even if such data were available, the model would still be necessary
to construct the impact of the tariffs on the level of wages. Online Appendix D illustrates that the
wage effects are a complex function of shocks in general equilibrium. Third, the model allows us to
compare wages under different counterfactual scenarios, such as shutting down foreign retaliations.
    Figure V illustrates large variation in exposure to the trade war across counties in the U.S.
The top panel shows county-level exposure to U.S. tariffs, and the bottom panel shows county-
level exposure to retaliatory tariffs. We construct the county-level exposure of tradeable sectors
by first computing the trade-weighted import and retaliatory tariff changes by NAICS sector and
then mapping them to counties based on counties’ employment structure.31 The maps show a clear
contrast between the regional structure of U.S. protection and retaliation. The Great Lakes region

   30
      We find similar
                     results assuming mobile labor across sectors. In that case, the overall loss is $4 billion, with the
breakdown for EV M , EV X , ∆R as {$ − 51b, $12.7b, $34.3b}.
   31
      We compute the NAICS-level import and export tariff shock as the import and export-weighted aver-
ages of the variety level U.S. and retaliatory tariff changes using average 2013-2016 trade shares. We then
construct the county-level import and export tariff shocks as the labor-compensation weighted average of the
NAICS-level tariff shocks.P InPthe notation of the model, the import tariff shock (due to U.S. tariffs) is
                                                 p∗ m   ∆τ
∆τrj =                 Pg∈Gs Pi∈I ig∗ ig ig and the export tariff shock (due to retaliatory tariffs) is ∆τs∗ =
                     wsr Lsr
         P
           s∈S       wrT LT
                          r             p    m 0 0
                 P     P g0 ∈GXs i0 ∈I∗ i0 g0 i g
                             p  x   ∆τ
                               ig
       wsr Lsr          i∈I ig        ig
                                         , where wrT LTr are total tradeable sector wages in county r.
P                 g∈Gs
 s∈S     T T
                  P     P       X
         wr Lr                           pig xig
                          g∈Gs     i∈I




                                                               25
of the Midwest and the industrial areas of the Northeast received higher tariff protection, while
rural regions of the Midwestern plains and Mountain West received higher tariff retaliation.
    We construct the model-implied impacts across counties in response to the tariff war.32 On
average across counties, the nominal wages for workers in tradeable sectors increase by 0.1% (sd
0.4%). However, these income gains at initial prices are more than offset by a higher cost of living,
as the CPI of tradeable goods increases by 1.1% on average across sectors, partly due to an average
2.0% increase in import prices. As a result, real wages in the tradeable sector fall by 1.0% (sd
0.5%), on average. We do not observe a meaningful change in the gini coefficient across counties.
    Figure VI shows the impacts of the trade war across counties. The first map shows the county-
level reduction in real wages in tradeable sectors in a hypothetical scenario where U.S. trade part-
ners did not retaliate, and the second map shows real wage losses from the full war. Every county
experiences a reduction in the tradeable real wage. Counties with smaller relative losses are concen-
trated in the Rust Belt region as well as the Southeast. These patterns map imperfectly with the
direct protection received through import tariffs shown in Figure V because of input-output link-
ages across sectors. The counties hit hardest by the war are those concentrated in the Midwestern
Plains, largely due to the structure of the retaliatory tariffs.

V.F      Tariff Protection, Wages, and Voting Patterns
    As discussed in Section II.C, the pattern of tariff changes across sectors does not a priori support
the view that protection was driven by incentives to maximize national income or by contributions
of special interests. We probe a third hypothesis from the political economy of trade protection
literature, namely that policy-makers pursued an electoral strategy when setting tariffs by targeting
regions according to their voting patterns. We examine the relationship between the county-level
tariff exposure shown in Figure V and voting patterns in the 2016 presidential election. The logic of
majority voting suggests that tariffs set by an electorally motivated incumbent government should
be higher in sectors that are disproportionally located in regions where voters are likely to be
pivotal in elections.33 We then contrast the ex ante incentives of policymakers suggested by the
relationship between tariffs and voting with the ex post distributional consequences of their policies.
    Figure VII presents a non-parametric plot of county-level import and retaliatory tariff changes
against the Republican (GOP) vote share, weighted by county population. The county-level tariffs
are constructed within tradeables, and therefore do not reflect differences in shares of tradeable
activity across counties. The figure reveals two different patterns of protection for U.S. and retalia-
tory tariffs. For U.S. tariffs, we observe an inverted-U shape, implying that counties with a 40-60%

   32
      The real tradeable wage change in region r is P               ˆ − Pˆr , where wT,r
                                                      defined as wT,r                  ˆ is the nominal wage increase in
the tradeable sector, and where Pˆr = βN T P̂N T,r + s∈S βs Pˆs is the change in the local price index. Equation (D.4)
gives the solution for the wage change as function of price changes. Equations (D.9) to (D.12) characterize the block
of the model with the solution to the price changes as function tariffs and expenditure shifters.
   33
      Helpman (1995) characterizes optimal tariffs under majority voting in a specific factors model, showing that tariffs
are higher in sectors where the median voter has larger factor ownership. Grossman and Helpman (2018) emphasize
that psychological benefits to voters from tariff protection (e.g., increased self-esteem from mutually recognized group
membership) may underlie a shift to protectionism.


                                                           26
Republican vote share received more protection than heavily Republican or Democratic counties.
Hence, U.S. tariffs appear targeted toward sectors concentrated in politically competitive counties.
By contrast, trading partners retaliated by targeting exports in sectors concentrated in heavily
Republican counties.34 We explore how these targeting patterns vary with other demographic and
economic variables in Online Appendix E.
    We use the general-equilibrium model to assess if the tradeable real wages of electorally com-
petitive counties indeed experience the largest (relative) gains. Figure VIII plots tradeable real
wages against the county Republican vote share for two different scenarios. The black solid curve
shows the actual impacts of the war. The dashed curve reflects the impact under a hypothetical
scenario where U.S. trade partners did not retaliate. The figure reveals that in the (hypothetical)
scenario where trade partners did not retaliate, the impacts would have been fairly even across
electorally competitive counties. There is no sharp peak, and the relationship plateaus between a
35% and 50% vote share. Relative to a heavily Democratic county (a 5-15% vote share), the losses
in a heavily Republican county (85-95% vote share) are 6% larger.
    The black curve reveals the impacts from the full war. The peak shifts leftward and is more
pronounced. The war relatively favored tradeable workers in Democratic-leaning counties with a
2016 Presidential vote share of roughly 35%. Moreover, workers in Republican counties (85-95%
vote share) bore the largest cost of the full war.35 The losses in these counties are 32% larger
than in a heavily Democratic county (a 5-15% vote share). This asymmetry between Republican
and Democratic counties is further illustrated in Online Appendix Figure A.6, which plots across
counties the simulated tradable wage change from the full trade war against the hypothetical
scenario where U.S. trade partners did not retaliate. Retaliatory tariffs had a disproportionately
negative impact on Republican counties, as is illustrated by the mass of red counties that fall far
below the 45-degree line. In contrast, the model implies that Democratic-leaning counties were not
as harshly affected by retaliations.


VI      CONCLUSION
    This paper analyzes the impacts of the 2018 trade war on the U.S. economy. We estimate key
elasticities of trade outcomes using import and retaliatory tariff variation. We find large impacts
of the war on imports and exports. Before-duties import prices faced by the U.S. did not fall in
response to tariffs over the time horizon that we consider, implying complete pass-through of tariffs
to duty-inclusive import prices.
    These estimates imply an annual loss for the U.S. of $51 billion due to higher import prices.
However, a general equilibrium model imposing neoclassical assumptions implies a small aggregate
real income loss of $7.2 billion. Hence, we find substantial redistribution from buyers of foreign

  34
     This finding is also shown by Fetzer and Schwarz (2019).
  35
     Auer et al. (2018) suggest heavy Republican districts would loose more from revoking NAFTA. Ma and McLaren
(2018) provide evidence that tariff changes in the years leading up to NAFTA were biased towards industries located
in swing states.


                                                        27
goods to U.S. producers and the government, but a small net effect for the U.S economy as a
whole. We also document that U.S. tariffs protected sectors concentrated in electorally competitive
counties, while foreign retaliations affected sectors concentrated in Republican counties. These
spatial patterns generate heterogeneous impacts of the trade war, and through model simulations
we find that tradeable sectors in heavily GOP counties experienced the largest losses. Therefore,
even though the aggregate impacts are small, the distributional effects are substantial.
   We close with four important caveats. First, our analysis does not include an analysis of U.S.
retail prices paid by final consumers. Second, we do not consider the impacts of trade policy
uncertainty on the business climate. Third, our framework does not allow for country-level wage
effects in foreign countries that would further impact the terms-of-trade. Finally, our analysis does
not examine long-run impacts of the trade war. We believe these are important topics for future
research.



References
Altig, D., N. Bloom, S. Davis, B. Meyer, and N. Parker (2018): “Are Tariff Worries
 Cutting into Business Investment?” Federal Reserve of Atlanta Blog.

Amiti, M. and J. Konings (2007): “Trade Liberalization, Intermediate Inputs, and Productivity:
 Evidence from Indonesia,” American Economic Review, 97, 1611–1638.

Amiti, M., S. Redding, and D. Weinstein (2019): “The Impact of the 2018 Trade War on
 U.S. Prices and Welfare,” CEPR Discussion Paper 13564.

Antràs, P., D. Chor, T. Fally, and R. Hillberry (2012): “Measuring the Upstreamness of
 Production and Trade Flows,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 102.

Antràs, P. and A. De Gortari (2017): “On the geography of global value chains,” Tech. Rep.
 23456, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Arkolakis, C., A. Costinot, and A. Rodriguez-Clare (2012): “New Trade Models, Same
 Old Gains?” The American Economic Review, 102, 94–130.

Atkin, D. and D. Donaldson (2015): “Who’s Getting Globalized? The Size and Implications
 of Intra-national Trade Costs,” Working Paper 21439, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Attanasio, O., P. K. Goldberg, and N. Pavcnik (2004): “Trade Reforms and Wage Inequality
 in Colombia,” Journal of development Economics, 74, 331–366.

Auer, R., B. Bonadio, and A. A. Levchenko (2018): “The economics and politics of revoking
 NAFTA,” Tech. Rep. 25379, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Autor, D. H., D. Dorn, and G. H. Hanson (2013): “The China Syndrome: Local Labor
 Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States,” American Economic Review, 103,
 2121–68.

Autor, D. H., D. Dorn, G. H. Hanson, and J. Song (2014): “Trade adjustment: Worker-level
 evidence,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129, 1799–1860.

                                                 28
Bagwell, K. and R. W. Staiger (1999): “An Economic Theory of GATT,” American Economic
 Review, 89, 215–248.

Baqaee, D. and E. Farhi (2019): “Networks, Barriers, and Trade,” Tech. Rep. 26108, National
 Bureau of Economic Research.

Bellora, C. and L. Fontagné (2019): “Shooting oneself in the foot? Trade war and global
 value chains,” .

Bown, C. and Y. Zhang (2019): “Measuring Trump’s 2018 Trade Protection: Five Takeaways,”
 Tech. rep., Peterson Institute for International Economics.

Broda, C., N. Limao, and D. E. Weinstein (2008): “Optimal Tariffs and Market Power: The
 Evidence,” American Economic Review, 98, 2032–65.

Broda, C. and D. E. Weinstein (2006): “Globalization and the Gains from Variety,” The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121, 541–585.

Bustos, P. (2011): “Trade liberalization, exports, and technology upgrading: Evidence on the
 impact of MERCOSUR on Argentinian firms,” American economic review, 101, 304–40.

Caliendo, L., R. C. Feenstra, J. Romalis, and A. M. Taylor (2015): “Tariff Reductions,
 Entry, and Welfare: Theory and Evidence for the Last Two Decades,” Tech. Rep. 21768, National
 Bureau of Economic Research.

Caliendo, L. and F. Parro (2015): “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of NAFTA,”
 The Review of Economic Studies, 82, 1–44.

Caliendo, L., F. Parro, E. Rossi-Hansberg, and P.-D. Sarte (2017): “The Impact of
 Regional and Sectoral Productivity Changes on the US Economy,” The Review of economic
 studies, 85, 2042–2096.

Cavallo, A., G. Gopinath, B. Neiman, and J. Tang (2019): “Tariff Pass-through at the
 Border and at the Store: Evidence from US Trade Policy,” .

Chetty, R., A. Looney, and K. Kroft (2009): “Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence,”
 American Economic Review, 99, 1145–77.

Coglianese, J., L. W. Davis, L. Kilian, and J. H. Stock (2017): “Anticipation, Tax Avoid-
 ance, and the Price Elasticity of Gasoline Demand,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 32, 1–15.

De Loecker, J., J. Eeckhout, and G. Unger (2018): “The Rise of Market Power and the
 Macroeconomic Implications,” Working Paper 23687, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Dekle, R., J. Eaton, and S. Kortum (2008): “Global rebalancing with gravity: measuring the
 burden of adjustment,” IMF Staff Papers, 55, 511–540.

Dix-Carneiro, R. and B. K. Kovak (2017): “Trade Liberalization and Regional Dynamics,”
  American Economic Review, 107, 2908–46.

Dixit, A. and J. Londregan (1996): “The determinants of success of special interests in redis-
  tributive politics,” the Journal of Politics, 58, 1132–1155.



                                              29
Dixit, A. and V. Norman (1980): Theory of International Trade: A Dual, General Equilibrium
  Approach, Cambridge University Press.

Donaldson, D. (2018): “Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Impact of Transportation Infras-
 tructure,” American Economic Review, 108, 899–934.

Eaton, J. and S. Kortum (2002): “Technology, Geography, and Trade,” Econometrica, 70,
 1741–1779.

Feenstra, R. C. (1989): “Symmetric Pass-through of Tariffs and Exchange Rates under Imperfect
  Competition: An Empirical Test,” Journal of International Economics, 27, 25 – 45.

——— (1994): “New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International Prices,” The Amer-
 ican Economic Review, 157–177.

Fetzer, T. and C. Schwarz (2019): “Tariffs and Politics: Evidence from Trump’s Trade Wars,”
  CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP13579.

Flaaen, A. B., A. Hortaçsu, and F. Tintelnot (2019): “The Production Relocation and
  Price Effects of US Trade Policy: The Case of Washing Machines,” Tech. Rep. 25767, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Freund, C., M. Ferrantino, M. Maliszewska, and M. Ruta (2018): “China US Trade War
 Scenarios: Impacts on Global Trade and Income,” World Bank Working Paper.

Goldberg, P. K., A. K. Khandelwal, N. Pavcnik, and P. Topalova (2010): “Imported
 intermediate inputs and domestic product growth: Evidence from India,” The Quarterly journal
 of economics, 125, 1727–1767.

Goldberg, P. K. and M. M. Knetter (1997): “Goods Prices and Exchange Rates: What Have
 We Learned?” Journal of Economic Literature, 35, 1243–1272.

Goldberg, P. K. and G. Maggi (1999): “Protection for Sale: An Empirical Investigation,”
 American Economic Review, 89, 1135–1155.

Goldberg, P. K. and N. Pavcnik (2016): “The Effects of Trade Policy,” in Handbook of com-
 mercial policy, Elsevier, vol. 1, 161–206.

Gopinath, G., O. Itskhoki, and R. Rigobon (2010): “Currency Choice and Exchange Rate
 Pass-Through,” American Economic Review, 100, 304–36.

Grossman, G. and E. Helpman (2018): “Identity Politics and Trade Policy,” Working Paper
 25348, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Grossman, G. M. and E. Helpman (1994): “Protection for Sale,” The American Economic
 Review, 84, 833–850.

——— (2005): “A Protectionist Bias in Majoritarian Politics,” The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
 nomics, 120, 1239–1282.

Handley, K. and N. Limão (2017): “Policy Uncertainty, Trade, and Welfare: Theory and
 Evidence for China and the United States,” American Economic Review, 107, 2731–83.



                                             30
Head, K. and T. Mayer (2014): “Gravity equations: Workhorse, Toolkit, and Cookbook,” in
 Handbook of international economics, Elsevier, vol. 4, 131–195.

Helpman, E. (1995): “Politics and Trade Policy,” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Re-
 search.

Hillberry, R. and D. Hummels (2013): “Trade elasticity parameters for a computable general
  equilibrium model,” in Handbook of computable general equilibrium modeling, Elsevier, vol. 1,
  1213–1269.

Irwin, D. A. (2014): “Tariff Incidence: Evidence from US Sugar Duties, 1890-1930,” Tech. Rep.
  20635, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Johnson, H. G. (1953): “Optimum Tariffs and Retaliation,” The Review of Economic Studies,
  21, 142–153.

Khandelwal, A. K. (2010): “The Long and Short (of) Quality Ladders,” Review of Economic
 Studies, 77, 1450–1476.

Kovak, B. K. (2013): “Regional Effects of Trade Reform: What Is the Correct Measure of
 Liberalization?” American Economic Review, 103, 1960–76.

Ma, X. and J. McLaren (2018): “A Swing-state Theorem, with Evidence,” Tech. rep., National
 Bureau of Economic Research.

Mayer, W. (1984): “Endogenous Tariff Formation,” American Economic Review, 74, 970–85.

McCaig, B. and N. Pavcnik (2018): “Export Markets and Labor Allocation in a Low-Income
 Country,” American Economic Review, 108, 1899–1941.

Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson (2008): “Five Facts about Prices: A Reevaluation of Menu
 Cost Models*,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123, 1415–1464.

Nunn, N. (2007): “Relationship-Specificity, Incomplete Contracts, and the Pattern of Trade*,”
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122, 569–600.

Ossa, R. (2014): “Trade wars and trade talks with data,” American Economic Review, 104, 4104–
 46.

——— (2016): “Quantitative Models of Commercial Policy,” in Handbook of commercial policy,
 Elsevier, vol. 1, 207–259.

Pierce, J. R. and P. K. Schott (2012): “A Concordance Between Ten-Digit U.S. Harmonized
  System Codes and SIC/NAICS Product Classes and Industries,” Journal of Economic and Social
  Measurement, 37, 61–96.

Rauch, J. E. (1999): “Networks versus markets in international trade,” Journal of International
 Economics, 48, 7 – 35.

Romalis, J. (2007): “NAFTA’s and CUSFTA’s Impact on International Trade,” The Review of
 Economics and Statistics, 89, 416–435.

Sequeira, S. (2016): “Corruption, Trade Costs, and Gains from Tariff Liberalization: Evidence
  from Southern Africa,” American Economic Review, 106, 3029–63.

                                              31
Simonovska, I. and M. E. Waugh (2014): “The Elasticity of Trade: Estimates and Evidence,”
  Journal of international Economics, 92, 34–50.

Spearot, A. (2016): “Unpacking the Long-run Effects of Tariff Shocks: New Structural Im-
  plications from Firm Heterogeneity Models,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 8,
  128–67.

Spearot, A. C. (2013): “Variable Demand Elasticities and Tariff Liberalization,” Journal of
  International Economics, 89, 26–41.

Topalova, P. (2010): “Factor Immobility and Regional Impacts of Trade Liberalization: Evidence
 on Poverty from India,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2, 1–41.

Winkelmann, L. and R. Winkelmann (1998): “Tariffs, quotas and terms-of-trade: The case of
 New Zealand,” Journal of International Economics, 46, 313–332.

Zoutman, F. T., E. Gavrilova, and A. O. Hopland (2018): “Estimating both supply and
  demand elasticities using variation in a single tax rate,” Econometrica, 86, 763–771.




                                             32
Figures and Tables
                                                                     Figure I: Trade War Timeline

                                                                     Panel A: Tariffs on U.S. Imports

                                                  40%




                                                                                                                              Washer

                                                  30%                                                                             Solar
                        Statutory Tariffs (%)




                                                                                                                               China2
                                                                                                                               China1
                                                                                                                             Steel 1 & 2



                                                  20%



                                                                                                                               China3
                                                                                                                               Alum2
                                                                                                                               Alum1
                                                  10%




                                                  0%
                                                        Jan    Feb   Mar   Apr   May   Jun    Jul   Aug   Sep   Oct   Nov   Dec       Jan
                                                                                             2018




                                                              Panel B: Retaliatory Tariffs on U.S. Exports
                                                  40%                                                                          China2
                                                                                                                               China1
                                                                                                                               Russia


                                                                                                                               China3


                                                  30%
                        Retaliatory Tariffs (%)




                                                                                                                             EU, Turkey
                                                                                                                              Mexico




                                                  20%                                                                         Canada

                                                                                                                               China4




                                                  10%




                                                  0%
                                                        Jan    Feb   Mar   Apr   May   Jun    Jul   Aug   Sep   Oct   Nov   Dec       Jan
                                                                                             2018


Notes: Figure shows the unweighted average tariff rate of targeted import and export varieties for each tariff wave before and
after they are targeted. Import tariffs constructed from U.S. International Trade Commission (USITC) documents, and
retaliatory tariffs constructed using official documents from foreign finance and trade ministries.
                                                   Figure II: Variety Event Study: Imports



                                                  Log Value                                                                       Log Quantity
               20                                                                                20


                0                                                                                 0
     Percent




                                                                                       Percent
               -20                                                                               -20


               -40                                                                               -40


               -60                                                                               -60
                     -6   -5   -4     -3   -2    -1   0    1     2   3    4   5   6+                   -6   -5   -4     -3   -2   -1   0    1    2   3      4   5   6+
                                    Months Relative to Tariff Enactment                                               Months Relative to Tariff Enactment



                                                Log Unit Value                                                           Log Duty-Inclusive Unit Value
               40                                                                                40

               30                                                                                30
     Percent




                                                                                       Percent




               20                                                                                20

               10                                                                                10

                0                                                                                 0

               -10                                                                               -10
                     -6   -5   -4     -3   -2    -1   0    1     2   3    4   5   6+                   -6   -5   -4     -3   -2   -1   0    1    2   3      4   5   6+
                                    Months Relative to Tariff Enactment                                               Months Relative to Tariff Enactment




Notes: Figure plots event time dummies for targeted varieties relative to untargeted varieties. Regressions include country-
product, product-time, and country-time fixed effects. Standard errors clustered by country and HS-8. Event periods before -6
are dropped, and event periods >=6 are binned. Error bars show 95% confidence intervals. In Appendix B we provide evidence
that the temporary surge in imports during event period 2 reflects an anticipation response to additional tariff threats on a
subset of Chinese varieties. Sample: Monthly variety-level import data from U.S. Census. Sample period is 2017:1 to 2019:4.
                                                  Figure III: Variety Event Study: Exports



                                                  Log Value                                                                       Log Quantity
               20                                                                                20

                0                                                                                 0
     Percent




                                                                                       Percent
               -20                                                                               -20


               -40                                                                               -40


               -60                                                                               -60
                     -6   -5   -4     -3   -2    -1   0    1     2   3    4   5   6+                   -6   -5   -4     -3   -2   -1   0    1    2   3      4   5   6+
                                    Months Relative to Tariff Enactment                                               Months Relative to Tariff Enactment



                                                Log Unit Value                                                           Log Duty-Inclusive Unit Value
               30                                                                                30


               20                                                                                20
     Percent




                                                                                       Percent




               10                                                                                10


                0                                                                                 0


                                                                                                 -10
               -10
                     -6   -5   -4     -3   -2    -1   0    1     2   3    4   5   6+                   -6   -5   -4     -3   -2   -1   0    1    2   3      4   5   6+
                                    Months Relative to Tariff Enactment                                               Months Relative to Tariff Enactment




Notes: Figure plots event time dummies for targeted varieties relative to untargeted varieties. Regressions include country-
product, product-time, and country-time fixed effects. Standard errors clustered by country and HS-6. Event periods before
-6 are dropped, and event periods >=6 are binned. Error bars show 95% confidence intervals. Sample: Monthly variety-level
export data from U.S. Census. Sample period is 2017:1 to 2019:4.
                                                                                     Figure IV: Dynamic Specification


                                                                                          Panel A: Tariffs on U.S. Imports
                                                                               Log Value                                                                                             Log Quantity

                              0                                                                                                                      0

                              -1                                                                                                                    -1
                    Percent




                                                                                                                                          Percent
                              -2                                                                                                                    -2

                              -3                                                                                                                    -3


                              -4                                                                                                                    -4
                                    -6     -5            -4        -3    -2     -1    0    1           2       3       4       5    6+                    -6   -5   -4    -3    -2    -1   0   1    2   3   4   5   6+
                                                     Months Relative to Tariff Increase                                                                             Months Relative to Tariff Increase


                                                                                Log Unit Value                                                                           Log Duty-Inclusive Unit Value
                                         .6                                                                                                         1.5

                                         .4
                                                                                                                                                     1
                    Percent




                                                                                                                                          Percent
                                         .2
                                                                                                                                                     .5
                                          0

                                         -.2                                                                                                         0

                                         -.4
                                                                                                                                                    -.5
                                                    -6        -5    -4   -3     -2   -1    0       1       2       3       4   5    6+                    -6   -5   -4     -3   -2    -1   0   1    2   3   4   5   6+
                                                               Months Relative to Tariff Increase                                                                   Months Relative to Tariff Increase




                                                                         Panel B: Retaliatory Tariffs on U.S. Exports
                                                                                Log Value                                                                                            Log Quantity
                                                                                                                                                     2
                               1

                                                                                                                                                     1
                              .5
                    Percent




                                                                                                                                          Percent




                               0                                                                                                                     0


                              -.5                                                                                                                   -1

                              -1                                                                                                                    -2
                                    -6         -5        -4        -3    -2     -1    0        1       2       3       4       5    6+                    -6   -5   -4    -3    -2    -1   0   1    2   3   4   5   6+
                                                         Months Relative to Tariff Increase                                                                         Months Relative to Tariff Increase


                                                                              Log Unit Value                                                                             Log Duty-Inclusive Unit Value
                               1                                                                                                                     2

                                                                                                                                                    1.5
                              .5
                    Percent




                                                                                                                                          Percent




                                                                                                                                                     1
                               0
                                                                                                                                                     .5
                              -.5
                                                                                                                                                     0

                              -1                                                                                                                    -.5
                                    -6         -5        -4        -3    -2     -1    0        1       2       3       4       5    6+                    -6   -5   -4     -3   -2    -1   0   1    2   3   4   5   6+
                                                         Months Relative to Tariff Increase                                                                         Months Relative to Tariff Increase




Notes: Figures plot cumulative sum of β coefficients from the regression:
                                                                                                           Pm=6                     y
                   ∆ ln yigt = αgt + αit + αis +                                                               m=−6
                                                                                                                                   βm [ln (1 + τig,t−m ) − ln (1 + τig,t−1−m )] + igt
where i denotes countries, g denotes products, and t denotes time. Standard errors clustered by county and HS-8 for imports,
and by country and HS-6 for exports. Error bands show 95% confidence intervals. Monthly variety-level import and export
data from U.S. Census. Sample period is 2017:1 to 2019:4.
                         Figure V: Regional Variation in U.S. and Retaliatory Tariffs
                                                 Panel A: Tariff Increase on US Imports, 2017-2018
                               Weighted by Variety-Level US Import Share and County-Level 2016 Tradeable Sector Employee Wage Bill




                                                                   Mean = 1.11 p.p., std = 0.91
                2.37 − 11.78                  1.97 − 2.37                 1.66 − 1.97                1.25 − 1.66                 0.86 − 1.25
                0.59 − 0.86                   0.44 − 0.59                 0.35 − 0.44                0.00 − 0.35



                                                 Panel B: Tariff Increase on US Exports, 2017-2018
                               Weighted by Variety-Level US Export Share and County-Level 2016 Tradeable Sector Employee Wage Bill




                                                                   Mean = 4.17 p.p., std = 2.67
                7.60 − 12.37                  7.37 − 7.60                 5.68 − 7.37                4.29 − 5.68                 3.06 − 4.29
                2.30 − 3.06                   1.71 − 2.30                 1.30 − 1.71                0.98 − 1.30                 0.00 − 0.98

Notes: Figure shows county-level exposure to U.S. import tariff changes (Panel A) and retaliatory tariff changes (Panel B)
due to the trade war, weighted by variety-level 2013-2017 U.S. trade shares (constructed from Census data) and by 2016
county-level tradeable sector employee wage bill (constructed from County Business Patterns). Darker shades indicate higher
tariff exposure. Values indicate percentage point tariff increases.
       Figure VI: Model Simulation of Real Wage Impacts from U.S. and Retaliatory Tariffs
                                 Panel A: Model Simulation: Tradeable Real Wage Loss from Full War




                                          Legend displays percent real wage loss. Mean loss = 1.03%, std = 0.54%.
                            1.60 − 3.63                 1.25 − 1.60                 0.95 − 1.25                 0.71 − 0.95
                            0.46 − 0.71                 0.08 − 0.46                 No data



                     Panel B: Model Simulation: Tradeable Real Wage Loss from U.S. Tariffs (without retaliations)




                                          Legend displays percent real wage loss. Mean loss = 0.51%, std = 0.22%.
                            0.75 − 1.28                 0.62 − 0.75                 0.50 − 0.62                 0.39 − 0.50
                            0.27 − 0.39                 0.02 − 0.27                 No data

Notes: Figure shows county-level mean tradeable wage losses as simulated from the model. Panel A shows losses accounting
for both import and retaliatory tariffs. Panel B shows losses in the counterfactual scenario that U.S. trade partners did not
retaliate. Darker shades indicate greater losses. Values indicate percent wage declines.
                                                 Figure VII: Tariff Changes vs. 2016 Republican Vote Share



                                      .018                                                                          .035




                                                                                                                           County Retaliatory Tariff Change
        County Import Tariff Change




                                      .016                                                                          .03




                                      .014                                                                          .025




                                                                                                                    .02
                                      .012




                                                                                                                    .015
                                       .01
                                             0            .2            .4              .6                 .8   1
                                                                 2016 GOP Presidential Vote Share

                                                                Import Tariffs       Retaliatory Tariffs




Notes: Figure plots county-level import and retaliatory tariff changes against the 2016 Republican presidential two-party
vote share, using a non-parametric fit weighted by county population. County-level tariff changes weighted by variety-level
2013-2017 U.S. trade shares and by 2016 county-level tradeable sector employee wage bill. Vote shares constructed from
Federal Election Commission data. Unit of analysis is 3,111 U.S. counties.
   Figure VIII: Model-Simulated Tradeable Real Wage Impact vs. 2016 Republican Vote Share



                                          -.4
        Tradeable Real Wages (% Change)




                                          -.6




                                          -.8




                                          -1
                                                0   .1   .2        .3     .4          .5        .6          .7   .8   .9   1
                                                              2016 Presidential GOP Two-Party Vote Share

                                                                           Full War        No Retaliation




Notes: Figure plots model-simulated county-level tradeable real wage changes due to the trade war against the 2016 Republican
presidential two-party vote share, using a non-parametric fit weighted by county population. Vote shares constructed from
Federal Election Commission data. Unit of analysis is 3,049 U.S. counties.
                                 Table I: The 2018 Trade War

               Panel A: Tariffs on U.S. Imports Enacted by U.S. in 2018

                                                Products        2017 Imports          Tariff (%)
 Tariff Wave               Date Enacted
                                              (# HS-10)       (mil USD)      (%)*     2017    2018

 Solar Panels                Feb 7, 2018                 8         5,782       0.2     0.0    30.0
 Washing Machines            Feb 7, 2018                 8         2,105       0.1     1.3    32.2
 Aluminum                 Mar-Jun, 2018                67         17,685       0.7     2.0    12.0
 Iron and Steel           Mar-Jun, 2018               753         30,523       1.3     0.0    25.0
 China 1                      Jul 6, 2018            1,672        33,510       1.4     1.3    26.2
 China 2                   Aug 23, 2018               433         14,101       0.6     2.7    27.0
 China 3                    Sep 24, 2018             9,102       199,264       8.3     3.3    12.9
 Total                                             12,043      302,970       12.7      2.6    16.6

 Panel B: Retaliatory Tariffs on U.S. Exports Enacted by Trading Partners in 2018

                                                   Products      2017 Exports          Tariff (%)
 Retaliating Country        Date Enacted
                                               (# HS-10)      (mil USD)       (%)*    2017     2018

 China                      Apr-Sep, 2018             7,474        92,518       6.0     8.4    18.9
 Mexico                        Jun 5, 2018             232           6,746      0.4     9.6    28.0
 Turkey                      Jun 21, 2018              244           1,554      0.1     9.7    31.8
 European Union              Jun 22, 2018              303           8,244      0.5     3.9    29.2
 Canada                        Jul 1, 2018             325         17,818       1.2     2.1    20.2
 Russia                       Aug 6, 2018              163             268      0.0     5.2    36.8
 Total                                               8,073       127,149       8.2      7.3    20.4
Notes: “*” Values indicate percentage point tariff increases. Panels display unweighted monthly HS10-
country average statutory tariff rates. 2017 tariff rates computed as the annual average; 2018 tariff
rates computed using data from December 2018. Total tariff rates are computed as the trade-weighted
average of table row values. The denominator for import (export) share is the total 2017 annual USD
value of all U.S. imports (exports). The U.S. government announced import tariffs on aluminum and
steel products on March 23 but granted excemptions for Canada, Mexico, and the European Union;
those exemptions were lifted on June 1. The dates of Chinese retaliations are: April 6, July 2, August
23, and September 24. See text for data sources.
                                       Table II: Sector Variation in Tariff Rate Changes

                       Tariff Changes for Targeted Import Varieties and Export Products, by NAICS3 Code
                                                            Imports (U.S. Tariffs)                  Exports (Retaliatory Tariffs)

                                                                                ∆ Tariffs                                   ∆ Tariffs

 Sector                                NAICS-3    # Varieties   # Products    Mean     Std.    # Products   # Varieties   Mean      Std.
 (1)                                       (2)            (3)          (4)      (5)      (6)          (7)           (8)     (9)     (10)
 Crop and Animal Production              111-2           456           456     0.10    0.00           303          380     0.24     0.11
 Forestry and Logging                      113             71           71     0.10    0.00            79            79    0.12     0.07
 Fishing, Hunting and Trapping             114           486           486     0.10    0.00           247          247     0.24     0.03
 Oil and Gas Extraction                    211             17           17     0.10    0.00             8             8    0.22     0.07
 Mining (except Oil and Gas)               212           103           103     0.10    0.00            89            92    0.10     0.05
 Food                                      311           732           732     0.10    0.00           622        1,014     0.17     0.09
 Beverage and Tobacco Product              312             64           64     0.10    0.00            55          379     0.23     0.06
 Textile Mills                             313         1,502         1,502     0.10    0.00           468          494     0.12     0.06
 Textile Product Mills                     314           176           176     0.10    0.00           122          235     0.16     0.08
 Apparel                                   315             92           92     0.10    0.00           325        1,082     0.20     0.07
 Leather and Allied Product                316           237           237     0.10    0.00           196          357     0.16     0.08
 Wood Product                              321           424           424     0.10    0.00           194          194     0.10     0.03
 Paper                                     322           335           335     0.12    0.05           239          388     0.12     0.07
 Printing and Related Activites            323             14           14     0.10    0.00            46            74    0.13     0.09
 Petroleum and Coal Products               324             74           74     0.13    0.06            64            64    0.23     0.05
 Chemical                                  325         1,730         1,730     0.12    0.05         1,159        1,411     0.12     0.08
 Plastics and Rubber Products              326           251           251     0.15    0.07           171          196     0.10     0.07
 Nonmetallic Mineral Product               327           354           354     0.11    0.03           225          632     0.18     0.08
 Primary Metal                             331         1,147        14,093     0.19    0.07           495        1,738     0.20     0.07
 Fabricated Metal Product                  332           583           852     0.14    0.06           404        1,236     0.18     0.09
 Machinery                                 333         1,344         1,344     0.20    0.07         1,075        1,218     0.11     0.06
 Computer and Electronic Product           334           617           878     0.21    0.07           458          506     0.11     0.07
 Electrical Equipment and Appliances       335           414           594     0.18    0.08           326          656     0.16     0.08
 Transportation Equipment                  336           429           429     0.15    0.07           273          680     0.21     0.08
 Furniture and Related Product             337           160           160     0.10    0.01            37          244     0.21     0.07
 Miscellaneous                             339           231           231     0.13    0.06           393          608     0.16     0.09
 Total                                               12,043        25,699     0.12     0.03        8,073       14,212     0.17      0.07
 Notes: Table shows the mean and standard deviation of tariff increases across 3-digit NAICS sectors. A tariff change of 0.10 indicates
a 10 percentage point increase. Sectors with the same number of targeted varieties and products in Columns 3 and 4 reflect import
tariffs exclusively targeting Chinese products. Means and standard deviations in the final row computed as the simple average of
table row values. Import tariffs constructed from U.S. International Trade Commission (USITC) documents, and retaliatory tariffs
constructed using official documents from foreign finance and trade ministries.
                      Table III: Tests for Pre-Existing Trends


                           Panel A: U.S. Import Trends
                                    (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)
                               ∆ ln p∗ig mig    ∆ ln mig     ∆ ln p∗ig    ∆ ln pig
 ∆17−18 ln(1 + τig )               0.12           -0.04        0.18         0.18
                                  (0.11)         (0.19)       (0.15)       (0.15)
 Country × Sector FE                Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
 Product FE                         Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
 R2                                0.14           0.14         0.14         0.14
 N                               180,744        149,173      149,173      149,173

                           Panel B: U.S. Export Trends
                                    (1)           (2)         (3)               (4)
                               ∆ ln pX                     ∆ ln pX       ∆ ln pX          ∗)
                                     ig xig    ∆ ln xig          ig            ig (1   + τig
                ∗)
 ∆17−18 ln(1 + τig                 0.07          0.11        -0.03             -0.03
                                  (0.06)        (0.09)      (0.07)            (0.07)
 Country × Sector FE                Yes          Yes          Yes               Yes
 Product FE                        Yes           Yes          Yes               Yes
 R2                                0.11          0.12        0.12              0.12
 N                               207,840       163,181     163,181           163,181
Notes: Table reports pre-trend tests for import (Panel A) and export (Panel B) variety-
level trade outcomes. Table reports regressions of the 2017:1-2017:12 average monthly
changes in values, quantities, unit values, and tariff-inclusive unit values against the 2018
tariff changes. Standard errors clustered by country and HS-8 (imports) or HS-6 (exports).
Significance: *** .01; ** 0.05; * 0.10.
             Table IV: Variety Import Demand (σ) and Foreign Export Supply (ω ∗ )

                                 (1)             (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
                            ∆ ln p∗igt migt   ∆ ln migt    ∆ ln p∗igt    ∆ ln pigt     ∆ ln p∗igt    ∆ ln migt
 ∆ ln(1 + τigt )              -1.52∗∗∗        -1.47∗∗∗       0.00        0.58∗∗∗
                               (0.18)          (0.24)       (0.08)        (0.13)
 ∆ ln migt                                                                               -0.00
                                                                                        (0.05)
 ∆ ln pigt                                                                                             -2.53∗∗∗
                                                                                                        (0.26)
 Product × Time FE               Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes
 Country × Time FE               Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes
 Country × Sector FE             Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes
 1st-Stage F                                                                              36.5           21.2
 Bootstrap CI                                                                         [-0.14,0.10]   [1.75,3.02]
 R2                              0.13            0.13         0.11         0.11           0.00             .
 N                            2,993,288       2,454,023    2,454,023    2,454,023      2,454,023      2,454,023
Notes: Table reports the variety-level import responses to import tariffs. Columns 1-4 report import values,
quantities, before-duty unit values, and duty-inclusive unit values regressed on the statutory tariff rate. Column
5 reports the foreign export supply curve IV regression, ω̂ ∗ , from equation (9); the first stage is column 2.
Column 6 reports the import demand curve IV regression, σ̂, from equation (8); the first stage is column 4. All
regressions include product-time, country-time and country-sector fixed effects. The coefficient in column (4) is
not 1 plus the coefficient in column (3) because the duty-inclusive unit value is constructed using actual duties
collected by U.S. customs data. Standard errors clustered by country and HS-8. 90% Bootstrap confidence
intervals constructed from 1000 samples. Significance: * 0.10, ** 0.05, *** 0.01. Sample: monthly variety-level
import data from 2017:1 to 2019:4.
              Table V: Product Elasticity η

                         (1)           (2)          (3)
                      ∆ ln sM gt   ∆ ln pM gt    ∆ ln sM gt
 ∆ ln ZM gt            -0.81∗∗      1.52∗∗∗
                        (0.39)       (0.40)
 ∆ ln pM gt                                        -0.53∗
                                                   (0.27)
 Sector-Time FE          Yes          Yes           Yes
 1st-Stage F                                        14.6
 η̂ (se[η̂])                                    1.53 (0.27)
 Bootstrap CI                                   [1.15,1.89]
 R2                      0.01         0.10            .
 N                     371,916      371,916       371,916
Notes: Table reports the product-level import responses to
import tariffs. Column 1 reports the reduced form regression
of the imported product’s share within sectoral imports, sgt ,
on the product-level instrument, Zgt . Column 2 reports the
first stage: the regression of the product-level import price
index Pgt on Zgt . Column 3 reports the IV regression with
the implied η̂ and its standard error noted at the bottom of
the table in column 3. The product-level import price index
is constructed using σ̂ from column 6 of Table IV according
to (11), and the instrument is constructed using the statutory
tariffs using equation 12. All regressions include sector-time
fixed effects. 90% Bootstrap confidence intervals constructed
from 1000 samples. Regressions clustered by HS-8. Signifi-
cance: * 0.10, ** 0.05, *** 0.01. Sample: monthly product-
level import data from 2017:1 to 2019:4.
                        Table VI: Sector Elasticity κ

                               (1)                  (2)
                                                                      (3)
                        ∆ ln( PPM st Mst
                                Dst Dst
                                         )   ∆ ln    PM st
                                                      pst        ∆ ln( PPM st Mst
                                                                         Dst Dst
                                                                                  )
 ∆ ln ZM st                   0.30               -1.59
                           (0.36)             (3.49)
            PM st
 ∆ ln        pst                                                      -0.19
                                                                      (0.49)
 Sector FE                    Yes                   Yes                Yes
 Time FE                      Yes                   Yes                Yes
 1st-Stage F                                                            0.2
 κ̂ (se[κ̂])                                                       1.19 (0.49)
 Bootstrap CI                                                      [0.89,1.71]
 R2                          0.24               0.67                     .
 N                           2,041              2,041                 2,041
Notes: Table reports the sector-level import responses to import tar-
iffs. The sample is at the sector-time level from 2017:1 to 2019:4.
Column 1 reports the reduced form regression of the imported sector’s
share within total sectoral expenditures imports, sgt , on the product-
level instrument, Zgt . Column 2 reports the first stage: the regression
of the product-level import price index Pgt on Zgt . Column 3 reports
the IV regression with the implied η̂ and its standard error noted at
the bottom of the table in column 3. The sector import price index is
constructed using σ̂ from column 6 of Table IV and η̂ from column 3 of
Table V according to (14), and the instrument is constructed using the
statutory tariffs using (15). All regressions include sector fixed effects.
Regressions clustered by sector. 90% Bootstrap confidence intervals
constructed from 1000 samples. Significance: * 0.10, ** 0.05, *** 0.01.
Sample: monthly sector-level import data from from 2017:1 to 2019:4.
                                    Table VII: Foreign Import Demand σ ∗

                                 (1)            (2)           (3)               (4)                 (5)           (6)
                                                                                        ∗
                            ∆ ln pX
                                  igt xigt   ∆ ln xigt     ∆ ln pXigt   ∆ ln pX
                                                                              igt (1 + τigt )    ∆ ln pXigt    ∆ ln xigt
           ∗
 ∆ ln(1 + τigt )             -0.99∗∗∗        -1.00∗∗∗        -0.04            0.96 ∗∗∗

                               (0.28)         (0.36)        (0.16)             (0.16)
 ∆ ln xigt                                                                                         0.04
                                                                                                  (0.16)
                 ∗
 ∆ ln pX
       igt (1 + τigt )                                                                                           -1.04∗∗∗
                                                                                                                  (0.32)
 Product × Time FE               Yes            Yes          Yes                Yes                 Yes            Yes
 Country × Time FE               Yes            Yes          Yes                Yes                 Yes            Yes
 Country × Sector FE             Yes            Yes          Yes                Yes                 Yes            Yes
 1st-Stage F                                                                                         7.8           38.2
 Bootstrap CI                                                                                   [-0.30,0.26]   [0.73,1.39]
 R2                              0.07           0.07         0.06              0.06                   .            0.51
 N                            3,306,766      2,564,731    2,564,731         2,564,731            2,564,731      2,564,731
Notes: Table reports the variety-level export responses to retaliatory tariffs. Columns 1-4 report reduced form regres-
                                                                                                         ∗
sions of export values, quantities, before-duty unit values, and duty-inclusive unit values on ∆ ln(1 + τigt ), the change
in retaliatory export tariffs. Column 5 reports the IV regression that estimates the U.S. export supply elasticity ω̂; the
first stage is column 2. Column 6 reports the IV regression that estimates the foreign import demand elasticity σ ∗ ; the
first stage is column 4. All regressions include product-time, country-time and country-sector fixed effects. Standard
errors clustered by country and HS-6. 90% Bootstrap confidence intervals constructed from 1000 samples. Significance:
* 0.10, ** 0.05, *** 0.01. Sample: monthly variety-level export data from 2017:1 to 2019:4.
                         Table VIII: Aggregate Impacts

                              EVM              EVX             ∆R              EV
                                (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)
                                               2018 Trade War
 Change ($ b)                 -51.0             9.4            34.3            -7.2
                          [-54.8,-47.2]     [4.1,15.6]     [32.3,36.1]     [-14.4,0.8]
 Change (% GDP)               -0.27            0.05            0.18           -0.04
                          [-0.29,-0.25]     [0.02,0.08]    [0.17,0.19]     [-0.08,0.00]
                                  2018 U.S. Tariffs and No Retaliation
 Change ($ b)                 -50.9            16.6            34.8            0.5
                          [-52.9,-49.0]     [13.2,20.3]    [32.8,36.5]      [-4.0,5.7]
 Change (% GDP)               -0.27            0.09            0.19            0.00
                          [-0.28,-0.26]     [0.07,0.11]    [0.18,0.20]     [-0.02,0.03]

Notes: Table reports the aggregate impacts in column 4, and the decomposition into
EV M , EV X , and tariff revenue (∆R) in columns 1-3. The top panel reports the
impacts from the 2018 trade war. The bottom panel simulates a hypothetical sce-
nario where trade partners do not retaliate against U.S. tariffs. The first row in each
panel reports the overall impacts of each term in billions of USD. The third row scales
by 2016 GDP. These numbers are computed using the model described in Section
V with {σ̂ = 2.53, η̂ = 1.53, κ̂ = 1.19, ω̂ ∗ = −0.00, σ̂ ∗ = 1.04}. Bootstrapped 90% con-
fidence intervals based on 1000 simulations of the estimated parameters reported in
brackets.
                        The Return to Protectionism
                             Appendices for Online Publication
  Pablo D. Fajgelbaum, Pinelopi K. Goldberg, Patrick J. Kennedy, Amit K. Khandelwal



A     Data Appendix
A.1     Definitions
    Recall from the main text that we use the following definitions throughout our analysis:

    • Products are HS-10 codes. For example, the HS-10 code 7206100000 covers the product “iron
      and non-alloy steel ingots.”

    • Varieties are product-country pairs. For example, imports (exports) of “iron and non-alloy
      steel ingots” from (to) Canada are a distinct variety.

    • Sectors are NAICS-4 codes. For example, the NAICS-4 code 3312 covers “Steel Product
      Manufacturing from Purchased Steel.”

A.2     Trade Data
A.2.1    Census Trade Data

    Our sample is a monthly panel of variety-level traded goods from January 2017 to April 2019.
This sample covers the universe of countries and HS-10 codes available in the Census data, including
both manufacturing and agricultural products. The Census data does not cover imports or exports
of services, such as education or tourism.
    In these data we observe the following variables:

    • USD value of all imports and exports.

    • Quantities of imports and exports. Quantities are missing for approximately 16% of observa-
      tions in the variety-level import sample and 20% of observations in the variety-level export
      sample. Within HS-10 codes, units of quantity are homogeneous.

    • For imports, we observe the USD value of duties collected by U.S. customs.

A.2.2    Import Tariffs

    Our import tariff database is a monthly variety-level panel of tariffs on U.S. imports from 2017:1
to 2019:4. To construct this database, we scrape the U.S. tariff schedule from publicly available
official U.S. International Trade Commission (USITC) documents. USITC publishes a “baseline”
tariff schedule in January of each year, and publishes revisions to the baseline schedule to reflect
changes in tariff policy. These revision files (14 revisions in total for 2018) document the ad-valorem
tariff increases that we use as identifying variation in our empirical analysis. We find 99.8% overlap
in the value of targeted import products when comparing our dataset to the compilation of targeted
products by Bown and Zhang (2019).
    The U.S. typically implemented tariff increases at the level of HS-8 codes, and this is why
we cluster standard errors at the HS-8 level in our analyses of U.S. import tariffs. However, in
rare cases the U.S. exempted specific HS-10 codes within HS-8 categories. A total of 18 Chinese
varieties received tariff exemptions at the 10-digit level. These varieties have a 2017 annual value of
$1 million. By using HS-10 codes as our definition of products, we are able to exploit this variation
in our empirical analysis.
    The U.S. and trade partners frequently enacted tariff increases in the middle of the month. In
our event study analyses, we assign event time = 0 to the subsequent month if tariffs increases were
implemented after the 15th of the month. When estimating the elasticities, we scale tariff increases
by the number of days of the month they were in effect. For example, a 15 p.p. tariff increase
enacted on the 20th day of a 30-day month is assigned a 10 p.p. tariff increase (15 * 20/30 = 10)
in the initial month, and an additional 5 p.p. increase in the subsequent month.1
    Here we provide additional details about which countries are targeted or exempt for each U.S.
tariff wave; this information is intended to complement Table I in the main text.

   1. Washer Tariffs: Apply to all countries except Canada and GSP Least Developed Nations.2
   2. Solar Panel Tariffs: Apply to all countries except GSP Least Developed Nations.
   3. Steel Tariffs: Apply to all countries except Argentina, Australia, Brazil, and South Korea.
       Canada, Mexico, and the EU were exempt until June 1, 2018, after which exemptions were
       lifted.
   4. Aluminum Tariffs: Apply to all countries except Argentina (subject to quotas) and Aus-
       tralia (fully exempt with no quota restrictions). Canada, Mexico, and the EU were exempt
       until June 1, 2018, after which exemptions were lifted.
   5. China Tariffs: Apply only to imports of Chinese varieties.




   1
      Our database does not account for antidumping or countervailing tariffs. It also does not account for a very
small fraction of varieties for which tariff increases apply only after surpassing a quota threshold; we estimate that
such quota thresholds affect only $16 million (out of ~$300 billion) of annual targeted imports. We also ignore all
2018 tariff changes not associated with the trade war, such as tariff reductions resulting from long-standing treaty
commitments. Our empirical specifications are thus identified solely from plausibly exogenous changes in tariffs
implemented during the trade war.
    2
      GSP Least Developed Nations include: Afghanistan, Angola, Benin, Bhutan, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi,
Cambodia, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Djibouti, Ethiopia, Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti,
Kiribati, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mozambique, Nepal, Niger, Rwanda, Samoa, Sao
Tome and Principe, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Tanzania, Togo, Tuvalu, Uganda, Vanuatu,
Yemen, and Zambia.
A.2.3     Retaliatory Tariffs

    Our export (retaliatory) tariff database is a monthly variety-level panel of tariffs on U.S. exports
from January 2017 to April 2019. We collect “baseline” tariff rates on U.S. exports using ad valorem
equivalent MFN rates from the most recently available vintage of the WTO World Tariff Database.
We then collect official documentation from foreign finance ministries describing retaliatory tariff
actions due to the trade war. We construct the retaliatory tariff rate as the MFN rate plus the
ad valorem retaliatory tariff increase, and follow the same event date assignment and tariff scaling
rules as we use for the import tariffs.
    Since we do not have access to foreign customs data, we do not observe tariff revenue collected
by U.S. trade partners on U.S. exports. We thus construct the duty-inclusive price as (one plus)
the value of U.S. exports multiplied by the retaliatory tariff rate.
    In rare cases, retaliatory tariffs increased over multiple months: for example, Mexico announced
retaliatory tariffs in June 2018 that were increased in July 2018. In other rare cases, retaliatory
tariffs decreased over time: for example, in January 2019 China reinstated the MFN tariff rate on
U.S. autos and auto parts as a result of tariff negotiations.3
    Finally, we note that HS codes are only harmonized across countries up to the level of HS-6
codes. Finer codes, such as HS-8 and HS-10 codes, are developed independently by each country
for internal classifications. Thus when U.S. trade partners enact tariffs using their own versions
of HS-8 codes, we nevertheless assign tariffs at the HS-6 level. In principle, this could imply
that our analysis overestimates the value of U.S. exports subject to tariffs and underestimates the
foreign import demand elasticity. However, when we estimate the foreign demand elasticity using
a merge between Chinese HS-10 to U.S. HS-10 codes, we estimate σˆ∗ =1.08(se 0.36) which is not
statistically different from our baseline estimate of σ̂ ∗ =1.04 (se 0.32). This merge does not use an
official concordance between the two countries’ HS classifications, and therefore we perform all the
analyses by assigning retaliatory tariffs at the HS-6 level.

A.3     Sector-Level Data
   1. BLS Price Indexes: The BLS Producer Price Index (PPI) is a monthly sector-level panel
       indexing the prices received by producers for their output, covering virtually all tradeable
       non-farm domestic output. The BLS Import Price Index (MPI) and Export Price Index
       (XPI) are monthly sector-level panels that measure FOB price inflation in imported and
       exported goods. All three price indexes are Laspeyres indexes, and thus hold the quality and
       availability of goods constant over time. The MPI and XPI exclude price inflation due to
       tariffs and use two-year lagged annual trade value weights.
   2. Federal Reserve G17 Industrial Production Index (G17): The Fed G17 is a monthly
       sector-level panel indexing real output in non-farm sectors. Index values are computed as a

   3
      As with the import tariffs, our retaliatory tariff database does not capture antidumping or countervailing duties.
It also does not capture potential non-tariff retaliatory actions, such as changes in purchasing behavior by state-owned
enterprises.
        Fisher index, with weights constructed from annual estimates of value added.
    3. BEA 2016 Input-Output (IO) Accounts, “Use” Tables: These tables quantify annual
        2016 inputs and outputs of commodities by intermediate and final users.
    4. Pierce and Schott (2012) provide a cross-walk between HS-10 and NAICS codes. For the
        quantitative model, we classify NAICS-4 sectors as tradeable if they match to an HS code.

A.4      County-Level Data
    • Census County Business Patterns (CBP): These data provide annual 2016 industry
        employment and wage data at the county-level for non-farm sectors.

    • BEA Local Area Personal Income and Employment: These data provide annual 2016
        farm-sector employment and wage data at the country-level.

    • American Community Survey, 5-Year: We collect the following country-level variables:
        share unemployed, share white, share with a college degree, and mean income. These data
        are used in Online Appendix Table A.15.

    • U.S. Federal Election Commission: Country-level voting patterns for each political party
        in the 2016 federal elections.


B       Appendix to Section II.D (Event Study)
    In Figure II, we document a sharp temporary increase in U.S. imports of targeted varieties at
event period = 2, followed by a sharp decline in event time = 3. The pattern driven by targeted
Chinese varieties in December 2018, and is apparent across a broad range of sectors, implying that
it is not a result of seasonality, which in any case would be controlled for by αgt fixed effects. Here,
we provide evidence that this effect reflects an anticipatory response to an announcement made by
the U.S. at the end of September 2018 that the U.S. would increase tariffs on approximately $200
billion of already-targeted Chinese varieties from 10% to 25% on January 1, 2019.
    To isolate this anticipation effect, we first split targeted import varieties into two subsamples:
(1) Chinese varieties worth approximately $200 billion that were initially targeted with a 10% tariff
increase in late September 2018, and then threatened with an additional 15% tariff increase in
January 2019; and (2) all other targeted varieties, worth approximately $100 billion. We then
re-estimate the event study specification from Equation 1, but allow the event-time coefficients to
vary for threatened and non-threatened varieties. If the anticipation explanation is correct, we
should not observe a surge in imports at event period = 2 for non-threatened varieties.4
    Figure A.4 plots the event-time coefficients for both groups relative to untargeted varieties. At
event period = 2, we observe a sharp increase in imports for the threatened varieties, corresponding
    4
     Recall that for tariffs implemented after the 15th of the month, we assign event time = 0 to the following month.
In this case, that means the September 24th tariff wave is assigned event time = 0 in October, and event time = 2
corresponds to December.
to a surge in anticipatory imports in December 2018 prior to expected tariff increases in January
2019. As expected, we do not observe a similar import surge for non-threatened varieties and the
pronounced jump at event time 2 is concentrated entirely in threatened Chinese varieties.


C      Appendix to Section III (Trade Framework and Identification)
C.1    Utility and Price Indexes
    The demands of consumers and final producers are aggregated at the sector level. Each tradeable
sector s = 1, .., S is used for consumption Cs and as intermediate Is . Sector-level aggregate demands
are:
                                                                                              κ
                                              1          κ−1        1         κ−1              κ−1
                                              κ           κ         κ          κ
                             Cs + Is = ADs Ds                  + AM s M s                            ,   (C.1)

where Ds and Ms are composite domestic and imported products,
                                                                         η
                                                                η−1       η−1
                                                  X       1
                                                          η      η
                                    Ds =                aDg dg                  ,                      (C.2)
                                                  g∈Gs
                                                                            η
                                                                   η−1       η−1
                                                  X       1
                                                          η         η
                                    Ms =                aM g m g                     ,                 (C.3)
                                                  g∈Gs

where dg and mg is U.S. consumption of the domestic variety and an aggregate of imported varieties
of product g, respectively, and where Gs is the set of products in sector s. The imported products
are further differentiated by origin. For each g ∈ Gs , the quantity imported is
                                                                      !    σ
                                                  X       1     σ−1       σ−1
                                                          σ      σ
                                     mg =                aig mig                  ,                      (C.4)
                                                    i
where mig is the quantity of product g imported from country i. The terms ADs , AM s , aDg , and
aig denote demand shocks at the different tiers.
    The sector level price index associated with (C.1) is
                                                                                     1
                                           1−κ         1−κ                            1−κ
                                 Ps = ADs PDs  + AM s PM s                                     ,         (C.5)
where PDs and PM s are the price indexes of domestic and imported goods in sector s associated
with (C.2) and (C.3),
                                                                           1
                                                                            1−η
                                                   X
                                    PDs =                aDg pDg                 ,                     (C.6)
                                                   g∈Gs
                                                                            1
                                                                             1−η
                                                   X
                                    PM s =               aM g p M g                  ,                 (C.7)
                                                   g∈Gs

where pDg is the price of the domestic variety of good g, and pM g is the price index of imported
varieties associated with (C.4),
                                                                    !    1
                                                    X                   1−σ
                                         pM g =          aig p1−σ
                                                              ig              ,                    (C.8)
                                                     i
where pig is the domestic price defined in (5).


D     Appendix to Section V (Aggregate and Distributional Effects)
D.1    Wages
    The inverse labor demand resulting from profit maximization (23) is
                                                                         !      1
                                                                              1−αI,s
                                                   Zsr ps
                                    wsr =                     α                        ,           (D.1)
                                            (Lsr /αL,s )αK,s φs I,s
for s = 1, .., S, where Lsr is the number of workers by sector and region. We define the tradeable
sector wage as
                                                    P
                                                     s∈S wsr Lsr
                                            wT,r   = P           .
                                                          s∈S   Lsr
Using the non-traded wage wN T,r = PN T,r ZN T,r , market clearing in the non-traded sector gives:
                                                               Xr
                                            wN T,r = βN T            .                             (D.2)
                                                              LN T,r
    The wage per person in the non-traded sector is wN T,r = PN T,r ZN T,r .

D.2    General-Equilibrium System in Changes
    We derive the model solution as a system of first-order approximations around an initial equi-
librium corresponding to the period before the tariff war. We use this system for the numerical
experiments in Section V. Every market clearing condition is expressed in log-changes. The outcome
depends on endogenous variables, observed initial shares, elasticities and tariff shocks.
    Letting x̂ ≡ d ln n
                      x, the system
                                 o
                                    gives the change in each endogenous variable given shocks to U.S.
and foreign tariffs,                ∗ . Using market clearing conditions, the solution of the model can
                           dτig , dτig
be expressed asna system
                   o
                         for the changes in wages pernefficiency
                                                            o
                                                                 unit {ŵsr }, average wages in the
traded sectors ŵrT , wages in the non-traded sector ŵrN T , producer prices {p̂s }, intermediate
             n    o                                                 n         o            n   o
input prices φ̂s , employment in the tradeable sector L̂Tr , sector price indexes P̂s , import
              n        o
price indexes P̂M s , product level price indexes {p̂M g }, duty-inclusive prices of imported varieties
                                                          n     o
{pˆig }, tariff revenue R̂, sector level expenditures
                                                   Ês , national final consumer expenditures X̂,
                                                                         n   o
national value added Ŷ , national intermediate expenditures by sector PsˆIs , national sales by
      n      o                                             n o
sector psˆQs , and final consumer expenditures by region X̂r .
    We now describe the full system that characterizes the solution to these outcomes. To organize
the presentation, it is convenient to split it in 4 blocks.
Wages, Producer Prices, Input Prices, and Tradable Employment
                                             n                                              o               n                       o
   The first block characterizes wˆsr , wˆT,r , wNˆT,r , pˆs , φ̂s , LˆTr                       given X̂r , Ês , Pˆs , τˆig
                                                                                                                          ∗ . We let χI be

an indicator variable for whether labor is immobile across sectors, as in our benchmark (otherwise,
it is perfectly mobile). From (D.1) to (D.2):
                     χI                          
        wˆsr =               pˆs − αI,s φˆs + 1 − χI wˆT,r ,                                                                                       (D.3)
                  1 − αI,s
                                                  pˆs −αI,s φˆs
                                                      
                                             wsr Lsr
                                                                −           LˆTr
                                   P
                                                                                                                         pˆs − αI,s φˆs
                                                                                                                     !
                  
                           I
                                  s∈S       wT,r LT
                                                   r  αK,s                              I
                                                                                            X             wsr Lsr
       wˆT,r = 1 − χ                                                             +χ                                                   ,          (D.4)
                                       P     wsr Lsr 1−αI,s
                                                                                            s∈S
                                                                                                          wT,r LTr          1 − αI,s
                                        s∈S wT,r LT r    αK,s
                                        
     wNˆT,r = χI X̂r + 1 − χI wˆT,r .                                                                                                              (D.5)
From the equilibrium in the non-traded sector, the change in traded sector employment is
                                                                                     LN T
                                             LˆTr = 1 − χI            wˆT,r − X̂r         r
                                                                                                      .                                            (D.6)
                                                                                                LTr
Adding up (25) across all varieties within a sector and using the sector supply Qs implied by (23),
the producer price in sector s changes according to:
                                                                                                                                         ∗
                  PDs Ds
                                                 αI,s                 ps Qsr αL,s                                             pDg xig dτig
                           Eˆs + (κ − 1) Pˆs +
                                                                 P                                        P          P
                   ps Qs
                                                       φ̂
                                                  αK,s s
                                                            +                      wˆ
                                                                   r∈R ps Qs αK,s sr
                                                                                                − σ∗         g∈Gs        i∈I              ∗
                                                                                                                                ps Qs 1+τig
          pˆs =                                   1−αK,s
                                                                                                                                              .     (D.7)
                                                                 PDs Ds             PDs Ds
                                                                                                 
                                                   αK,s
                                                             +    ps Qs
                                                                        κ   + 1−     ps Qs
                                                                                                     σ∗

Finally using (22) the price index of intermediates is
                                                                 X α s0
                                                                    s ˆ
                                                           φ̂s =        Ps0 .                                                                      (D.8)
                                                                  s0 ∈S
                                                                          αI,s

Consumer Prices, Import Prices, and Tariff Revenue
                                                  n                                o                  n              o
   The second block characterizes Pˆs , PM
                                         ˆ s , p̂gM , pˆgi , R̂ given Ês , dτig . From (C.5), the sector
price index changes according to a weighted average of producer prices and the import price index,
                                    PDs Ds           PDs Ds
                                                           
                               ˆ
                              Ps =         pˆs + 1 −          P̂M s .                        (D.9)
                                      Es                Es
From (2), (4), (6), (C.7), and (C.8), the import price index P̂M s in sector s changes according to
                                             X  pM g m g 
                                      ˆ
                                    PM s =                  pM
                                                             ˆ g,                             (D.10)
                                            g∈G
                                                 P M s Ms
                                                                  s

where the product-level import price index changes according to
                                                                                   !
                                                                X      pig mig
                                                  p̂M g =                              p̂ig ,                                                     (D.11)
                                                                i∈I
                                                                       pM g mg
and where the CIF price changes according to

                       ω∗                                                          1       dτig
             pˆig =       ∗
                              Ês + (κ − 1) Pˆs + (η − κ) P̂M s + (σ − η) p̂M g +                   .                                             (D.12)
                      1+ω σ                                                       1 + ω ∗ σ 1 + τig
A second order approximation to the change in tariff revenue, defined as R =
                                                                                                           P      P        P        ∗
                                                                                                            s∈S    g∈Gs    i∈I τig pig mig ,
gives:
                        X X X p∗gi mgi                          X X X p∗gi mgi                                        
                 R̂ =                                  dτgi +                             (τgi + dτgi ) pˆ∗gi + mˆgi
                            s g∈Gs        i
                                              R                 s g∈Gs        i
                                                                                  R

                                       1              1X X X                  
                                      + τ d2 (p∗ m) +           τgi d2 p∗gi mgi ,
                                       2              2 s g∈G i
                                                                              s

                                      p∗gi mgi
                                     ∂(          )
                      
where d2 p∗gi mgi           = dτ 0    ∂τ 0 ∂τ        dτ .5 From the equilibrium in the market for each variety that
results from combining (4) and (6), using the solution for pˆig + mˆig we obtain an equation relating
tariff revenue to observable shares, changes in tariffs, and changes in price indexes and expenditure
shifters computed in the previous blocks of equations:
                                  p∗gi mgi 1 + ω ∗                                                    
                                                                   ˆ
          X X X
     R̂ =           (τgi + dτgi )                    Ês + (κ − 1) P s + (η − κ) P̂ Ms + (σ − η) p̂ gM
           s g∈G i                   R 1 + ω∗σ
                   s

             X X X                    σ−1                 p∗ig mig dτig
                                                       
         +                    1 − τig
             s g∈Gs     i
                                      1 + ω∗σ                  R 1 + τig
                                                                     !2
             X X X p∗ig mig              1 + ω∗             dτig
         −                            σ                                   .                                                    (D.13)
             s g∈Gs     i
                               R        1 + ω∗σ            1 + τig

Sector and Region Demand Shifters
                                                                                                                   n           o
    The third block characterizes the sector and region level expenditure shifters Ês , X̂r given
n                             o
 R̂, pˆs , φˆs , wNˆT,r , wˆsr . Sector-level expenditures are defined as Es = Ps Cs + Ps Is . Hence, they
change according to:
                                                    Ps Cs          Ps Cs
                                                                                     
                                              Ês ≡       X̂ + 1 −       PsˆIs ,                                               (D.14)
                                                     Es             Es
where national consumer consumer expenditures change as function of the change in net income Ŷ
and tariff revenue,
                                              Y         R
                                                 Ŷ + R̂,   X̂ =                                                               (D.15)
                                              X         X
and where net national income changes according to
           X  PN T,r QN T,r                        
                                                       ps Qs X ps Qsr 
                                                                                   
                                                                            pˆs + Qˆsr .
                                     X
      Ŷ =                     X̂r +     (1 − αI,s )                                                                           (D.16)
           r∈R
                     Y               s∈S
                                                        Y     r∈R
                                                                    ps Qs

    Aggregate expenditures PsˆIs in intermediates from sector s are given by
                                                X ps0 Qs0 r               
                            PsˆIs =                           pˆs0 + Qˆs0 r .
                                      X
                                           αss0                                                                                (D.17)
                                     s0 ∈S      r∈R
                                                    Ps Is
Using local labor market clearing we obtain the change in sales of sector s in region r entering in



    Since initial tariffs are small, we set the product of initial tariffs and the second order term 12 τ d2 (p∗ m) to zero.
    5

The product of tariffs and the first-order term in the change of imports, tdm, is 0.003% of GDP.
the last three expressions:
                                                    1         αI,s ˆ    αL,s
                                    pˆs + Qˆsr =        pˆs −      φs −      wˆsr .                               (D.18)
                                                   αK,s       αK,s      αK,s
Finally using (26) final expenditures in region r change according to
                                                                              
                                               psr Qsr
                                                         (1 − αI,s ) pˆs + Qˆsr +   br R
                                       P
                                         s∈S     Xr                                 Xr R̂
                               X̂r =                           PN T,r QN T,r
                                                                                            .                     (D.19)
                                                          1−        Xr


D.3       Numerical Implementation and Parametrization
      To implement the system (D.3)-(D.13) we write it in the reduced form Ax̂ = y, where x̂ is
a column vector stacking all the endogenous variables, y is a column vector with the retaliatory
tariff shocks, and A collects elasticities and observed shares. The reduced-form of the system,
giving the solution for endogenous variables as function of shocks, takes the form x̂ = A−1 y. We
check numerically that the matrix A has full rank and that, therefore, the equilibrium in changes
is uniquely defined. The vector x̂ includes 1, 020, 045 endogenous variables, hence the matrix A
has 1012 elements. However the matrix A is very sparse, making this inversion computationally
feasible and quick. The reason the matrix is very sparse is that, as noted above, the various blocks
of the system interact only through a few variables. Specifically, of the approximately 1 million
endogenous variables, about 700, 000 correspond to the variety prices pˆig , which only enter in the
rows of A corresponding to import prices and tariff revenue.
      To parametrize the system (D.3)-(D.13), from the IO tables we use sales from tradeable sector
                       0
s0   to sector s (Ps0 Iss ), consumption expenditures by sector (Ps Cs ), exports by sector, import expen-
                                                                                                                P
ditures by sector (PM s Ms ), total labor compensation (ws Ls ), and gross operating surplus (                     r Πsr ).
Tradeable sectors are defined as those for which we find a concordance with the HS codes using the
concordance of Pierce and Schott (2012).6 Since non-traded sectors only use labor in the model,
sector payments to non-traded sectors are accounted as payments to labor, and non-traded sector
purchases from other sectors are accounted as final absorption. We construct total sales (ps Qs in
the model) as the sum of sales to other sectors, final absorption and net exports.
      The elasticities {σ, σ ∗ , ω, η, κ} are point estimates from the estimation in Section IV, and boot-
strapped confidence intervals are computed using the 1,000 bootstrapped estimates. The technology
                 0
parameters αss , αK,s and αL,s are defined as intermediate input, gross operating surplus are la-
bor shares of sales. The tradeable consumption shares βs are defined as the sectoral shares in
the domestic absorption columns of the IO tables. We set a non-traded share of expenditures of
βN T = 0.7 such that the model matches the observed 15% share of imports in GDP.
      Implementing the system (D.3)-(D.13) also requires information on labor income and employ-
ment shares by counties. We allocate the total labor compensation from IO tables across U.S.
counties using the regional labor compensation shares from the 2016 County Business Patterns
database. We keep counties with positive employment in both tradeable and non-tradeable sectors

      6
     The NAICS codes that do not match to any HS code using the concordance of Pierce and Schott (2012) are
included in the non-traded sector: 23, 42, 55, 115, 44, 45, 48, 49, 52, 53, 56, 62, 71, 72, 2131, 22, 3328, 51, 54, 61, 81.
(this drops 41 counties). Consistent with our assumption that the Cobb-Douglas function is con-
stant across regions within a sector, county-level sales by sector are constructed by applying the
(inverse) national labor share to the regional wage bill by sector.
   Finally, implementing the system requires information on import and export flows by variety.
We apply the import and export shares within each 4-digit NAICS sector from customs data for 2016
to the sector-level import and export flows of the IO table. To limit the scale of the counterfactuals
we restrict the trade dataset to the largest trade partners accounting for 99% of U.S. trade and to
the largest varieties accounting for 99% of trade within each sector and at least $10,000.
   As a result, we match the model to 2016 data on economic activity for 3,067 U.S. counties,
88 traded sectors (4-digit NAICS), 71 trade partners, 10,228 imported HS-10 products, 213,578
imported varieties (unique product-country origin), 3,684 exported products, and 53,508 unique
product-destination countries.

D.4    Producer Price Increases
   When foreign export supply is perfectly elastic (ω = 0), we can combine our previous solution
for the increase in the producer price index from (D.7) with the price indexes (D.9) to (D.12) to
obtain the following decomposition of the change in producer prices in response to a tariff shock:
                         1
                   pˆs =    (DomExpenditures + T arif f Shocks + CostShocks )                (D.20)
                         Φs
where
                                   PDs Ds ˆ
             DomExpenditures ≡            Es ,
                                    ps Qs
                                             X X PDs Ds pig mig                     X X pDg xig         ∗
                                                                                                      dτig
                                                                      dτig
                 T arif f Shocks ≡ (κ − 1)                                   − σ∗                         ∗
                                                                                                                  ,
                                                        ps Qs   Es   1 + τig                   ps Qs 1 + τig
                                             g∈Gs i∈I                               g∈Gs i∈I
                                   αI,s       X ps Qsr αL,s
                   CostShocks ≡         φ̂s +               wˆsr ,
                                   αK,s         ps Qs αK,s
                                                r∈R
                                  1 − αK,s   PDs Ds PDs Ds   PDs Ds PM s Ms       PDs Ds
                                                                                                      
                             Φs ≡          +               +                κ+ 1−                          σ∗ .
                                    αK,s      ps Qs  Es       p s Qs  Es           p s Qs
   This decomposition highlights the general-equilibrium effects on the producer prices in the U.S.
when U.S. or foreign tariffs change. The first two components, domestic expenditures and tariffs,
drive price changes through reallocation of domestic and foreign demand. The first component in-
cludes demand shifters (Ês ) entering through the shares of sectors and final consumers in aggregate
demand. The second component (tariffs) implies that higher domestic tariffs (dτig > 0) and higher
                   ∗ > 0) reallocate expenditures into or away of domestic products, respectively
foreign tariffs (dτig
leading to higher or lower prices. The third component shows that domestic prices change with
costs, either through input linkages or wages in those regions where the sector is more concentrated.
The intensity of these effects is mediated by the estimated elasticities σ ∗ and κ, entering through
the tariff component and through the constant Φs .
E    Appendix to Section V.F (Tariff Protection, Wages, and Voting
     Patterns)
    In Section V.F we document that import tariffs were targeted toward politically competitive
counties (as measured by their 2016 presidential vote share), whereas retaliatory tariffs were tar-
geted at heavily Republican counties. Here, we further explore how these patterns vary with other
political, economic, and demographic characteristics of counties.
    First, we examine whether the inverted U-shape pattern in import tariffs holds when we re-
strict to counties that are located in politically competitive states in the U.S. Electoral College.
Figure A.5 plots county-level tariffs for states that had GOP vote shares of 45-55% in the 2016
presidential election and match the list of the most competitive states in the electoral college by
fivethirtyeight.com: AZ, CO, FL, GA, MI, MN, NC, NH, NM, NV, OH, PA, VA, and WI. The
inverted U-shape pattern in import tariffs is even more pronounced in these states.
    Table A.15 further explores how these patterns vary with counties’ economic and demographic
characteristics. For U.S. tariffs, Panel A shows that the inverted-U pattern over county-level
Republican vote share remains even after controlling for agriculture employment shares, several
measures of county demographic characteristics, and pre-existing trends in county employment and
income growth. For retaliatory tariffs, Panel B shows that the positive relationship with county
Republican vote share disappears once we control for agriculture employment share.
                                 Online Appendix Figures and Tables

                                     Figure A.1: Statutory Tariff Changes


                                                         Imports
                            .5


                            .4


                            .3
                 Fraction




                            .2


                            .1


                            0
                                 0      .1           .2           .3              .4              .5
                                          Change in Statutory Import Tariff (p.p.)



                                                         Exports

                            .4



                            .3
                 Fraction




                            .2



                            .1



                            0
                                 0      .1          .2            .3             .4               .5
                                         Change in Retaliatory Export Tariff (p.p.)




Notes: Figures show the distribution of tariff increases due to the trade war. Import tariff changes constructed from
U.S. International Trade Commission (USITC) documents, and retaliatory tariff changes constructed using official
documents from foreign finance and trade ministries.
               Figure A.2: Import Tariffs and Export Supply Elasticities from Broda et al. (2008)



                                         .4
         Average Post-War Tariff Level




                                         .3




                                         .2




                                         .1




                                         0
                                              0                   200                        400                       600
                                                  Broda, Limao, Weinstein (2008) Inverse Export Supply Elasticity



Notes: Figure plots post-war tariff levels against export supply elasticities estimated by Broda et al. (2008). Unit of analysis is
NAICS-4 sectors.
                                                    Figure A.3: Political Contributions and Statutory Tariff Changes



                                             15


                                                                                    3311
         Sector Import Tariff Increase (%)




                                                                                                                         3312


                                             10

                                                                                                             3313




                                             5                                                       3323
                                                                                                 3351 3169
                                                                                                3371                                    3359
                                                                                                                                 3324
                                                                                                                                 3315                 3344
                                                        3379   3372                          3352              3334     3353                        3369
                                                                                                                                3332                 3339
                                                                                                                                                       3329
                                                                                                                                                 3333
                                                                             3219                                                       32733222          3345
                                                                                                          3272       3261   3335
                                                                                                             3133       3336                 3322
                                                                                    3326                  3132
                                                                                                 3262                                      3331
                                                                                               3117                        3362         3279
                                                                                                  3327          3321      3111 3259
                                                                                                  3131                       3149
                                                                                                                               3114 3212 3271           3341
                                                                                              3252 31                       3363
                                                                                                1141            1133                                    3256
                                                                                                     3255                3231                                  3251
                                                                                                         3343                                    3253
                                                                                                                                                3342           3364
                                                                      3141                       3161 3366                                        3115
                                                                                                                    3399 32742122 311832113391 322121233361
                                                                                                                                                       3112    3119        3113
                                             0                                        3152     3162         3314                          2121
                                                                                                                                           3116       3122   3121 3346
                                                                                                                                                                    3241          2111   3254



                                                  $1k                 $10k                     $100k                                           $1,000k                            $10,000k
                                                                      2016 PAC Contributions by NAICS-4 Sectors



Notes: Figure plots 2016 financial campaign contributions against tariff changes at the sector level. Campaign contributions are
measured using legal disclosure data compiled by the Center for Responsive Politics and cover contributions to candidates for
the U.S. House of Representatives during the 2016 election cycle. Import tariffs are trade-weighted averages within NAICS-4
sectors.
                                   Figure A.4: Import Event Study for 2019 Threatened Varieties



                                                       Log Value                                                                       Log Quantity

                                          Threatened           Not Threatened                                               Threatened          Not Threatened

                   20                                                                                 20

                    0                                                                                  0
         Percent




                                                                                            Percent
                   -20                                                                                -20

                   -40                                                                                -40

                   -60                                                                                -60

                         -6   -5    -4     -3   -2    -1   0   1      2   3    4   5   6+                   -6   -5   -4     -3   -2   -1   0   1     2   3      4   5   6+
                                         Months Relative to Tariff Enactment                                               Months Relative to Tariff Enactment



                                                     Log Unit Value                                                           Log Duty-Inclusive Unit Value

                                          Threatened           Not Threatened                                               Threatened          Not Threatened

                   40                                                                                 40

                   30                                                                                 30
         Percent




                                                                                            Percent




                   20                                                                                 20

                   10                                                                                 10

                    0                                                                                  0

                   -10                                                                                -10
                         -6   -5    -4     -3   -2    -1   0   1      2   3    4   5   6+                   -6   -5   -4     -3   -2   -1   0   1     2   3      4   5   6+
                                         Months Relative to Tariff Enactment                                               Months Relative to Tariff Enactment




Notes: Figure reports the event study specification from equation (1) but allows the event-time coefficients to vary over two
subsamples of targeted varieties: (a) Chinese varieties that were initially targeted in late September 2018 and threatened
with additional tariff increases in January 2019 (shown in blue), and (b) targeted import varieties that were not threatened
by additional tariff increases in January 2019 (shown in red). The graph plots the event-time coefficients for both targeted
subsamples relative to untargeted varieties. Standard errors clustered by country and HS-8. Error bars show 95% confidence
intervals. Significance: * 0.10, ** 0.05, *** 0.01. Monthly variety-level import data from U.S. Census. Sample period is 2017:1
to 2019:4.
   Figure A.5: Tariff Changes vs. 2016 Republican Vote Share in Politically Competitive States


                                  .019                                                               .03




                                                                                                            County Retaliatory Tariff Change
    County Import Tariff Change




                                  .018

                                                                                                     .025



                                  .017



                                                                                                     .02

                                  .016




                                  .015                                                               .015
                                         0   .2           .4             .6                 .8   1
                                                  2016 GOP Presidential Vote Share

                                                  Import Tariffs      Retaliatory Tariffs


Notes: Figure shows a population-weighted non-parametric fit of county-level 2017-2018 tariff changes due to the trade war
against the 2016 GOP presidential vote share within the following states: AZ, CO, FL, GA, MI, MN, NC, NH, NM, NV, OH,
PA, VA, and WI.
                   Figure A.6: Simulated Real Tradeable Wage Impacts by Political Orientation



                                                    Real Tradable Wage Change (%)
                     0
                               45° Line
                               GOP
                               Competitive
                               Dem
                    -.5
        Full War




                    -1




                   -1.5




                    -2
                          -2                 -1.5                  -1                      -.5                      0
                                                         Without Retaliations



Notes: Unit of analysis is U.S. counties. The y-axis indicates the real tradeable wage change due to both U.S. and retaliatory
tariffs, as simulated from the model. The x-axis indicates the simulated real tradeable wage change in a counterfactual
scenario in which U.S. trade partners did not retaliate. Blue (red) markers indicate counties where Democrats (Republicans)
received >60% of the two-party 2016 presidential vote. Purple markers indicate politically competitive counties where both
the Democratic and Republican party received between 40-60% of the two-party vote. Marker sizes are proportional to each
county’s 2016 population. Counties with a less than 2% decline in the full-war real tradeable wage or with only agriculture
employment are dropped to improve the data visualization; the dropped counties are overwhelmingly Republican and fall far
below the 45-degree line.
Table A.1: Targeted Products, Intermediate vs. Final Goods


                        Targeted US Imports

  Product Type                     # HS-10      mil USD     ∆ Tariff

  Intermediate/Capital Good           10,115     257,032        14.3
  Final/Consumer Good                  1,928      45,938        10.2
  Total                              12,043     302,970         14.0

                        Targeted US Exports

  Product Type                     # HS-10      mil USD     ∆ Tariff

  Intermediate/Capital Good            6,212     104,402        11.0
  Final/Consumer Good                  1,861      22,746        14.5
  Total                               8,073     127,148         13.1
 Notes: Intermediate and final consumer goods are classified using
 BEC codes. Table reports the number and 2017 annual value of tar-
 geted products, as well as the unweighted average tariff increase.
                Table A.2: Tests of Pre-Existing Trends, 2013-17
                             Panel A: U.S. Import Trends
                                    (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)
                               ∆ ln p∗ig mig    ∆ ln mig     ∆ ln p∗ig    ∆ ln pig
 ∆17−18 ln(1 + τig )               -0.01          -0.07        0.08         0.08
                                  (0.05)         (0.08)       (0.06)       (0.06)
 Country × Sector FE                Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
 Product FE                         Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
 R2                                0.11           0.12         0.11         0.11
 N                               273,550        228,753      228,753      228,753

                             Panel B: U.S. Export Trends
                                    (1)           (2)         (3)               (4)
                               ∆ ln pX                     ∆ ln pX       ∆ ln pX          ∗)
                                     ig xig    ∆ ln xig          ig            ig (1   + τig
                ∗)
 ∆17−18 ln(1 + τig                 -0.04         0.02        -0.02             -0.02
                                  (0.06)        (0.08)      (0.06)            (0.06)
 Country × Sector FE                Yes          Yes          Yes               Yes
 Product FE                        Yes           Yes          Yes               Yes
 R2                                0.08          0.09        0.09              0.09
 N                               328,666       263,919     263,919           263,919
Notes: Table reports pre-trend tests for import (Panel A) and export (Panel B) variety-
level trade outcomes. Table reports regressions of the 2013:1-2017:12 average monthly
changes in values, quantities, unit values, and tariff-inclusive unit values against the 2018
tariff changes. Standard errors clustered by country and HS-8 (imports) or HS-6 (exports).
Significance: *** .01; ** 0.05; * 0.10.
         Table A.3: Reduced Form Variety Import Outcomes, Applied Tariffs

                                  (1)                (2)             (3)         (4)          (5)
                                        app
                            ∆ ln(1 + τigt   )   ∆ ln p∗igt migt   ∆ ln migt   ∆ ln p∗igt   ∆ ln pigt
                                     ∗∗∗
 ∆ ln(1 + τigt )                0.61
                                 (0.07)
           app
 ∆ ln(1 + τigt )                                  -2.50∗∗∗         -2.55∗∗∗      0.01       1.01∗∗∗
                                                   (0.15)           (0.24)      (0.14)       (0.14)
 Product × Time FE                Yes               Yes              Yes         Yes          Yes
 Country × Time FE                Yes               Yes              Yes         Yes          Yes
 Country × Sector FE              Yes               Yes              Yes         Yes          Yes
 1st-Stage F                                        80.5             76.9        76.9         76.9
 R2                              0.14               0.01             0.01        0.00         0.00
 N                            2,993,288          2,993,288        2,454,023   2,454,023    2,454,023
Notes: Table reports the variety-level import responses to applied import tariffs. Columns 1-4 report
the reduced-form outcomes of import values, quantities, before-duty unit values, and duty-inclusive
                                   app                    app
unit values regressed on ∆ ln(1 + τigt ), where ∆ ln(1 + τigt ) is instrumented by the statutory rate
∆ ln(1 + τigt ). All regressions include product-time, country-time and country-sector fixed effects.
Sample: Monthly variety-level import data from 2017:1 to 2019:4. Standard errors clustered by
country and HS-8. Significance: * 0.10, ** 0.05, *** 0.01.
                             Table A.4: Variety Import Outcomes with Trends

                                 (1)             (2)          (3)                (4)                (5)          (6)
                            ∆ ln p∗igt migt   ∆ ln migt    ∆ ln p∗igt   ∆ ln p∗igt (1 + τigt )   ∆ ln p∗igt   ∆ ln migt
 ∆ ln(1 + τigt )              -1.49∗∗∗        -1.45∗∗∗       0.01             0.60  ∗∗∗

                               (0.19)          (0.26)       (0.08)             (0.13)
 ∆ ln migt                                                                                         -0.01
                                                                                                  (0.06)
 ∆ ln pigt                                                                                                     -2.44∗∗∗
                                                                                                                (0.25)
 Product × Time FE                Yes              Yes        Yes               Yes                 Yes          Yes
 Country × Time FE                Yes              Yes        Yes               Yes                 Yes          Yes
 Country × Sector FE              Yes              Yes        Yes               Yes                 Yes          Yes
 Variety FE                       Yes              Yes        Yes               Yes                 Yes          Yes
 1st-Stage F                                                                                        32.2         20.5
 R2                              0.16            0.16        0.15               0.15                0.02           .
 N                            2,956,057       2,419,851   2,419,851          2,419,851           2,419,851    2,419,851
Notes: Table reports the variety-level import responses to import tariffs, controlling for variety-specific time trends.
Columns 1-4 report the reduced-form outcomes of import values, quantities, before-duty unit values, and duty-inclusive
unit values regressed on ∆ ln(1 + τigt ). Column 5 reports the foreign export supply curve IV regression, ω̂ ∗ , from
equation (9); the first stage is column 2. Column 6 reports the import demand curve IV regression, σ̂, from equation
(8); the first stage is column 4. All regressions include variety, product-time, country-time and country-sector fixed
effects. Standard errors clustered by country and HS-8. Sample: Monthly variety-level import data from 2017:1 to
2019:4. Significance: * 0.10, ** 0.05, *** 0.01.
                      Table A.5: Variety Import Outcomes with Long-Run Trends

                                 (1)             (2)            (3)                (4)                (5)          (6)
                            ∆ ln p∗igt migt   ∆ ln migt      ∆ ln p∗igt   ∆ ln p∗igt (1 + τigt )   ∆ ln p∗igt   ∆ ln migt
 ∆ ln(1 + τigt )               -0.79∗∗         -0.78∗∗         0.04              0.38  ∗∗

                                (0.33)          (0.34)        (0.07)             (0.15)
 ∆ ln migt                                                                                           -0.05
                                                                                                    (0.08)
 ∆ ln pigt                                                                                                       -2.07∗∗∗
                                                                                                                  (0.31)
 Product × Time FE               Yes             Yes           Yes                Yes                 Yes          Yes
 Country × Time FE               Yes             Yes           Yes                Yes                 Yes          Yes
 Country × Sector FE             Yes             Yes           Yes                Yes                 Yes          Yes
 Variety FE                      Yes             Yes           Yes                Yes                 Yes          Yes
 1st-Stage F                                                                                          5.2           6.3
 R2                              0.15            0.15           0.13              0.13                0.10           .
 N                            7,872,049       6,403,668      6,403,668         6,403,668           6,403,668    6,403,668
Notes: Table reports the variety-level import responses to import tariffs, controlling for long-run variety-specific time
trends. Columns 1-4 report the reduced-form outcomes of import values, quantities, before-duty unit values, and
duty-inclusive unit values regressed on ∆ ln(1 + τigt ). Column 5 reports the foreign export supply curve IV regression,
ω̂ ∗ , from equation (9); the first stage is column 2. Column 6 reports the import demand curve IV regression, σ̂, from
equation (8); the first stage is column 4. All regressions include variety, product-time, country-time and country-
sector fixed effects. Standard errors clustered by country and HS-8. Sample: Monthly variety-level import data from
2013:1 to 2019:4. Significance: * 0.10, ** 0.05, *** 0.01.
                             Table A.6: Variety Export Outcomes with Trends

                                 (1)            (2)           (3)               (4)                (5)          (6)
                                                                                        ∗
                            ∆ ln pX
                                  igt xigt   ∆ ln xigt     ∆ ln pXigt   ∆ ln pX
                                                                              igt (1 + τigt )   ∆ ln pXigt   ∆ ln xigt
           ∗
 ∆ ln(1 + τigt )             -1.03∗∗∗        -1.02∗∗∗        -0.07            0.93 ∗∗∗

                               (0.30)         (0.38)        (0.16)             (0.16)
 ∆ ln xigt                                                                                        0.07
                                                                                                 (0.17)
                 ∗
 ∆ ln pX
       igt (1 + τigt )                                                                                        -1.10∗∗∗
                                                                                                               (0.35)
 Product × Time FE               Yes            Yes          Yes                Yes                Yes          Yes
 Country × Time FE               Yes            Yes          Yes                Yes                Yes          Yes
 Country × Sector FE             Yes            Yes          Yes                Yes                Yes          Yes
 Variety FE                      Yes            Yes          Yes                Yes                Yes          Yes
 1st-Stage F                                                                                       7.0          33.6
 R2                              0.10           0.11         0.10              0.10                 .           0.50
 N                            3,252,348      2,515,825    2,515,825         2,515,825           2,515,825    2,515,825
Notes: Table reports the variety-level export responses to retaliatory tariffs, controlling for variety-specific time
trends. Columns 1-4 report reduced form regressions of export values, quantities, before-duty unit values, and duty-
                                   ∗
inclusive unit values on ∆ ln(1 + τigt ), the change in retaliatory export tariffs. Column 5 reports the IV regression
that estimates the U.S. export supply elasticity, ω̂; the first stage is column 2. Column 6 reports the IV regression
that estimates the foreign import demand elasticity, σ ∗ ; the first stage is column 4. All regressions include variety,
product-time, country-time and country-sector fixed effects. Standard errors clustered by country and HS-6. Sample:
Monthly variety-level export data from 2017:1 to 2019:4. Significance: * 0.10, ** 0.05, *** 0.01.
                         Table A.7: Variety Export Outcomes with Long-Run Trends

                                   (1)            (2)            (3)                  (4)                (5)          (6)
                                                                                              ∗
                              ∆ ln pX
                                    igt xigt   ∆ ln xigt      ∆ ln pXigt      ∆ ln pX
                                                                                    igt (1 + τigt )   ∆ ln pXigt   ∆ ln xigt
           ∗
 ∆ ln(1 + τigt )                 -0.41∗          -0.38          -0.06               0.94 ∗∗∗

                                 (0.22)         (0.25)         (0.09)                (0.09)
 ∆ ln xigt                                                                                               0.16
                                                                                                        (0.28)
                 ∗
 ∆ ln pX
       igt (1 + τigt )                                                                                                -0.40
                                                                                                                     (0.26)
 Product × Time FE                 Yes            Yes            Yes                  Yes                Yes           Yes
 Country × Time FE                 Yes            Yes            Yes                  Yes                Yes           Yes
 Country × Sector FE               Yes            Yes            Yes                  Yes                Yes           Yes
 Variety FE                        Yes            Yes            Yes                  Yes                Yes           Yes
 1st-Stage F                                                                                             2.2         105.0
 R2                               0.09            0.09           0.08                0.08                 .            0.31
 N                             9,171,659       7,031,740      7,031,740           7,031,740           7,031,740    7,031,740
Notes: Table reports the variety-level export responses to retaliatory tariffs, controlling for long-run variety-specific
time trends. Columns 1-4 report reduced form regressions of export values, quantities, before-duty unit values,
                                            ∗
and duty-inclusive unit values on ∆ ln(1 + τigt ), the change in retaliatory export tariffs. Column 5 reports the IV
regression that estimates the U.S. export supply elasticity, ω̂; the first stage is column 2. Column 6 reports the IV
regression that estimates the foreign import demand elasticity, σ ∗ ; the first stage is column 4. All regressions include
variety, product-time, country-time and country-sector fixed effects. Standard errors clustered by country and HS-6.
Sample: Monthly variety-level export data from 2017:1 to 2019:4. Significance: * 0.10, ** 0.05, *** 0.01.


                                         Table A.8: Product Fixed Effects


                                               (1)                 (2)              (3)              (4)
                                         ∆ ln p∗gt mgt , fe   ∆ ln mgt , fe     ∆ ln p∗gt , fe   ∆ ln pgt , fe
                    ∆ ln(1 + τgt ), fe      -1.71∗∗∗           -1.69∗∗∗            -0.09           0.46∗∗
                                             (0.33)              (0.38)           (0.20)           (0.20)
                    Sector-Time FE             Yes                Yes               Yes              Yes
                    R2                        0.02                0.02              0.01            0.01
                    N                       318,889            285,077           285,077          285,077
                   Notes: Outcomes are the product-time fixed effects from variety-level regressions
                   of changes in import values, quantities, unit values, and tariff-inclusive unit val-
                   ues on product-time, country-time, and country-sector fixed effects. Regressor is
                   the product-time fixed effect from a regression of the change in the import tariff
                   on product-time, country-time, and country-sector fixed effects. Standard errors
                   clustered by HS-8. Specification is a product-level regression from 2017:1 to 2019:4.
    Table A.9: Variety Tariff Pass-Through, Final vs. Intermediates


            Panel A: Import Unit Values and Import Tariffs
                                                     (1)          (2)           (3)
                                                  ∆ ln p∗igt   ∆ ln p∗igt    ∆ ln p∗igt
 ∆ ln(1 + τigt )                                    0.01         0.01          -0.00
                                                   (0.08)       (0.08)        (0.07)
 ∆(1 + τigt )× BEC Final Good (0/1)                 -0.44
                                                   (0.30)
 ∆(1 + τigt )× CPI Final Good (0/1)                               -0.21
                                                                 (0.22)
 ∆(1 + τigt )× Part or Component (0/1)                                         0.12
                                                                              (0.32)
 FEs                                              gt,it,is      gt,it,is     gt,it,is
 R2                                                 0.11          0.11         0.11
 N                                               2,449,311     2,454,023    2,454,023

          Panel B: Export Unit Values and Retaliatory Tariffs
                                                     (1)          (2)           (3)
                                                  ∆ ln pXigt   ∆ ln pXigt    ∆ ln pXigt
           ∗
 ∆ ln(1 + τigt )                                    0.01         0.02          -0.05
                                                   (0.21)       (0.18)        (0.16)
        ∗
 ∆(1 + τigt )× BEC Final Good (0/1)                 -0.16
                                                   (0.31)
        ∗
 ∆(1 + τigt )× CPI Final Good (0/1)                               -0.25
                                                                 (0.28)
        ∗
 ∆(1 + τigt )× Part or Component (0/1)                                         0.47
                                                                              (0.42)
 FEs                                              gt,it,is      gt,it,is     gt,it,is
 R2                                                 0.06          0.06         0.06
 N                                               2,557,707     2,564,731    2,564,731

Notes: Table reports the variety-level tariff pass-through for before-duty import and
export unit values across binary classifications of final versus intermediate goods. Col-
umn 1 interacts the tariff with a final good indicator constructed from BEC codes.
Column 2 classifies final goods according to whether there is a direct match in the
description of the HS product code with the entry-line items from the BLS Con-
sumer Price Index. Column 3 classifies intermediate goods as those with HS product
descriptions that contain the words "parts" or "components." All regressions include
product-time, country-time and country-sector fixed effects. Standard errors clus-
tered by country and HS-8. Significance: * 0.10, ** 0.05, *** 0.01. Sample: monthly
variety-level import data from 2017:1 to 2019:4.
                                      Table A.10: Variety Import Tariff Pass-Through, Product Characteristics

                                                       (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)          (9)         (10)          (11)
                                                     ∆ ln p∗igt   ∆ ln p∗igt    ∆ ln p∗igt   ∆ ln p∗igt   ∆ ln p∗igt   ∆ ln p∗igt   ∆ ln p∗igt    ∆ ln p∗igt   ∆ ln p∗igt   ∆ ln p∗igt   ∆ ln p∗igt
 ∆ ln(1 + τigt )                                       0.01         -0.01         0.04         0.03         0.10         0.08         0.06          0.02         0.02         -0.07        -0.61
                                                      (0.08)       (0.09)        (0.10)       (0.08)       (0.11)       (0.09)       (0.07)        (0.10)       (0.11)       (0.13)       (0.77)
 ∆(1 + τigt )× K (2010) Quality Ladder                 0.00
                                                      (0.05)
 ∆(1 + τigt )× dLEU (2016) Markup                                    -0.02
                                                                    (0.07)
 ∆(1 + τigt )× Coefficient of Price Variation                                     0.04
                                                                                 (0.07)
 ∆(1 + τigt )× BW (2006) Demand Elasticity                                                    -0.17∗
                                                                                              (0.09)
 ∆(1 + τigt )× CP (2015) Demand Elasticity                                                                  -0.05
                                                                                                           (0.09)
 ∆(1 + τigt )× N (2007) Contract Intensity                                                                                0.05
                                                                                                                         (0.06)
 ∆(1 + τigt )× NS (2008) Price Stickiness                                                                                              -0.01
                                                                                                                                      (0.08)
 ∆(1 + τigt )× ACFH (2012) Upstreamness                                                                                                             -0.03
                                                                                                                                                   (0.07)
 ∆(1 + τigt )× (Inventories / Shipments)                                                                                                                         -0.01
                                                                                                                                                                (0.10)
 ∆(1 + τigt )× R (1999) Differentiated (0/1)                                                                                                                                  0.11
                                                                                                                                                                             (0.14)
 ∆(1 + τigt )× Durable (0/1)                                                                                                                                                                0.61
                                                                                                                                                                                           (0.76)
 FEs                                                 gt,it,is      gt,it,is     gt,it,is      gt,it,is     gt,it,is     gt,it,is     gt,it,is     gt,it,is      gt,it,is     gt,it,is     gt,it,is
 R2                                                    0.11          0.11         0.11          0.11         0.12         0.11         0.11         0.11          0.11         0.11         0.11
 N                                                  1,345,844     2,434,673    2,335,058     1,580,846    1,536,403    2,265,752    1,896,505    2,344,122     2,291,029    2,454,023    2,449,311
Notes: Table reports the variety-level tariff pass-through for before-duty import unit values for products with different characteristics. Each specification interacts the import tariff with the
(standardized) product characteristic: 1) HS-10 quality ladders from Khandelwal (2010); 2) sector markups from De Loecker et al. (2018); 3) the HS-10 coefficient of unit value variation; 4) HS-6
elasticities of substitution from Broda and Weinstein (2006); 5) sectoral trade elasticities from Caliendo and Parro (2015); 6) HS-6 contract intensity from Nunn (2007); 7) the inverse frequency of
sectoral micro-level price adjustments from Nakamura and Steinsson (2008) (a higher value denotes more price stickiness); 8) sectoral upstreamness from (Antràs et al., 2012); 9) sector inventory
to sales ratios in 2016 from Census; 10) indicator of product differentiation from Rauch (1999); 11) durable good indicator from BEC. We trim the top and bottom 1% of continunous product
characteristic measures, with the exception of markups, which varies only at the level of 2-digit NAICS sectors. All regressions include product-time, country-time and country-sector fixed effects.
Standard errors clustered by country and HS-8. Significance: * 0.10, ** 0.05, *** 0.01. Sample: monthly variety-level import data from 2017:1 to 2019:4.
                                  Table A.11: Variety Retaliatory Tariff Pass-Through, Product Characteristics

                                                        (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)           (7)          (8)          (9)           (10)         (11)
                                                     ∆ ln pXigt    ∆ ln pXigt   ∆ ln pXigt   ∆ ln pXigt    ∆ ln pXigt   ∆ ln pXigt    ∆ ln pXigt   ∆ ln pXigt   ∆ ln pXigt    ∆ ln pXigt   ∆ ln p∗igt
           ∗
 ∆ ln(1 + τigt )                                       0.06          -0.04        -0.02        0.22          0.22         -0.02         0.10         0.04         -0.01         -0.02        -0.32
                                                      (0.35)        (0.14)       (0.18)       (0.36)        (0.23)       (0.17)        (0.17)       (0.16)       (0.18)        (0.15)       (0.32)
        ∗
 ∆(1 + τigt )× K (2010) Quality Ladder                 -0.14
                                                      (0.21)
        ∗
 ∆(1 + τigt )× dLEU (2016) Markup                                    -0.05
                                                                    (0.12)
        ∗
 ∆(1 + τigt )× Coefficient of Price Variation                                     -0.08
                                                                                 (0.12)
        ∗
 ∆(1 + τigt )× BW (2006) Demand Elasticity                                                     -0.50∗
                                                                                               (0.26)
        ∗
 ∆(1 + τigt )× CP (2015) Demand Elasticity                                                                   -0.18
                                                                                                            (0.21)
        ∗
 ∆(1 + τigt )× N (2007) Contract Intensity                                                                                -0.14
                                                                                                                         (0.16)
        ∗
 ∆(1 + τigt )× NS (2008) Price Stickiness                                                                                              0.21∗
                                                                                                                                       (0.12)
        ∗
 ∆(1 + τigt )× ACFH (2012) Upstreamness                                                                                                              -0.06
                                                                                                                                                    (0.10)
        ∗
 ∆(1 + τigt )× (Inventories / Shipments)                                                                                                                           -0.24
                                                                                                                                                                  (0.18)
        ∗
 ∆(1 + τigt )× R (1999) Differentiated (0/1)                                                                                                                                    -0.06
                                                                                                                                                                               (0.30)
        ∗
 ∆(1 + τigt )× Durable (0/1)                                                                                                                                                                  0.33
                                                                                                                                                                                             (0.43)
 FEs                                                  gt,it,is     gt,it,is      gt,it,is     gt,it,is     gt,it,is      gt,it,is     gt,it,is      gt,it,is     gt,it,is     gt,it,is      gt,it,is
 R2                                                     0.06         0.06          0.06         0.06         0.06          0.06         0.06          0.06         0.06         0.06          0.06
 N                                                   1,013,889    2,531,498     2,405,765    1,197,602    1,969,044     2,314,216    2,179,087     2,426,772    2,337,130    2,564,731     2,557,707
Notes: Table reports the variety-level retaliatory tariff pass-through for before-tariff export unit values for products with different characteristics. Each specification interacts the import tariff
with the (standardized) product characteristic: 1) HS-10 quality ladders from Khandelwal (2010); 2) sector markups from De Loecker et al. (2018); 3) the HS-10 coefficient of unit value variation;
4) HS-6 elasticities of substitution from Broda and Weinstein (2006); 5) sectoral trade elasticities from Caliendo and Parro (2015); 6) HS-6 contract intensity from Nunn (2007); 7) the inverse
frequency of sectoral micro-level price adjustments from Nakamura and Steinsson (2008) (a higher value denotes more price stickiness); 8) sectoral upstreamness from (Antràs et al., 2012); 9)
sector inventory to sales ratios in 2016 from Census; 10) indicator of product differentiation from Rauch (1999); 11) durable good indicator from BEC. We trim the top and bottom 1% of
continunous product characteristic measures, with the exception of markups, which varies only at the level of 2-digit NAICS sectors. All regressions include product-time, country-time and
country-sector fixed effects. Standard errors clustered by country and HS-8. Significance: * 0.10, ** 0.05, *** 0.01. Sample: monthly variety-level export data from 2017:1 to 2019:4.
Table A.12: Tariff Pass-Through at Alternative Data Frequencies

       Panel A: Import Unit Values and Import Tariffs
                            (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)
                        ∆ ln p∗igt     ∆ ln p∗igt    ∆ ln p∗igt    ∆ ln p∗igt
   ∆ ln(1 + τigt )         0.00          0.04          0.11          0.25∗
                          (0.08)        (0.07)        (0.07)        (0.14)
   FEs                   gt,it,is      gt,it,is      gt,it,is       gt,it,is
   Data Frequency       Monthly       2 Months      3 Months      4 Months
   R2                      0.11          0.10          0.10          0.09
   N                    2,454,023     1,521,091     1,180,044      874,774

      Panel B: Export Unit Values and Retaliatory Tariffs
                            (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)
                        ∆ ln pX igt    ∆ ln pXigt    ∆ ln pXigt    ∆ ln pXigt
             ∗
   ∆ ln(1 + τigt )         -0.04         0.11          0.16          0.00
                          (0.16)        (0.15)        (0.13)        (0.10)
   FEs                   gt,it,is      gt,it,is      gt,it,is       gt,it,is
   Data Frequency       Monthly       2 Months      3 Months      4 Months
   R2                       0.06         0.06          0.05          0.05
   N                    2,564,731     1,710,275     1,370,953     1,045,078
  Notes: Table reports the variety-level tariff pass-through to before-duty
  import (Panel A) and export (Panel B) unit values at different data fre-
  quencies. Each column estimates the regression in first differences at
  different data frequencies. Column 1 is the baseline monthly data (in the
  top panel, column 1 is the same as column 4 of Table IV and the bottom
  panel column 1 is the same as column 4 of Table VII. Columns 2-4 run the
  specification after aggregating the data to every two months, quarterly
  and every four months, respectively. All regressions include product-time,
  country-time and country-sector fixed effects. Standard errors clustered
  by country and HS-8 (for imports) or HS-6 (for exports). Significance:
  * 0.10, ** 0.05, *** 0.01. Sample: variety-level import and export data
  from 2017:1 to 2019:4.
                               Table A.13: Tariff Pass-Through with Alternative Fixed Effects

                                        Panel A: Import Unit Values and Import Tariffs
                                        (1)            (2)          (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)
                                    ∆ ln p∗igt    ∆ ln p∗igt    ∆ ln p∗igt     ∆ ln p∗igt    ∆ ln p∗igt    ∆ ln p∗igt    ∆ ln p∗igt    ∆ ln p∗igt
 ∆ ln(1 + τigt )                       0.00          -0.01         0.04           0.01          0.01          0.19        0.26∗∗∗         0.04
                                      (0.08)        (0.05)        (0.05)         (0.06)        (0.04)        (0.12)        (0.08)        (0.05)
 Product × Time FE                     Yes             No           No            Yes            No           Yes            No            No
 Country × Time FE                     Yes            Yes          Yes             No            No            No            No            No
 Country × Sector FE                   Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes            No            No           Yes
 Sector × Time FE                       No            Yes           No             No           Yes            No            No            No
 Country × Sector × Time FE             No             No           No             No            No           Yes           Yes            No
 Time FE                                No             No           No             No            No            No            No           Yes
 R2                                    0.11           0.00         0.00           0.11          0.00          0.16          0.05          0.00
 N                                  2,454,023     2,524,251     2,524,253      2,454,511     2,524,736     2,416,617     2,488,081     2,524,738

                                      Panel B: Export Unit Values and Retaliatory Tariffs
                                        (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)
                                    ∆ ln pX igt   ∆ ln pX igt   ∆ ln pX  igt   ∆ ln pX igt   ∆ ln pX igt   ∆ ln pX igt   ∆ ln pX igt   ∆ ln pX igt
           ∗
 ∆ ln(1 + τigt )                       -0.04         -0.02         -0.01          -0.03         -0.02         0.06          0.03          0.01
                                      (0.16)        (0.15)        (0.14)         (0.14)        (0.14)        (0.19)        (0.17)        (0.15)
 Product × Time FE                      Yes           No             No            Yes           No           Yes            No            No
 Country × Time FE                      Yes           Yes           Yes            No            No            No            No            No
 Country × Sector FE                    Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           No            No           Yes
 Sector × Time FE                       No            No             No            No            Yes           No            No            No
 Country × Sector × Time FE             No            No             No            No            No           Yes           Yes            No
 Time FE                                No            No             No            No            No            No            No           Yes
 R2                                    0.06          0.01           0.01          0.06          0.00          0.14          0.08          0.00
 N                                  2,564,731     2,591,089     2,591,090      2,564,999     2,591,357     2,504,753     2,531,680     2,591,358
Notes: Table reports the variety-level tariff pass-through to before-duty import (Panel A) and export (Panel B) unit values using alternative
sets of fixed effects. In the top panel, column 1 is the same as column 4 of Table IV. In the bottom panel, column 1 is the same as column
4 of Table VII. Standard errors clustered by country and HS-8 (for imports) or HS-6 (for exports). Significance: * 0.10, ** 0.05, *** 0.01.
Sample: variety-level import and export data from 2017:1 to 2019:4.
                  Table A.14: BLS PPI, Import and Export Price Indexes

                       (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)
                    ∆ ln pP
                          st
                            PI
                                 ∆ ln pP
                                       st
                                         PI
                                              ∆ ln pXP
                                                    st
                                                       I
                                                            ∆ ln pXP
                                                                  st
                                                                     I
                                                                          ∆ ln pMst
                                                                                    PI
                                                                                         ∆ ln pMst
                                                                                                   PI

 ∆ ln(1 + τst )      0.26∗∗       0.22∗∗         0.23          0.28           0.10           0.05
                     (0.11)       (0.10)        (0.14)       (0.21)         (0.08)         (0.08)
           ∗
 ∆ ln(1 + τst )        0.10         0.17       -2.31∗∗       -1.96∗          -0.52          -0.41
                     (0.15)       (0.16)        (1.09)       (1.06)         (0.31)         (0.37)
 Time FE                No          Yes           No           Yes             No            Yes
 Sector FE              No          Yes           No           Yes             No            Yes
 R2                    0.01         0.07         0.02          0.07           0.00           0.05
 N                    2,399        2,399        1,099         1,099         1,596          1,596
Table reports impacts of sector-level import and retaliatory tariffs on official BLS PPI, import price
(MPI) and export price (XPI) indexes. Sectoral tariffs are constructed as averages of variety-level
tariffs. Standard errors clustered by sector. Sample: Monthly panel of NAICS-4 manufacturing
sectors. Significance: * 0.10, ** 0.05, *** 0.01. Sample: monthly variety-level export data from
2017:1 to 2019:4.
     Table A.15: Correlates of County-Level Tariff Exposure

               Panel A: Outcome is County Import Tariff Exposure

                                        (1)           (2)         (3)          (4)
                                       ∆(τr )       ∆(τr )      ∆(τr )       ∆(τr )
 2016 GOP Pres. Vote Share             0.03∗∗∗      0.02∗∗      0.01∗∗       0.02∗∗
                                     (0.01)       (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.01)
 2016 GOP Pres. Vote Share Sq.        -0.03∗∗∗     -0.01∗      -0.01∗∗      -0.01∗∗
                                     (0.01)       (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.01)
 Ag Employment Share                               -0.07∗∗∗    -0.07∗∗∗     -0.07∗∗∗
                                                  (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.01)
 Demographic Controls                    No           No         Yes          Yes
 Pre-Trends                              No           No          No          Yes
 R2                                    0.03         0.13        0.14         0.15
 N                                    3,111        3,111       3,111        3,111
               Panel B: Outcome is County Export Tariff Exposure

                                        (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)
                                       ∆(τr∗ )      ∆(τr∗ )     ∆(τr∗ )      ∆(τr∗ )
 2016 GOP Pres. Vote Share             0.03∗∗∗      0.00∗      -0.00        -0.00
                                     (0.00)       (0.00)      (0.00)       (0.01)
 2016 GOP Pres. Vote Share Sq.                                              -0.00
                                                                           (0.01)
 Ag Employment Share                                0.28∗∗∗     0.25∗∗∗      0.25∗∗∗
                                                  (0.02)      (0.02)       (0.02)
 Demographic Controls                    No           No         Yes          Yes
 Pre-Trends                              No           No          No          Yes
 R2                                    0.09         0.40        0.43         0.44
 N                                    3,111        3,111       3,111        3,111
 Notes: Unit of analysis is U.S. counties. Outcome variables are the 2017-18 change in
import and export tariff exposure due to the trade war, defined as the county-specific
tradeable wage-weighted average of sector-level tariff increases. Employment and
demographic variables measured in 2016 from Census CBP and 5Y ACS. Agriculture
industries defined as NAICS codes beginning with 11. Demographic controls are:
share unemployed, share white, share with a college degree, and log mean income. Pre-
trend controls are 2013-2016 changes in: manufacturing and agriculture employment
shares, share unemployed, and log mean income. Regressions weighted by county
population. Standard errors clustered by state.
