                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                                    WORKING CONDITIONS
        THE IMPACT OF NEW UNIONIZATION ON WAGES AND
                    A LONGITUDINAL STUDY OF ESTABLISHMENTS
                              UNDER NLRB ELECTIONS




                               Richard B. Freeman

                               Morris M. Kleiner




                             Working Paper No. 2563




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MJ 02138
                                   April 1988




                                                           The authors want to
This study was funded by the National Science Foundation.
                                                          at seminars at MIT and
thank William Dickens, Casey Ichniowski, and participants
                                                        We also want to thank
Columbia University for their comments and criticisms.
       Skie and Jan Bull for their assistance with the computations for this paper.
Shelly                                                            in Labor Studies.
The research reported here is part of the NBERs research program
                       are those of the authors and not those of the National
Any opinions expressed
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #2563
                                               April 1988




                                              and Working Conditions:
       The Impact of New Unionization on Wages Under NLRB Elections
         A Longitudinal Study of Establishments




                                    ABSTRACT

                                                                on the wages and
                              the impact of union organization
      This study investigates
                                                    in the 1980s using a research
                                   newly organized
labor practices of establishments
                                              with their closest nonunion
                 establishments are 'paired'
design in which
                                                                          modest
                                              First, unionism had only a
                    are two major findings.
competitor. There
                                                       contrasts sharply with the
                                         plants. which
effect on wages in the newly organized
                                                             of union and nonunion
                        found in cross.settion comparisons
huge union wage impact
                                                                     Second, in
 individuals on Current population
                                    Suey and related data tapes.
                                                            substantially altered
                                on wages, new unionization
 contrast to its modest impact
                                                                    seniority
                               creating grievance systems. greater
 several personnel practices.
                              and posting.   That newly organized establishments
 protection. and job bidding
                                                 modest increases in wages
                      conditions but grant only
 adopt union working
                                                                     is the key to
                            voice' rather than monopoly wage gains
  suggests that 'collective
                             does in the economy.
 understanding what unionism




                                                 Morris M. Kleiner
Richard B. Freeman
                                                 Department of Economics 19th Ave., S.
National Bureau of Economic Research             231 Humphrey Center, 301,
1050 Massachusetts Avenue                        University of Minnesota
Cambridge, MA 02138                              Minneapolis, MN 55455
                                          1




           •i Intact of   New Unionization on Waqes ard WorkirrditiOr
           _prnit.iinal      StLxv of Estab1islsnts Urer NIRB Elections


     st.ies of the ecxnanic effects of unionization have traditionally
focusa on differerceS between union ard r urLion workers (Freatlan ard
ioff, 1984, Lewis 1986), in large part because of the availability of
                                                                   unions
crcss—section ari 1oritJnal data sets on iriividuals. Because
                                                                     the the
have had little organizirg suoess in the 1970s ard 1980s, hci.ever,
vast majority of union workers in sucth data sets are elTployei in
 estab1islfltS that were organiza decades earlier, ard thus may present a
xnisleadirq picthre of the arxtiic effects of the
                                                       --
                                                      union organization

that might be expect&i to thf1uer the decisis of orrently ruiion
                                             union organizirg drives. In a
manageirent ard workers to surcort or cççc6e
peric  when union wage ixreases have fallen short of those of xminiCfl
                                                             the iripact of
 workers,1 ard the union share of amçlcyxrent has cntractad,
                                                        can reasonably be
 newly organized unior on wages ard workir rditions
 expectrd to differ fron that of existirg unions.
      at behas      the &xmixziiic inçmact of s.xxessful union organizir drives
 in the       z in the
           1980s? Has      unionization rais&1 wages suItantiallY or altered
 workiricitia greatly                 pericd? To arwer these questions,
 in 1986 we surveyed    203 establishmarmts that had National Lahor Relations

 Board electi in the                              firm who did
                           1980s, ard 161 'crrxtro1'              rtfaoa union

  orgaiuz1r drives. By foczsirg on     establis1mntSrather than workers, ard
  by usin3 a before/after researth desit,     are able to examine what
                                              we                         rt
  unionization did to wages ard terf its, personnel practi,
                                                              ard atploynent.
                                             2

Thus,    'a are able to eatirrata   the 'trargiral' nther than avenge effects of
unionization in the    peri.
        Cur principal fL-ñiag   is that in the   1980s   rw unionisation pro±c
wage and   terefit gaire far tela those     inpli b standard aces-section
analyses of union wage effects. At the sane tine 'a find that realy
organiand workers cede sigeificant gains in the areas of grievance
procedures, job posting and bidoirn, arcS seniority protection. Cbnsistent
with a sniest effect of raw unionisu on wages, anrw'er, 'a find laer
growth of Fsrploylrent in rawly unionised establisS-mentsthan in air central

qraip of estab1is-mrints, ?thile 'a are canrnt deter-mire with any certainty
the extent to WSilCth the relatively weak union inçact on wages in air sançie
is due to the eccnarjc corditions of the l980s (a 'paricd' effect), the
pattern of gein in first contracts (an 'age' effect), or the specifio
d.aracterjstics of establis-urents that 'are organizef in the period (a
"vintage' effect), air results dSonstrate that ore cartrnt extrapelate
extant estimates of uniorVrxnjnion wage differences to rawly organized
establisS-greorts, That rawly unionized plants ad<t standard union working
corditiore sajests, Iroreaver, that the industrial jurispredence (Slici-iter,
Italy and Livernash) or collective voice (Frran and          )tff)
                                                               rather than
the na'ly      face of nionisit is the easer of the institution.
      St present the evidence arcS argsents for these claire in three parts
In section era 'a desorite air survey nethedolony, a 'seni—experinental'
desiga that inrolven paired cerparisore of establishments to control for
unobserveddifferences tetween 1finra that face/do not face union organizing
drives, In the secxrd     tion'a give air basic estimates of what rev union
organization does to wage arcS perscnel practices, In section three       'a
                                         3

prthe the results for  utric prthl          ard disc' altemative
thterpretatia of the firdirs.
I. Issues ard ?thcdolcv
     Starxiard analyses of the union wage prnitnn in the United States
estinte that the wages of union workers exceed    te   of ncrainicn workers in
crcas—section data by 15 to 25          (1is, 1986) ard that the wages of
workers who   switd union status in 1critñir%al data is ax*it    10   percent

higher in the union status   (Fran, 1985; Lewis,    1986). Neither of these
estiimtes, hver, is likely to gage arately the inçact of unionism on
the wages of establislnrents organized in the 1980s, ard thus the wage cests
 (to fints) ard benefits (to workers) of sucressful orgariizirq drives.
Because unions have organized few workplaces in the past two decades,
estirates of union effects based on crs-section data essentially itrast
workers in    fin organized years ago (in the 1970s ard 1960s or earlier) to
workers in other firns while estimates based on lcrgiti.iii.nal data ctrast
 workers who d-iarqe union status by ncvirg to or fran already organized
 workp1ac rather than workers    in plants that are rawly organized versus
 thcee in plants that renain nonunion.
      re     are three reasa for e ptirg the      unic   effects of     n
                                                                        union

 organizatian in the 1980s to differ fran the wage differei between
                                                                       workers

  in already existirg union aril nonunion workplaces. First is the unfavorable
         envircruint of the peried: the delis in union representation,
 ecorK.lnC

 derulatian of irdustries, inoreased foreign cxçetition, ard hii
 urtçloysnt that are likely to have raised the elasticity of labor denard
 facir rily organized labor ard thus to have     red the ability of the
 unions to raise wages2      In an envircnrtent in wtiith marrj existir unions
                                          4

1red their precthzn over rxrrunicri labor, it is plausible to e'çet that
new unions feral a rtiailarly diffiojlt task of establithirq preniirn in

the first instarcs,3
     She, union iirçacts on rewly organizel nrkers are likely to differ
frun those on previoisiy organized eorkers because first ctntracts are
likely to prdan different cxitronas than later contracts, as has been
recngnizei sirce the days of Paul g1as, if riot earlier. In his 1930 book
on real wages in the U.S. tnlas argued that unions poshid. for esiaIly

large wage gains in their first caitract presurably to strengthen the
loyalty of the newly organized workers, aid that after the first contract,
union wages would increase at about the sara rate as nonunion wages:
"Unionisn, in other wools, very predably does give an arcciab1e increase
in earnings during the early ngriol of effective organization, but during
the later aol rrore nature years of union davalsent the relative rate of
thither progress seers to he no onre rapid on the whole for unionists than
fur rea-r0000rusts. {irnolao. 0. 564) Other analysts, bc.wver, argue the
          Si -  it u-< are err cc cameo noes fran jfl-r .ecur
                                              r            —   tr              t
provisicos like dues checkoffs in their first contract. producing snaIl wage
gains with first contracts,   La   the education sector, where collective
bargaining is a relatively nrcent pheratenon, the evidence suggests that
teacher unions obtained only modest wage gains in first contracts (Freerren
1986)     Pewter, ti-at siteation could differ in the private sector,
     A   third reason for expecting differences in union effects between
existing ard newly organized plants are vintage effects &ce to the distinct
rtharaoteristicrs of establishnents or workers organized in the 198th cerpared
to ti-see organized earlier. Its infreepercy of organization in the    198th
                                             5

suests, in partia.lar, that rly organized plants          re likely to    have

different tharacterizti than other plants. Labor/nagnt relations ay
have teen partio1arly poor in the plants that beca union, makir rkers
           favorable to unions, or managrent       y
                                                have          n
                                                         less cçposed to
                                                                       rt foresee
unions in thcGe plants than elsewhere, pcssibly because they did
sericus    rziic lcses u*i becziairg unionized. Amther potential cause of
vintage effects is that workers sçxrtir unions in the 1980s terd to be
disprcrtionately mirxrity or fnale cx*ipared to the white males who
organized decades earlier.
(Xir Leta Set

     As data  sets like the Q.irrerit PcpJlation Suxvey (C) aid National
Labor Relations Bcard administrative raxrds do not provide infornetion on
eiunic danjes associated with ne. union ozganization, we developed a ne.
establishrrent-based data set to estimate the inpact of ni unionization in
the 1980s.     We   d   velc:i cur data thrgh a three-step procedure.
     First,    we   cbtained fran the Boston aid Kansas City National Labor


during the 1980s. The states covered by the       t
Relations Board districts r&xrds of establishirents that had elections
                                                 districts are generally
reflective of the national labor relations envLrcmnnnt. A cxposite rankii
of private su±or unicr density in the states in cur saxiple was 29th cut of
51 (D.C.   inoled). "
     Secxn:I, we cxniucted 203      on-site intezviews with   firn that had
elections with over 20 tp1oyees in the bargaining unit. Of the 243 finrs
we oontacted, 203 agreed to talk to us, for a response rate of 83.5 percent:
100 were in Bctcn aid 103 were in Kansas City; 5 percent had elections in

1985; 31 percent in 1984; 12 percent in 1983; 10 percent in 1982; 16 percent
                                                        6
in 1981; 16 parctrit in 1980 and 10 percent in 1979. In air original sairple
8.4 ercsrrt sent cut of tusiress or tried, To                 s
                                                    if tj'j was an abrcrcelly
hii or 1cM rats, se detennined the states of fifty reninion "cxrçetitor
establisl'rrents" that had or organizing drive        the 1980s ant faint that
6.5 percent went art of tusiness or              rriat
                                               The win rate of unions in the
tint elections in cur sarple was, anreciver, virthajdy i&ntioal to the
rainoral average: unions won 39 percent of the elections in air sarple
ccxrrpared   to a    38   percent win rate for
                                         all elections contacted in 1981 with
over 20 cerplcyees (Thiedoff, 1984). The proportion of fins wtio lost
eiecrciorn erd sic4resf colccccfre contracts was also at the national average:
64   oercent of            elections won   icy   unions in air eargie prcduced signed
collective contracts this cxrearen with the 63 percent repznted                 try   !'tt,crnld
for the pericd l%79in2 (McDonald, 1983),
     Third. we obtained data for a 'txntrob' graip of rrninicn
accatlitents that did rot experierna organizing drives during the                     1980s,

Aconiccag  cot. :'nnagorc in the 2icon tort ccgerierceci orgarciring drrves had
cccvi infoccnatico aScot clcse ccrrneti tcrc-, we asked, then to race their two

clceve'ct rcnunion crsacetithrs in their region, and inrterviesxzd those fins,
Mc had lens succeen in obtaining ocoreratico in this part of air straty: we

tnleçigre:i 362 ctr,paoies arid cbtaired 161 pairs for a resporne rate of 44aS
icercerdi leaver, oven with this response rate, we s-till ceded up with
ratctied ocrpaztitozs for auproxisrately80% of the establistrents that had
organizing drives,
       We   use our earple of control establisi'orants           to sealuate the effects of
rice uvaica orcanloeticn en eccrvraic cutccras              in two ways: 1) by contrastirg
charcien     in   wa-crnn/çetrscrvxel practices    in   fins that faced organizing    drives
                                               7
with   all   f1z that did rct; ard 2) by azçarirg firm that            fa     drives
with their      'c1est tçetitor' ard analyziri         the pairal differen.
                           tential1y useful.
paired cxrrparisons provide a                            way   to ritro1 for saxrple
selection or ur±etveI variable prthlts by              allii us to trast
estab1ishints facirz3 organizirq drives with 'brother' establis rIts rather
than with firm in gerral. If the          pair
                                            onrrectly give us sets of
establisurnts that are trore alike than other establishunts in c'.ir saple,
the variar of wages ard t:enefits (other variables) betn pairs prior to
the organizir drive shild be lcMer than the variai between rardatly
selectrd establishrents. This is because the rrron ccuçxnerit of the
variation      betn pairs is reirove by differerirxj.           Fornally,   let var
(in   W./W.)    be the     in in wages ard terf its (other variables)
                         variax
between pairel establisftrnts ard let v(in W, in        be the covariame
                                                    W)
between then           to o:xiron cxrçonent.   Then,   siixe var(ln W/W) = var in W
  var in - 2 cov(in W,                                    <var in + var in when
                         irM). var(in W/W)
+
        W
coy> 0 due to a ituon cxzxçonent. In cr sanpie the relevant variar
were   var in    W.     var in W = .019; var (in W1/W) = .024. Her, the
                      = .022;

                                    urrtev
tedriique does izx3.ee reluce
      Before turnirq to         r       differerces anori firt.
                             tpirica1 analysis, three akiitical pDints on
the data. First, rx,te that althch the san,1e is lirnita to 364
establisnts, tIe facirq organizir drives içloy over 64,000 werkers,
while the      itro1 saitple loy1 an aãlitical 82,000 werkers, so that we
are dealir with sizeable ritnrbers of rkers.            Sd, while the data lacks
informatici ai werker ctharacteristi corxtair           a typa surveys, cur
                                                               CPS

nasures of estab1isnt ctharacteristi aid paired .xzrparisons are likely
to cxntro1 for a significant prcportion of the variar in wages due to
                                            8
dlfferers arcrn jots:   recent analysis of wages on establi&ment and werker
d-aracteristica finds that establisThient d'aracteristica acnsit for at
least as nr±c of the variar in wages as personal (lunran capital)
d-rccterrstica (Groehen, 1986) mind, by cbtainirg wage and other data on
ash5 lirteertos before as well as after the union orcanizating drive, we
thffererce away persistent urnreasured ctaracteristics of work forces arcrq
estaiñishrents.
IL Urirical Pesuits
     In this section we present estiretes of the impact of rei union
ogeaniration cc wages, personrel practices, and €npioyoent, first by
crurarirtg ecatahiihrrents that faced organizirg drives to all erpetitor
establishments ard then by ccenaririg them to their paired 'clceest
crarretitors'
      Cur   first set of wage   estimates are based on the follmeirq in wage
ecuation:
      {l)D1nWi=aUl+bY2+W3±dZ+eirMere
      un
                             1      1     1      01         t
           is the cage otiarrye at the itt atbolishnrnt fran ore gear
before the NUB election to       t periods after the election or,   for
establisisenta that did ret have an organirige drive, to      t years after their
pair faced a drive5
      UI,   172. are <draw variables reflasting the catrrna of the organirirg
                   U)
drive: vt,ether it reenitad in a union victory in the NURB election and a
ooliective contract (Ui=i); a union victory with re contract (U2=l); or a
      defeat (U3=l) Sires doerican unions rely almost exclusivelyon
coricor

sigred collective contracts to affect outcomes, we forms on the setmeted
coefficients on the UI demur variable.
                                              9

       Z   is a set of itrol variables,     irltir a    d.miny   variable for the
NLRB district of the firm (Ecstcn or Kansas City); dimrj variables for year
of the election, to alli time effects; aix! a dtmty variable for whether the
workers were prcdt.ticn       or x   prhtion ploy.
       in       is the wage at the ith establis-nnt 1 year before the
oranizi drive for establishments facir drives, aix! in the same year as
the relevant pair for      the
                           with.rt a drive.6
     uit is the error tern
       air   estimates using pairi ccxrarisons are basel on the       follir
&juation:
       (2) Din (W./W.)t = aUl +W2 +dJ3 + dTh       +    wbere                is the
                                             (W/W)o U1,
wage in the establisnt facing an organizirg drive ard is the wage in
its pair; aix! in /W) is the differential between the pairs year
before the election.
     Table 1 presents the results of cur analysis of diarqes in cxzmpensation
(wages plus benefits as reçcrtod to cur intariiewers) for the           frcn
one year before to one year after the election aix! frcxn one year before to


trols.        Buse
all of these periods,
                         s
the .irrent pericd for establishments facirq organiziig drives aix! cur
                             establishments did rit   rort wages ard benefits for
                     cur saiiple falls short of the full 364 by nearly a
third. The tulk of the missing csexvatior result frc the absejxe of
figures     on wages   ard benefits prior to the oxxjanizirq drive.       the basis
of rtxh1y similar wage ard benefit levels for establishments that gave
o1ete figures aix! t1-e that did rxt for the figures that were given by
the latter establishments, we do       rt
                                    believe this data prthlen biases cur
results.
                                         10

     Turning   to the figures, coltrrs 1-3 record sean levels of   peration
in crir)starTt 1977 'llars for an establishrent ore year before tte election,
ore year after the election, ard at the tire of the survey or, in the case
of establisirrents that did rc't have orgenizirg drives, the wages at the tis
ore year before ard one year after their 'pair' face5 drives, ard at the
tire of the survey. The rears for one year before s&w that estab1i.thnts
that faced drives had slightly   lar   persation than those that did rct,
with plants that erdel up with contracts havim 2.9% laer pay than plants
that did ret face an onganizirg drive. The post election pericd wears show
a different pattern, with pay higher in plants that faced drives, as nild
be expected given a direct union wage effect and potential threat effects on
plants facirq drives, 1urrs 4 ard 5 present regression estinstes of the
inpact of organizing drive cutcxres on diarsges in wages using iation 1,
with the diverse factors &scriied there held fixef, fl'e calailatin     sk
that workers in establithrrentsthat gairel a contract had zodest bit
statistically significantly greater ircreases in pay than workers in control
establisirrents, taco .03 to .04 In points. hey also show that pay rose
slightly bit irsignificantly sore in plants where the union     the election
bit failed to gain a contract than in the controls and rose sciwhat sore in
establisirreits where the union lost the elation, in this case by
statistically significant arcunts fraa one panel before to the current
          Ore possible interpretation of the greater ircrease in wages in
establitents that      fa drives than in the itrols is that they raised
pay to deter furthur ortnizirq efforts, as predicted by    iels of union
 threat or   ilIier effects.    Note  also that the differentials between
 establisirrents ti-at faced ard did not face or'pnizirg drives rose fron ore
                                            11

year after the election to the tise of the xvey, sugestirq greater direct
ari spillover effects of unionism as tine prcxs. In rx         se,
                                                               hcy.ever,
dc   the estinatal union—induci prenium arroad anvthirø li3ce the stariiard
union waqe estimates of 15      to 25 pernt.
     In ac1ition to the calc.ilati in the table, we also estiita several
other econartric pecificatior of equation 1. In one pecificaticn we
instniinerrt the base         cxreration in eqmation 1 on the base pe.ricxl
                                   8
oiiçensation in a different pericx In arther sçification we weightai
c±eervations by riurrbers of rkers in an estab1ishnt. The results in all
these   eqrnnts cnrrcborat1 the firdirs reported in table 1.
paired CTD cisons
     Table 2 presents   c*.ir   estimates of the differerxe between diames in
xzrçration in establishirnts        ar their pair. 1ise 1 ard 2 rerd the
seen of the differerxs between the in tharges in tperation in an
establishnent urxergoir an organizirq drive ard in       its pair over the
sFified pericxl.    They confixm the greater irxrease in cixensation in
establishsents in 'thidi the union wirE an election ard gains a contract
fcurd in table 1; reveal slitly naller           than
                                                   in pay in establishixnts
          tmi
s
in thidi        win bt fail to gain a itract than in their pairs; ard

     nestly higher d,ares in crpensation in establishnents in which the
union leses the election than in their pairs. Finally, coherE 3 ard 4
record the   rression coeffcients for the effectsof the varims organizir
c*its    fran egation 2. In these calclatia we anitted the czrEtant
term fran the reressicn, so that the coefficients on the oranizir drive

category variables reflect the differez in pay between establishnents ard
their pair in a given category (ciitional on the year of the election ard
                                             12

the differential cm year hefore the        eltia-i).     For   estab1isnts where
the unicri   sr a cnitract the estimates stcj greater wage ircreases than in
their pain finn cm year prior to the airrerit pericd bit mt fran cm year
prior to cm year after; for establishannts where unicm ni eleticm bit
were uneble to gain contracts the estimates s1x* nlible lanses in pay
relative to the pair; while for establislurents where the unicn lest the
electicn, the rerjressicra show irereases in cxzrpenaticr relative to their
pair frm ore year tefore to the an-rent paricxl bit not to one year aften
The prirary differerce hetwean these results ard these in table I is the

greator irdicetion that plants that faced onanizirç drives obtained larger
wage gains as tlire   prcceei&.   Still,    the key   firdirq ream ins: the estirrateci
union effects on wages in ready organized plants         fall short of these
obtained fran Cr5 ard other cross    satiai data sets, irditix that cm
jjj    extrapalate those   estirretes to the margin of r'ly ornize1
wer)pla.
Personnel Practices
     in acklitice to cbtainirq wage anti kenefits information fran
establislmants that faceti organizirg drives ant their camtitors, we alse
asked whether firma intrczt, elinirated, or left urctargcd a diverse set

of person-el practices, rarigirq fros frirge benefits to seniority
to grieiamn arbitration to profit sharing. Pa the resprses showed that
fins either introduced or left urcharged all practicm exont for profit
sharing plan, tdx they either eliminatel or left trcharg, we coded the
variables as 0-1 didiotceries, with 0 reflecting the urchargal catrgory ard 1
reflecting a charge for all practi save profit-sharirg, where we used the
o to reflect the dacrease in profit—sharirg aM I to reflect maintainirg a
                                              13

plan.     We    usai a lcgistic ftntion to estimate the ixipact of the    onizir
drive cutcis:
(3)                 Pi=l/[l+e-
        where       is the prthabiity of intr       iz'elimistir a practice; ar
the   catril ard ccntrol variables are as before.
        Thblepresents air analysis of the
                3                                  efft
                                                 of the union orard.zir
drives on the fair           practices that we faird were iiipacta:1 by new
unionisation. For eath practice lurm 1 ard 2 rBxrd the prevalerce of
the practice ore year before ard one year after the organizir drive; celiziu
3   gives the    diare in the prevalei of the practice while column 4
contrasts the thar*3e betwn the organizirs establishmants and their paired
controls; finally, colis 5 presents estimated listic efficients for
uation  3. Consistent with crces-secticn analyses of the effect of
unionin on fringe benefits (Freeman, 1981), the results          sh,
                                                            that union
contracts significantly irxrease the prevaleix of formal grievar
prccedures, written seniority system for pruxtions or layoff and recalls,
and written pcsting of prrctior — practices that are generally vieved as
part of the 'industrial juripnxere' (Slitthter, Iea1y and Livernash, 1960)
or 'collective voice' (Fran and Mff, 1984) face of unionism — while
reducii the prevalere of profit sarirq plans. In aition to the
personnel practices      in table   3 we also examined the   effect of ne. unionisn
onseveral other practic — written sickleave, funeral leave, pensions,
military/jury duty pay — and faird ixxest insignificant union inpacts.
     All told, we viei the firiiir of significant union effects on
industrial jurisprience/voice personnel practices in the aheer of large
wage effects as supportirq the inxrtai of the voice face of unionism.
                                           14

tvlcyttent
     'fl-e   extent to   tet ne unlcthsation is assiatai with retrtiae in
eitçloyrrentat the establisftrent level   proiid a   otential d-szk en cur wage
ard tenefit firxtirgs aid sate irsiit into the issue of wtetker inlets
rotiate mncly wage gaire or efficient contncts, In general, extant
researeti has i-ct farrd sitantial union arployrrent effects with irdustry or
state eriployrrant data, a1tha4s arplcynent has shifted away frau unlailsel
sectors and states Ore interpretation of these aggragate results is that
leases of arploynent asscciated with unlonias tray he balax by gains to
cnrçetirrg nenunice fins. Zrcther is that unions negotiate sufficient jet
security previsions to prcdoea efficient crntracts that do net    rite
arpleyrrant helev cirpetitive levels. Anether is that ti-a reseanth designs
fail to capture 'nice arplcrynent effects that cxxurrai sEen unics-s first
established their wage prania.
     lIe     evidence fron air survey, based as darges in establtthnent
arployrrent fran the tiirr of the NIPB election to the current canal, present
a different picture of the relation between rrtiasisaticn and arployrrerrt than
that faint in irare aggregated data Pa can he sesn in coltras I of table 4,
cur data slat that while arployrent grew in cxntrol establisisents, ti-rae
that fared organizmrq drives hal either ic ircrease In erployaenrt or had
redirtiore in esployrsest ('tere tinione won the election bit cnild twit get a
cántraot Ctiutns 2 ccnftrzrs this result with a regressice analysis that
artrols for regicn, tither wor5cers are prcdsrtlcn workers     or net, tIe year
the election was held, etcY
     Wiile sore nay wish to interpret these results as IndicatIng that new
uniomsatice and 'anion orgarizieg drives retire aiplcyrrent free wi-at it
                                         15

might otherwise be, we sgest caution     dt to the fact that iployririt
decreas ut,                              estab1isrxts where the union
                  aheolutely ard relatively, in
    the eltion bt c.ild n't gain a antract, If union-irilucei wage gains
were the main factor   tir  the   slcr grth of xç1'irxt in the
estab11sbants that fad drives, c*ares in                  sild have been
least where the union gaines czntracts,   rtwhere they failed to gain
contracts: after all, table 1 shoved that wages iixreased less rapidly in
                  r
the union wins, contract category. It is psibility that cor data are
pickir        a relation between eiployuent patter ard the lcc.s of
organizis activity, rather than the efffxt of colletive bargainir on
erpoysnt:   fii exçriencirq drrs in p1Oynt have the tys of
                                                    may

         prllackthat lead .orkers to seek union prottion.
Unfortunately   we lrent figures over a lczer period or other data
                                                                      ss
that establishmant cxxparisct, unlike
finx that were
                                         arateanalyses,
                          slcr eploymant grovth than xzarison
                  organized had
                                                               s
to prc the ctserved relation. At the least, hcever, cir analysis
                                                               that

finrs, whid sests that future analysis of union loyuent effts             fs
on rawly organized establishixntsrather than aggregate data.
$tjon III &utric Prthez ard Intereretatii
    To what extent can cor results can be generalized beyord the saxrles

stiied?   Given   that we could not coeduct a cxntrolled rarxkn assigrnrnt
experinent,   xi a1icable are our estimated imdest wage effts for other
establishirts in the 1980s? Nov irrportant are the period, age, ar vintage
effts described at the outset in ecplainirg the differerre between our
results ard the ntid larger wage estimates based on CPS type data sets?
                                            16

                  of whether air firdirqs can be gereralizal beyord the
       The question

sarple relates to the           selertivity bias in stixlyirç establisments
that   fa   organizing drives aid their clone petitors. Stile           it is
catnr to think of selertivity bias in estinating the union wage effert in
tens of the differenon between the union prenitni orditi'nl a-i the
ctserird union (aM rxnmion) sanpie aM the differential that           ild
                                                                      result
fran randan organizationof a set of 'air3cers or establisbeents, we do rot
believe that this is the rest aseftil way to pcse the prttlen. ?That is
relevant is rot what unionization      nild do to a rardcrrJy chcsen
establisftrent bit rather what   it ',nild do to establishments with a
reasonable chance of being unionizad         to   fins   clone to the rargin of
being oroanizef   ratter than to the average      reninion establishment, Th the
extent that these 'tranginal' fins mere clonely resetle the establishments
in air sanple than the average rxriunion establiabnent, an estimate of what
unionism waild do to a rardrdy selertef fin waild provide a misleading
picture of the rotential effats of rev organizationS           at
                                                            ore wants to
?nna is rot what uniceisan will do to ranflly doreen fires bit what it will
do to fires for Mum unic'nisation is a reascrably prcteble event — that is,
the impact of traiceisatice an establishment wages wei-xtef try the
prdability of organization in the relevant seriaL In an erwirorirrent where
union organizing is infreguaot, we believe that air sample of establishrents
ii likely to offer a closer proxy to the desired weightrd sample than a
randan   collation of fires,       selativity pzthlen, then, is rot ore of
                                 The

correrting for the norirarrian retire of air sample bat rather diakirq
whether there are differerces between the establishments that facod drives
aid their cntçetitors that did ret that ini4it bias air estimate of the
                                                  17


iact of uiaiisati.
estimate   I                  We           issue in two ways. First,
                                    examine the
                wall irasured variables prior to the organizir drive prict
whith establishnents face drives ard,          onrditil cz the drive, hcw wall
                                                                         rrtii
they prJ.ict the
<x   the prthability of
examine    its iirpact on   r
                            facii a drive to
                                estimates.
                                                  r
                    itccxt. Srd, wa acd an inverse Mills
                                                        dwe in pay rressias ard
                                                                                     basa1




      Table 5 suimmarizes c&ir analysis   of the iqcact of wages ard benefits,
personnel practis,        ard other variables before the union organizirq drive,
anf organizin3    itcires.      l.rstgives rraxirarn
                                           1                likelil
                                                           estimates of a
lit eation        that an establishaent has an ornizir drive It s1-s that
wages ar'd benefits do nat significantly affeat the prbility of a drive,
aiti that only seniority pr'/isicrs ard health wverage axxj personnel
practices have discernible iscts.         preser of seniority tules raises
the d-aixm of a drive, ssibly             use
                                         'arkars in rmniicn firm nat
feel that supervisors apply the rule fairly, shile health coverage is also
associated with a higher prthability of an organizirq drive, for rx arcarent
reason. (lnrrs 2 ard 3 suraarise the results of similar analysis of the
daxies that, -ditianal on an eleation,                 uni ild win, ani, viitional
on a win, that they wmiid ciatain a omatract,            }Iere, wa loy a prortic.rai
hazards    exl (O1;Z1) =        .   (0)   e(Z), where        (0)   is an arbitrary
unepecifie ase-lima hazard furction for continuocs 0, ard 0 is the evenr
that an orqanizirq ca!tpaign has taken place (Lawless, 1982) In coltssi 2
cly cx variable is significant, the preser of a written grievazra
prcceiure, whicii rethx.es the iikeli1 of a uniaa win in an elertioru Thh
 is  istent  with eiiderxe that 'peE3itive' laber relaticz relcoes chanres
of union victories. The fficients in colirnn 3 yield, by                  trast, ro
                                            18

siificant inpact for any variable on the probability      tt   a firm    1d
sige a   tract.       of the cala.ilatior is sufficiently striid.r to
                   Na-a

sugest sericus selectivity bias pthlm in cur earlier analysis.
    still, we    so.tto 'correct' cur results for sib1e selectivity bias
by est1itir a probit variant of the colam 1 ation, 1culatirg               ti
inverse Mills ratio, ar a&th the term to cur wage       rrsia.
                                                            As we did
not inc1e the existenoe of          practi in the wage rression,
identification   cat not only fran the non-linear funotional form bit also
fran the   asrtion that personnel practi affect organizir drives bit
not futhre wage increases.    The L'werse   Mills term did not enter the
calculatione with a significant coefficient anI had only    slliteffects an
the estisetad coefficients on organizir cataories)0 14er, cur major
firir   — that the union wage effect is nuth      llerfor neily unionizel
fires than iit3icatai by the starxlard crs-section estimates    —   is
tmaffectal by this eonetric probe.
cur results versus Cr s-section    sugg
      Axptir cur estimates as correct, what mit elain the differe
in nagrütx3e betn then ard un.iaynoinion wage differentials fan. in CPS
ard   relat surveys?
                   is that the differere reflects differers betn
establisheent-bas ard idividual-bas amlyses, with establisnt-bas
est±nates   ller          establis-mnt data control *tter for rkplaoe-
                    1xcause
relata wage   differentialsthat are rre1ate with unionism than
irdividual-basad data, Aheent a    detail investigation of union     w
effects fran bith irdividual ard establisl-msnt scuxrs, we are unable to
                                                  19

asss the itegiüte of this sibi1ity, txxh                        do   be1ive that   it is of
sate potential        ixrtarx in e1ainir ar rei1ts.
                          is that c*ir estint union wage effects differ
       A secord pcssibility

fran thcee in crtss-sectian stilies because of the tine rird    have

ver,               this, corider the differential diare in union ard
             To assess

rnunion wages in the mid 1980s as reported in &reau of taher Statisti'
r1rertt Crat Irdex: these data sh that fran 1983 to 1986 naation
of union    rrkrs Lreased          by   15.6%   crpared to   20.4%   for onnunion workers,
reucirx3 the union preniun by pexhape 5 perrentage points.11                         ffl
short of the     15   to   20 percentage   point differential    betn c*r estimated
 03-.04 in point union wage effect arid crces-sectian union wage gapo,
believe that ttile pericd effts are inpjrtant in e1ainLrq the
differerc,       they are riit the whole story.
        A   third psthi1ity are                 effects, in cxtr analysis
                                                             As riothirg
of the factors that caused crrizirg drives ror of selectivity bias in wage
rressices indicated that the firrs facirq drives ware markedly different
than   their carpetitors, wa do rot believe cedort effects are that irportarit
in explairdrq cr results, 2erhas inion organizirq in the 1980s was
tivated by the sama uateneired earegetent treatrent of workers that
industrial relaticrs stidies fci.ud to have caused s.nressftl unionization in
other porieds of tire (Rees ,p.26) rather than by any special cchert effect.
       A   fc*irth   sibiity      is that age or first contract effects eqlain nxth
of the differeroe between air estimates of the inpact of unionizationon
wages aM those in CPS-type crcas-'section rcaressicxE.                 ile
                                                             we lack direct

evideroe on this point, the consisteroyof cur firidirge with those on the
effects of teacher uniaüsation on r.ily onpnizei sd1 districts is
certainly
                                            20

            estive of first contract effects.
organization had substantial effects on rn—wage         srkir
                                                                    r
                                                           firir that
                                                                itia-
                                                                              union
                                                                             but net
                                                                      ent data on
on wages ard benefits also seers to paint in this direction.
future wage settlenents in
ntagnitue of the
                             ar sanpie, hver,
                   first contract effect,
                                                         cannet detarnilne   t
Onnelusion
     This paper has presentrd the results of      a survey of 364    establishitents
covering over 146,000 Jrkers, sate of &n          fa    union organizirg drives
during the 1980s ani sate of wIzn did net face suth drives. Cur data shcws
that firns that icet elections to unions ard sigr collective contracts
inercasel wages ard benefits ircre rapidly than cttro1 fints but fell far
short of the gains nee3.ed to readi the
   s-section stzxiles. Cur data also    s t 15%-25%

                                                 that
                                                      union wage   prnit faird in
                                                          newly orgenizad srkers
thtaine substantial "voice" benefits xti as grievar prcoeures              ard
seniority provisi-s, while epariering declines in enploynent carparei to
control fire,    ?hyçcthesize that the susil wage effects that  fcurxi are
                                                   enic
                                        r
likely to reflect 'çericz' effects due to the           environnent of the
1980s ard 'first otract' effects due to the terercy of new union

orgenizati to use their bargainir            to etharce irustria1 dracy
ani decision-ma3drg by titles rather than to raise wages ard
differers in the estinati size of union wage prnium between
                                                                    y
                                                                also reflect

establishaerxt ari irdividual   rker data sets.
                                                      21

                                                Refererces

     Ccx,   0. P..,   "Prsic41 }rels             ard Life Thb1,"         Jrnai of the P'a1
Statistical Scciety,        B, 34 (1972)             187—220.

     Duglass, Paul H., Peal Waqes in the 'init States. 1890-1926, Fkuhtat
Mifflin Co., Ccrbrice, 1930, p. 564.



                    "The
                             Vol. 24, No. 1, March 1986,            .
     Frecren, Pidard B., 'Unioni Cues to the F&thlic Sector," Jcxirnal of
Enonic Literature,                                                       41—86.

                           Effect of Unionisu on Fris3e Benefits," Irbistriai ard
Laher   Pelatior      Psvi,    34, on     4   (July 1981;
     _______ ard 3.          off, What Cc Unior                     Basic Proks, 1984.
     Croshen,      Erica, "Sources of         Wage   Dispersion: Hc         Much Co   Frcloyers
Matter?" 1i. D.       This,    Harvard     U.,   1986,     cc   7—37.

     Lawless,      5, F., Statistical         dels ard Mathcds          for Lifetis Cata,      Ni
York: Jchn Wiley, 1982.
     Lewis,   H.    Greqj, Union Relative Wage             Effects:A&, University of
(iilcago Press, 1986.
     Fcforeld, Unarles, "arcrai                  to the Natioral organizir rnittes,"
AFlrcIO,    1983.

        ff, Js., "'1 ib1ic's Iise
Affairs,  Cecsrr       .
        s, Aitt, 'i .ceof
                           24, 1984,
                               E
                                              D-l.
                                                           of Cri," B.reau of


                                                 Trade Uniors, University
                                                                                      Natixl

                                                                                   of (hic&go
Press, revisal aliticri,           1977

        Sliditer,   S'otrer, Hesly,       5.,   ard Livernash, E.R.,        1     Inçiact Qf
                                                     shirgten,     D.C. :   &ooki Irstithtion,
1960.
                                              22




1.   Estimates   fr Qrrent     Waqe   Develc*vents   fr the   BLS for Jam.ary 1987
     shew that   for the pericd   1981-1986   uni wage    rates grew an average of
     4.4   er year thile rziuni wages irreaseI an average of 5 percent per
     year.
2.   In virthally all iroiels of ui-iion kavior iireases in the elasticity
     of the denard for laher    rthx uni wage gair,
3.   N1y orniz fthr will enonter an aãitticzal "shk' ensation
     efft d to both higher direct iaor costs (e.g. wii wage prenium)
     ard the irdirect osts of a grievar prure, written pstir etc.
     Therefore, the     rly oriiz  firm may experiei an ac'diticzial
     r1ti      in ployxnant relative to existin umia estab1is1-ntswbo


     rrctiatia. re
     have borne these extra labor/personnel costs in prevics peris ard
         face cfly izxreases in neotiatad wages in the .irrent rard. of
                             formally,   i   wild expect that W> W where
             is the wage dare in rJly orniz estab1ishnts to greater
     than       where       is the wage dange in newly orgenize estab1isnts.
4.         states in c*ir sanpie that had           e1ectict data   irx1 Arkansas,
     tiit, Ia, Vert.                         NIRB

                            l<sas,   Maine, Massadaisetts, Misscuri,    Nraska,
     New   Hançshire, ard


5.   In this cse we cal1e a rann grcip of 80            riuü
                                                       cxIp3nies that had
     r  NIRB electi, in the sane irdustry ard area that were in bosiness

     in the sas year as the NLRB election cxvpany. If the            firm was   r
    lcrer      in bosiness   e asked a   ll oititor
                                             23
                                                             whetherthe firm that
                                                         e1tion durirq the period of
    ciceed had a union present or had an          NLRB

    interest. If the arsr to both         qtior was rx it was counted as
    havirzg    ciceed for prpses of      r
                                       xzitrol stixy.


in these calculatiors, hase en
The first
                                    t
6. There are two different raticles for trollirg for the initial wage


                                                                '
                                    different rderlyir structural mels.
                is a ragression to nean txxel in whidi assae that
establisirrents axve or belov the average wage terd to have ircreases that,
all else the saire, brir then toward the irean The secord nrxlel derives the
c±are equation frau an iaticn relatir the level of wages to the v&±or
of ireasured variables ard an ur±servable, Then one cbtairs diares in
wages by subtractirej the level ation in an earlier ried fren the level
atien in t. If the ur±servable has the sane                efft
                                                       over tine, the
                                   rt
reiltant tharqe atien does centain the earlier peried wage. If the
effert of the uexvable dvinges over tire, it does contain the earlier
ric     wageas a right-hard side variable, In this case it is recessaxy to
do a bit of    ritetric to cbtain censistent estlirates, as wa report later
in fcotrrte 7.    Fran
                   Sea           (l.
7. For a reller sale of 160 establists sre also able to examine
wages three years prior to the eltion. Rsgressincj real wages 3 years
prior en  ir &miwf variables for organizir cateqor.j ard            trols
                                                                yielded
the folldr estinates (staiaxd errors) of the relation between future
ornizir activity aM these wages: union wirs eltien aM gairs                 tract:
—.01(.02); union wins el&tien bit does        rt gain itract: .04(.03); onion
leses   eltion:    —.00 (.01).           there açears to he ne stxt* relation
between wages    three years earlier aM organizirq entcs.
                                                   24

8.    Spific2lly,     s regresses the       wage   level one year before the drive on
the wage level three years before ard the other variables in the uation
anzl  us the prilcte value as the ctro1 for wage level in the rression
for daxes in wages fron one year before to one year after, This                 alls
for the sibility that          tJ
                             lage wage term will be orrelatei with the
residual in the charxe ation, as             inp1i by the sexrxl xdel descrihai in
ftrote 6.                                 this tential
               The irsti-unenting eliminates                 of bias. sar
9. We also catçared changes in iloyirerit in firs that fac organizir
drives with the dwges in their pairs. Cue th the nrber of fintE that did
rt repDrt esploynent there       just 62 suth thservatia', making the
                                   were
results suspect, Still, these calculatior showel a patterm similar to that
in table 5, with plants in whidi unions wen a irntract experiencing leeses
of ploynnt relative to their pair, ard these in whid unicns won an
election but   ild net gain a xz-itract also sdng relative declines in
loyment.       ly the grxip in       which unions lost        the election did net   s1
th a pattern.
10. In partia.ilar, for the rression of ctiange in wages one year rior to
the drive to the a,irrent peri, the estirretrd inpacts (stardard errors) of
otanizirg categories was: .mion wins citract, .03]. (.027); union wir
election bit fails to gain tract, .00 (.03); union loses election,
.04(.02).
11. These changes     are fron C     1982   to C        1986. Union ca'tpeneation rose
nre rapidly than nonunion ccziperationprior to 1983.                See U.S. 3ireau   of
Labor   Statistios,   News,   iploymant Cost Irdex, quarterly.
                                           TABLE   1:
             Estimates of the Impact of OrganizIng Activity
                   on Establishment Wages and Benefits



                                                                      Regression Coef—
Category & Nc.          Wage & Benefit Levels                 in      ficients for in
of Establish-            1977 Constant Dollars                        in 1977 Constant
merits (N)               (Standard Leviation)                         Dollar Wages

                                                                      lyrbe-       lyrbe-
                        1   year         1 year    at the             fore to 1    fore to
                     before           after        time of            yr after     the time
                    election         election survey                  election     of survey
                            (1)           (2)               (3)          (4)            (5)

          a rta-"
Unir Jiitns
tratt Cflt5t/
 N     33           $        5.45    $     5.47     $        5.47        .03            .04
                            (2.2,         (.ba)             (1.72)      (.01;       '.01)
Untc, gins clot-'
tic:; to tontract
(No Ccntract)
 N   = 21           $        5.56    $     5.39     $        5.50        .01             .02
                            (1.01)        (2.14)            (2.15)      (.02)           (.02)

Union loses electic
(Loses Election)

 N   = 80           $        5.75    $     5.72     $        r.82        .01             .03
                            (1.78;        '1.70)            '1.73;      (.01)           (.01,

Noor7soizirg
drive No      Drive;

 N     109          $        5.61    $     5.46         $     5.26
                            '1.80)        (1.71)              1.66;

                                                                                          24


Notes:       Stancord errors sac    parertoc
             Regressions ioc]ude controls for es one year before
               election rg1on, hat-er w'rkr. arc proLction wor-
               kers or not ana dJmOieS
             The sarplea ar" rest       to
                                                   fr c-r o
                                           year of electIon.
                                           rscdot/benefit
                                                     estat I as' cents
              who  reportet wave                          levels refor€           ,od   after
               the election and at Ste             S    'to   of tha sorvey
                                    TABLE   2:
             Estimates of Differences in Change of Log
            Real Wages for an Establishment from its Pair



           Changes in in wages and             Regression Coefficient for
         benefits in establishments          impact of organizing outcomes
          facing organizing drives             on log change in wages and
          minus changes in its pair          benefits relative to its pair

                  3.yr        1 yr                1 yr prior     1 yr prior
                  prior       a fter             to 1 yr after   to current
                       (1)        (2)                  (3)          (4)


Contract               .02        .04                  .00           .07
                                                      (.01)         (.03)

No Contract       —    .01    —   .01                 —.04          —.01
                                                      (.02)         (.03)
Loses Election         .03        .04                 —.00           .04
                                                      (.01)         (.01)




Notes:    Standard errors are in parentheses.
          The sample size for calculations is 62 pairs or 124
            establishments.
          Regressions include controls for region and the dif-
            ferences in wages one yoar before the election.
                                  TABLE 3:
                   Estimates of the Impact of Organizing
                      Activity on Personnel Practices
 Personnel                                                 Logit Coeff.
 practices       pence      of Pract                        in
                                                            for impact
 & organ—         1 year       1 year         in  practice of organiz—
 izing            before        after     practice vs.     ing activity
 activity        election      election    (2-1)   in pair  on practice
                     (1)           (2)          (3)        (4)          (5)
CR1EVANCE
PRCCE'Y
Contract
          5        ______
                     .38                        .48        .35          3.09
                                                                        (.58)
No C'ntract          .-,6          .64           :8    —.06                 .52
                                                                        (.90,
 oson P1cc.          .43            nO           17                     1    Cl
                                                                            .51)
No ,tlio             .43                        .o8
N2:1N ."NI,P—
ITY 4? ill >tN
Contract             .43                        .28        .23          174
                                                                        (.62)
No Cantract          .39           .11          .32        .18          1.64
                                                                        (.71)
Loso.    Eec.         53            63                     .08           .38
                                                                        (.60)
No Ecioc             .31           .36          .05

WRI4?t-N 4?S4?N
OF Pt-.      -




Ccnt. a-st                          66          .26        .24               32
                                                                        '.52)
No   Cortrac'                       75           4?    —.13             —.75
                                                                       (1. 10)
Loses Elec                          76           09    —   .0_s             .05
                                                                        (    Rn%
                                                                             —'"i
NC, Crive                          .51          .08
PRCFIT SHARING                                                    ______
Contract             .36           .24      —    4?    —.21            —1.60
                                                                       (1,80)
No Contract          .57           .08           11         06          —.92
                                                                       (1. IC)
Loses    Elec.       .55           .63           08        .02          —.66
                                                                        (.53)
No Drive             .43            51          .08         —                —

Notes?       Standa'4 t-crcc-s ace in parentsescs, Ingis-ir e'c4tions
             inorcded,
             Regressions incrade controls for region, vegas one year
               before the election, dummies for year of electon,
               and atdther wo:ktrs are :rod'ooton wor$rs or not
             Sample Sise = 364,
                                     TABLE   4:
                 Estimates of the Impact of Union Activity
                    on Establishment Employment Change


                  Mean   Lin in Employ-
                  ment: date of     elec-
                                                    Regression coefficients
                                                   for in    in employment:
                 tion to date of survey           date of election to current

Category (#
of estab—                     (1)                               (2)


Contract                     —.00                           —
                                                                .09
N   = 48                                                    (.04)

No Contract                  —.08                           —.13
N = 15                                                      (.04)

Loses Election                .01                           —.06
N   =   119                                                     .03

No   Drive                    .07
N    = 118


Notes:        Standard errors in parentheses.
              Regressions include controls for region (Boston or KC.)
              wage levels on year before the election, occupation, and
              year in which the election was held.
                                        29



                                     TABLE   5:
                        Maximum Likelihood Estimates
                       of Organizing Category Outcomes


                       Having an Organ-            Losing to    Signing a
                             Drive                   Union       Contract
                              (1)                     (2)           (3)

                           Logistic                 Hazard        Hazard
Variable                  Coefficient             Coefficient   CoeffIcient


Prior    Grievance           —.27                    —.67           .63
                             (.37)                   (.37)        (2.43;


PrIor Sentoritl               .82                     .22          —.71
                             (.34)                   .361          (.87)


Prior All    Heath            .54                     .50         —1.23
                             (.33)                   (.41)        (3.25)


Wage i year pri—             —.11                     .19          -1,14
or to election               '.16)                   (.19j         (1.73)

Notes.     Star dart   errL are     i   parenthesas.
           All regreosiuns Include controls for written posting or
             prcrotor oppcrturltLes,  gension plan, relocationoras-
             sIstance, severance pay. funeral leave,wcryers
                                                     military
             jury duty, for region, and fur whether         were
             prodct1On or not
