NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE UNWAVERING SES ACHIEVEMENT GAP:
TRENDS IN U.S. STUDENT PERFORMANCE
Eric A. Hanushek
Paul E. Peterson
Laura M. Talpey
Ludger Woessmann
Working Paper 25648
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25648

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2019

Hanushek and Woessmann were supported by a grant from the Smith Richardson Foundation.
Peterson was supported by grants from the Charles Koch Foundation and the Lovett and Ruth
Peters Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Eric A. Hanushek, Paul E. Peterson, Laura M. Talpey, and Ludger Woessmann. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Unwavering SES Achievement Gap: Trends in U.S. Student Performance
Eric A. Hanushek, Paul E. Peterson, Laura M. Talpey, and Ludger Woessmann
NBER Working Paper No. 25648
March 2019
JEL No. H4,I2,J24
ABSTRACT
Concerns about the breadth of the U.S. income distribution and limited intergenerational mobility
have led to a focus on educational achievement gaps by socio-economic status (SES). Using
intertemporally linked assessments from NAEP, TIMSS, and PISA, we trace the achievement of
U.S. student cohorts born between 1954 and 2001. Achievement gaps between the top and bottom
deciles and the top and bottom quartiles of the SES distribution have been large and remarkably
constant for a near half century. These unwavering gaps have not been offset by overall
improvements in achievement levels, which have risen at age 14 but remained unchanged at age
17 for the most recent quarter century. The long-term failure of major educational policies to alter
SES gaps suggests a need to reconsider standard approaches to mitigating disparities.

Eric A. Hanushek
Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
hanushek@stanford.edu

Laura M. Talpey
Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
United States
lmtalpey@stanford.edu

Paul E. Peterson
Harvard University
Program on Education Policy and Governance
Harvard Kennedy School
Cambridge, MA 02482
USA
ppeterso@gov.harvard.edu

Ludger Woessmann
University of Munich
ifo Institute and CESifo
Poschingerstr. 5
81679 Munich, Germany
woessmann@ifo.de

The increasing disparity in household income and wealth within the United States over the past half
century (Krueger (2003); Autor (2014); Saez and Zucman (2016); Alvaredo et al. (2017)) has amplified
concerns about the dependency of achievement on a student’s socio-economic status (SES). Disparate
student outcomes may spell limited intergenerational mobility in the 21st Century. Given the topic’s
importance, surprisingly little research attention has been given to trends in SES-achievement gaps over
the past half century. We draw upon data from four intertemporally linked assessments of student
performance administered to representative samples of U.S. students over nearly five decades.
Contrary to recent perceptions, we find little change in the SES-achievement relationship across the past
fifty years. These gaps occur within the context of stagnant levels of achievement overall, as the steady
average gains in student performance registered by age 14 do not lead to gains at age 17 in the most
recent quarter century. Our results cast doubt on claims that achievement inequalities are on the rise,
but they also suggest a need to reconsider policies and practices pursued in order to ameliorate the SESachievement connection.
Influential studies have concluded that the broadening dispersion in household income is widening skill
gaps between students from advantaged and disadvantaged backgrounds. In Coming Apart, Charles
Murray (2012) argues that “the United States is stuck with a large and growing lower class that is able to
care for itself only sporadically and inconsistently…. [Meanwhile,], the new upper class has continued to
prosper as the dollar value of the talents they [sic] bring to the economy has continued to grow.”
Robert Putnam (2015) says in Our Kids that “rich Americans and poor Americans are living, learning, and
raising children in increasingly separate and unequal worlds.” Richard Rothstein (2004) writes: “Incomes
have become more unequally distributed in the United States in the last generation, and this inequality
contributes to the academic achievement gap.”
The analysts have good reason to express such concerns. The acquisition of cognitive skills early in life is
critical for the accumulation of human capital and the amelioration of economic and social inequalities
(Friedman (2003); Magnuson and Waldfogel (2008)). Indeed, the U.S. rewards cognitive skills more than
almost all other developed countries, which also implies that the U.S. heavily punishes the lack of skills
(Hanushek, Schwerdt, Wiederhold, and Woessmann (2015, 2017)). Accordingly, policy makers have long
searched for tools that will help schools break the linkage between students’ learning and their SES
background (Ladd (1996); Carneiro and Heckman (2003); Krueger (2003); Magnuson and Waldfogel
(2008)). If the tools applied thus far have been unable to lessen the relationship between SES and
achievement, policy makers need to consider alternatives.
The public is accustomed to regular reports of changes in student achievement after release of data
from major assessments. However, reporters and analysts typically mention only the most recent
changes in achievement levels and gaps (see, for example, Zernicke (2016); Camera (2018)). That focus
on the immediate past ignores most of the near fifty-years’ worth of data on U.S. student performance
in math and reading that has accumulated.
To broaden the perspective, we make use of data from four well-documented and intertemporally
linked surveys of achievement in math, reading, and science administered to representative samples of
cohorts of U.S. adolescent students who were born between 1954 and 2001. The surveys also provide
information on students’ SES background.
We find that SES-achievement gaps in the 1950s birth cohorts are very large—hovering around one
standard deviation (s.d.) between those in the top and bottom deciles of the SES distribution (90-10 gap)
1

and around 0.8 s.d. for the top and bottom quartiles (75-25 gap). Importantly, these gaps have not
increased over time. Instead, they have remained essentially unchanged. That is, students from the
most disadvantaged backgrounds have seen trends in achievement similar to those from the most
advantaged backgrounds. In terms of learning, students at the 10th SES percentile remain some three to
four years behind those in the 90th percentile.
Concern about these gaps would be lessened if all achievement were rising, i.e., if a rising tide was lifting
all boats. Test scores for young adolescents (age 13-15) improved consistently over the past fifty years
with gains in mean student performance of close to 0.5 s.d. for young adolescents, or roughly 0.1 s.d.
per decade. But test scores for older adolescents (age 17) have not kept up. Older adolescents
experienced gains in the first half of the period (by 0.1 s.d., or 0.04 s.d. per decade), but in the past
twenty-five years their scores have plateaued, suggesting that achievement improvements made by
young adolescents are not lasting through their high school years. In other words, the tide does not
reach students at the time when they move into college and careers.
This paper has six sections. The first reviews the literature on achievement gaps. The second describes
our data, and the third provides our methodological approach. The fourth displays trends in student
achievement gaps and levels over the past half century. The fifth considers changes in family and school
factors that may have affected the trends. The final section concludes.

1. Relevant Research Literature
Although family background effects on student achievement are well-documented, few studies track
changes in the impacts of demographic variables on student performance over time. This lack of
longitudinal analysis is partly a function of persistent measurement issues.

1.1 The SES-Achievement Connection
The strong relationship between SES and achievement has long been known (Neff (1938)). Coleman et
al. (1966), in their seminal study of Equality of Educational Opportunity, found parental education,
income, and race to be strongly associated with student achievement, while they concluded school
factors to be of much less significance. In a secondary analysis of these data, Smith (1972) also found
family background to be the most important determinant of achievement. Subsequent research has
confirmed these early findings (Burtless (1996); Mayer (1997); Jencks and Phillips (1998); Magnuson and
Waldfogel (2008); Duncan and Murnane (2011); Duncan, Morris, and Rodrigues (2011); Dahl and
Lochner (2012); Egalite (2016)).
As discussed elsewhere, many factors connect SES and achievement (Cheng and Peterson (2018)). A few
examples illustrate—but certainly do not exhaust—the many possible mechanisms at work. Children
exposed to lower SES environments are at greater risk of traumatic stress and other medical problems
that can affect brain development (Nelson and Sheridan (2011)). College educated mothers speak more
frequently with their infants, use a larger vocabulary when communicating with their toddlers (Hart and
Risley (1995, 2003)), and are more likely to use parenting practices that respect the autonomy of a
growing child (Hoff (2003); Guryan, Hurst, and Kearney (2008)). College-educated and higher-income
families have access to more enriched schooling environments (Altonji and Mansfield (2011)) and are
less likely to live in extremely impoverished communities burdened with high violent crime rates

2

(Burdick-Will et al. (2011)). All these and other childhood or adolescent experiences contribute to
profound SES disparities in academic achievement (Kao and Tienda (1998); Perna (2006); Goyette
(2008); Jacob and Linkow (2011)).
In empirical analyses, chosen measures of SES are ordinarily based upon data availability rather than
conceptual justification. In large-scale assessments of student achievement, data collection procedures
usually ignore family-related factors shown to be of importance for student achievement such as parentchild interactions, child upbringing approaches, or general physical and nutritional conditions (see, for
example, Gould, Simhon, and Weinberg (2019)). Rather, the general approach is to look for more
readily available indicators of persistent cultural and economic differences across families as proxies for
the educational input of families. The standard list includes parental education, occupation, earned
income, and various items in the home. Age of mother at child’s birth, family structure, and a child’s
number of siblings are also used as indicators of family educational inputs. These measures tend to be
highly correlated, making their separate impacts on learning, and their relative importance, difficult to
disentangle.
While family income might be thought of as a good summary measure of SES, obtaining data on this
from large-scale surveys is problematic. Survey data linked to assessments often come from the
students themselves, and students generally have imperfect knowledge of their parents’ earned income.
For that reason, large-scale assessments that gather information directly from students seek to ascertain
economic well-being by asking questions about consumption items, such as the number of durable and
educational items present in the home. As compared to household earned income, students are
intuitively better informed about whether a durable good (e.g., a dishwasher, computer, or a separate
bedroom for themselves) is available in their home (Kayser and Summers (1973); Astone and
McLanahan (1991), 313). 1 An analysis by Fetters, Stowe, and Owings (1984) shows that studentreported indicators of parental education tend to be reliable but determined that “family income … was
a matter of speculation for many students and thus inaccurately reported” (Kaufman and Rasinski
(1991), 2). Consumption indicators may also be useful for estimating the resources of low-income
families who supplement earnings with transfer payments, such as food stamps, medical services,
housing assistance, and welfare benefits (Slesnick (1993)).
In sum, a child’s SES background has been estimated by a variety of measures. The items used depend
on alternatives available in the data, but when gathering data directly from students, stable measures
such as education and durable goods in the home are generally preferred to annual earnings.

1.2 Changes in the SES-Achievement Connection
A number of scholars have looked at achievement gaps over time. Most studies have traced changes in
the size of the black-white test-score gap, but two have explored the evolution of achievement gaps by
non-racial SES indicators.

Kayser and Summers (1973) write in their abstract: “In this study, the reliability and validity of student
reports of parental SES characteristics was investigated. Using panel data for student reports and independent
surveys of both mothers and fathers, it was found that student reports were relatively stable over time and were
more reliably measured for parental education than for either father’s income or occupation. The validities of the
reports were, for all but income reports, moderate. The validity of income reports was very low.”
1

3

Trends in the black-white gap. Changes in the black-white test-score gap in the United States have
been estimated by Grissmer, Kirby, Berends, and Williamson (1994), Grissmer, Flanagan, and Williamson
(1998), and Magnuson and Waldfogel (2008). All three rely upon the Long-Term Trend (LTT) version of
the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) to trace changes in the gap for students at ages
9, 13, and 17 between 1971 and the time their studies were completed. All three studies identify a
substantial closing of the racial test-score gap for cohorts born between 1954 and 1972. Had the early
gains registered by 17-year-olds continued at the same pace in subsequent decades, the black-white
test gap would have disappeared for children born in the twenty-first century. But as Magnuson and
Waldfogel (2008) put it, “steady gains” occurring among those born just after mid-century “stalled”
among cohorts born toward the end of the century, leading to revised projections that it could take
more than a century to close the racial gap if progress continues at its more recent pace (Hanushek
(2016b)). Reardon (2011) confirms these conclusions.
Since the SES backgrounds of black and white students differ markedly (Magnuson and Waldfogel
(2008)), changes in the black-white test-score gap may provide a partial window on trends in the SESachievement gap. But the correlation between race and SES is declining (Wilson (1987, 2011, 2012)),
and since black students constitute only around 16 percent of the school-age population (Rivkin (2016)),
this gap cannot provide a complete picture of the SES-achievement gap. It is entirely possible that the
mean performance of black and white students could be converging even while SES disparities remain
unchanged or increase in magnitude.
Trends in the SES-achievement connection. We are aware of only two studies that provide information
on trends in the SES achievement gap. 2 The first of these, by Hedges and Nowell (1998), simply reports
observed changes in an Appendix (Table 5B-3, 178). The authors regress student performance on a
number of background characteristics, as reported by six nationally representative surveys administered
to students between 1965 and 1992. Among the variables included in the regression, the coefficient for
parental education is the largest, and it changes little over time. The correlation between achievement
and family income in the six surveys is more modest and declines over time.
In a second investigation, Reardon (2011) draws upon data from 12 surveys to estimate gaps in math
and reading performances of students at the 90th and the 10th percentile of the household income
distribution. In contrast to Hedges and Nowell’s results, he finds that the “income achievement gaps
among children born in 2001 are roughly 75 percent larger than the estimated gaps among children
born in the early 1940s” (p. 95). After 1974, those at the income median were falling further behind
those at the 90th percentile. Looking deeper, Reardon (2011) concludes: “The 90/50 gap appears to
have grown faster than the 50/10 gap during the 1970s and 1980s” (p. 103). The Reardon study and its
conclusions have been widely quoted both by academics and in the general media (e.g., Edsell (2012);
Taverise (2012); Weissmann (2012); Maxie (2012); Duncan and Murnane (2014); Putnam (2015);
Jackson, Johnson, and Persico (2016)), and the idea that income-achievement gaps have dramatically
increased over the past half century may be said to be the contemporary conventional wisdom.

In a somewhat related analysis, Bertrand and Kamenica (2018) consider whether cultural differences
defined by income, education, gender, race, and political ideology have widened over time, and they find little
evidence of growing cultural divides.
2

4

Differences between the findings reported in the two studies may be due to the focus of the first study
on overall correlations between SES and mean achievement, while the latter study concentrates on
disparities between the extremes of the income distribution. Differences could also reflect the fact that
Reardon’s analysis makes use of twice as many surveys as the earlier study, including data on more
recent cohorts.
We, however, explore a third possibility—the inherent methodological limitations common to both
studies. They each estimate trends from data collected by different surveys that are not intertemporally
linked but instead are administered to students of varying ages using disparate instruments to estimate
achievement levels and SES characteristics. As Eric Nielsen (2015) says, when “data sources have
income and achievement measures that do not map easily across surveys, they add an additional layer
of complexity and uncertainty to the analysis.” It is this uncertainty that we seek to mitigate by relying
upon intertemporally linked surveys that allow for consistent measures of both student achievement
and SES.

2. Sources of Data
Four surveys use consistent data collection procedures to trace the achievement of representative
samples of U.S. adolescents over time. Their tests are designed to be comparable over time by
employing psychometric linkage based on using test items that are repeated across test waves. All of
them administer low-stakes tests: No consequences to any person or entity are attached to student
performances, and results are not identified by name for any school, school district, teacher, or student.
All four surveys collect information about the cultural and economic resources of the students’ families
using student reports of parents’ education and of a wide variety of durable material and educational
possessions in the home. In addition, parental occupation is available in one survey, and student
eligibility for free and reduced lunch is available from administrative records in two of the surveys.
Appendix A provides more complete descriptions of the four surveys summarized here.

National Assessment of Educational Progress – Long-Term Trend (LTT-NAEP)
LTT-NAEP tracks performances of adolescent students in math and reading at ages 13 and 17 beginning
with the birth cohort born in 1954 who became 17 years of age in 1971. 3 As indicated by its name, this
version of the NAEP, often called the “nation’s report card,” has been developed with the explicit
intention of providing reliable measures of student performance over test waves. It is the only source of
information for student cohorts born between 1954 and 1976. The U.S. Department of Education
suspended administration of the LTT-NAEP in 2014. In a typical year, approximately 17,000 students
participate in the administration of the LTT-NAEP.

LTT-NAEP also tests 9-year-olds, but we do not include these data in our analyses in order to maintain a
high level of comparability over time as well as to focus on the academic preparation of students as they approach
the stage where they need to be career or college ready. For a description of NAEP, see National Center for
Education Statistics (2013). In math, the first test is 1973. While we have mean achievement in that year that can
be used to analyze trends in achievement levels, we do not have access to the individual student data – making it
impossible to calculate the SES gaps for 1973. Thus, the achievement gap analysis is based upon two fewer
observations than the level analysis.
3

5

Main National Assessment of Educational Progress (Main-NAEP)
Main-NAEP administers tests of math and reading aligned to the curriculum in grade 8. 4 Begun in 1992
with new administrations of the survey every two to four years, it is designed to provide results for
representative samples of students in the United States as a whole and for each participating state. 5
Main-NAEP maintains a reputation for reliability and validity similar to LTT-NAEP, and it was thought to
track trends over time accurately enough that the LTT-NAEP no longer needed to be administered until
2024. For each administration of the test, the Main-NAEP sample is over 150,000 observations; the large
sample is necessary in order to have representative samples for each state.

Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA)
PISA, administered by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), began in
2000. It was originally designed to provide comparisons among OECD countries, but it has since been
expanded to many other jurisdictions. PISA administers assessments in math, reading, and science to
representative samples of 15-year-old students every three years. PISA assessments are designed to
measure practical applications of knowledge. The United States sample includes over 5,000 students for
each administration of the test. The U.S. has participated in every wave of the test, though results are
not available for reading for the 1991 birth cohort.

Trends in International Mathematics and Science Survey (TIMSS)
TIMSS, administered by the International Association for the Evaluation of Educational Achievement
(IEA), is the current version of an international survey that originated as an exploratory mathematics
study conducted in the 1960s in 12 countries. 6 The tests are designed to be curriculum-based and are
developed by an IEA-directed international committee. Early IEA tests were not linked over time, but
beginning with the cohort born in 1981 (tested in 1995) the TIMSS tests have been designed to generate
scores that are comparable over time. We use the TIMSS 8th grade math and science tests beginning
with this cohort. The U. S. sample includes approximately 10,000 observations for each administration of
the test.
The test years for each of the separate assessments are found in Appendix Table A.1.

3. Methodological Approach
To estimate SES-achievement trends, we aggregate achievement and family background data from the
four intertemporally linked surveys and construct an SES index similar to the one used by PISA.

Main-NAEP also tests students in grade 4 and periodically covers a wide variety of other subject areas,
none of which are used here. Main-NAEP science is excluded because 8th grade tests were only administered in
2000 and 2005.
4

Initially 41 states voluntarily participated in the state-representative testing, but the national test results
used here are always representative of the U.S. student population. After the introduction of the No Child Left
Behind Act of 2001, all states were required to participate in the state-representative tests.
5

6

For the history of international testing, see Hanushek and Woessmann (2011).

6

3.1 Aggregating Data Sets
We compile an aggregate distribution of achievement from student-level microdata available for each
subject, testing age, and birth cohort for a fifty-year period. With the exception of 17-year-olds in the
LTT-NAEP data, all tests are administered to students between the ages of 13 and 15. The first test was
administered by LTT-NAEP in reading to a cohort of students born in 1954; the last test was
administered to students born in 2001. Across this near half-century span, achievement data are
available for 2,737,583 students from 46 tests in math, 40 in reading, and 12 in science. Table 1 gives for
each survey the number of assessments, the subject matter, the age or grade level at which students are
tested, the birth cohorts that are surveyed, and the number of observations. Our main sample contains
98 separate test-subject-age/grade-year observations.
The Main-NAEP and TIMSS tests are grade based, while the LTT-NAEP and PISA tests are administered to
younger students at slightly different ages. For expositional simplicity, we convert grades to age groups
by the modal attendance patterns and refer to all younger students as age 14, the modal age.
To equate results across tests, we calculate achievement means and achievement gaps between groups
in s.d. for each subject, testing age, and birth-year cohort. We estimate trends in mean performance
over time by calculating the distance (in s.d.) of the mean of the distribution for each test, subject, and
cohort observation from the mean score in 2000 (or the closest test year), which is normalized to zero in
this base year. 7

3.2 Constructing the SES Index
We concentrate on two SES-achievement disparities: 1) the difference in achievement between the
highest and lowest deciles of the SES distribution (90-10 gap) and 2) the difference between the highest
and lowest quartiles (75-25 gap). To do so requires a continuous measure of SES that depicts the full
distribution of the population, rather than dividing it into a limited number of categories such as level of
degree attainment of parents. Given the inaccuracy of student reports of parental income (and the
ensuing lack of such data in large-scale assessments), we construct an index of SES based on studentreported indicators of parental education and home possessions. But we also must take into account
changes in the informational content of the indicators over time.
We construct an SES index similar to the one used by PISA (OECD (2017a)), which draws the first
principal component from a factor analysis of student-provided data on parental education, parental
occupation, and home possessions. We follow PISA by extracting a principal component separately for
each test administration, because we aim to observe the percentile distribution of SES in each given year
and because the measured home possessions vary over time as does their utility for characterizing SES
differences (for details, see Appendix B). We depart from PISA by excluding occupational prestige from
our SES index because data on parental occupations are not available from NAEP or TIMSS surveys.
Exclusion of the occupational prestige indicator affects the SES index only slightly, because that variable,
which estimates occupational prestige by the average education and income of individuals in each
occupation, is largely redundant after inclusion of the education and possession variables. The SES index

7

The base year for all test-subject series is either 1998, 1999, or 2000 with the modal date being 2000.

7

used here is highly correlated with the PISA index, and the two indices reveal essentially the same trend
line in the SES-achievement connection over the period tracked by PISA (Appendix Figure B.2).
Estimating SES by a family’s permanent income is conceptually an alternative, but that is not possible
from data available in these assessments. Nor is it clear that this is a superior measure of educational
inputs of the family. Nonetheless, to judge how our SES indicator correlates with permanent family
income, we estimate the correlation between our SES indicator for 1988 and earnings indicators
obtained from two waves of a panel survey administered as part of the 1998 Education Longitudinal
Study (ELS). Using the average of the two waves as a measure of permanent income, the correlation
between individual-level permanent income and our SES indicator is 0.66 (for details, see Appendix B).

3.3 Estimating Trends in Achievement Gaps and Levels
The separate assessments, while internally consistent over time, vary from each other in a variety of
details, including relationship to the curriculum, testing philosophy, and sampling frames. We assume
that each test is a valid measure of knowledge in each domain even though they vary in content.
Differences among tests may also be a function of normal sampling error. To identify the aggregate
trend in gaps and levels across birth cohorts, the estimation combines results from all assessments but
include indicators for subject, age group, and administrative entity.
t
For the trends in performance levels, we calculate the mean performance, Oisa
, by subject s, testing age

a, and birth cohort t for each survey i. We extract the performance trend with a quadratic function of
birth year:
t
Oisa
= α 0 + α1t + α 2t 2 + δ i + γ s + λa + ε isat

(1)

δ i , γ s , and λa are fixed effects for assessment type, subject, and age; t is birth year; and ε is a
random error. The α ′s describe the trend in achievement.

where

We use the same analytic approach to estimate trends in disparities in student performance for two
groups, j and k, where the gap at any time t is ∆ tjk . Specifically, we estimate:
t
t
∆ tjk = O isaj
− O isak
= β 0 + β1t + β 2t 2 + δ i + γ s + λa + µisat

(2)

In our main analysis, we estimate these disparity trends for two specific types of gaps:
1. The unconditional gaps between students at different points on the achievement distribution:
We show changes in the inter-quartile range as well as the difference between those performing
at the 90th and 10th percentiles of the achievement distribution.
2. Disparities by SES background: We consider the achievement gap between those in the top and
bottom deciles of the SES index distribution and those in the top and bottom quartiles of the
distribution. 8 For expositional purposes, we refer to these as the 90-10 and 75-25 SES gaps.

Note that the gaps for the SES distributions are calculated as the average score for those above the 90th
SES percentile and the average score for those below the 10th percentile (and similarly for quartiles). While we can
8

8

We supplement these main analyses with two additional analyses:
3. As a robustness check, we estimate gaps in performances between those eligible and not
eligible for free and reduced-price lunch.
Students who come from households at or below 130% of the poverty line are eligible for free lunch
(who we refer to as extremely poor), while those from households between 130% and 185% of the
poverty line are eligible for participation in the reduced-price lunch program (who we refer to as poor).
Information on student achievement by eligibility for these federal programs is available for cohorts
born as early as 1982. The variable is generated administratively from student records. We compare
those eligible for subsidized lunch to those not eligible.
The variable of free or reduced-price lunch eligibility has important limitations. First, it is dichotomous,
dividing the distribution at a point near its mean, so it does not allow for estimation near the extremes
of the continuum. Second, the share of the population who participate in the free lunch program
increases over time for a combination of reasons that include administrative changes in the
programmatic rules that allowed new eligibility certification and allowed entire schools to participate in
the program. For example, comparing academic year 1999 and 2015, the percentage of children below
200 percent of poverty was virtually identical (39 percent), but the percentage in the free and reduced
price lunch program increased from 37% to 52% (Chingos (2016); Greenberg (2018)). For these reasons,
we regard this variable as only a crude SES indicator that is best used as a robustness check.
4. To allow for comparisons between SES-achievement and race-achievement gaps, we also
estimate the black-white test-score gap with NAEP data.
In terms of racial differences, both the LTT-NAEP and Main-NAEP use school-district administrative data
to classify students by their racial and ethnic background. PISA does not collect race information in a
comparable form, and TIMSS, which collects information on race from student questionnaires, does so
for only a subset of its survey administrations. We do not track disparities for other ethnic groups.
Continuous immigration has substantially altered the composition of Asian and Hispanic populations
over the past 50 years, complicating comparisons of test performance for these groups over time.
However, we do estimate the SES-achievement gap separately for white students.

4. Trends in Achievement Gaps
Our results indicate that achievement gaps have been wide and persistent for the last half century. We
begin with the aggregate trend in the SES-achievement gap for all students in all subjects and then
explore heterogeneities by subject, ethnic group, and an alternative measure of income. The persistent
gaps observed might be less disconcerting if achievement levels were rising for everybody, making the
economic future better across the SES spectrum. But while we find steady achievement gains across

calculate the precise 90th and 10th percentile values for the distribution of our SES index, this does not correspond
to a specific individual or specific test score. Thus, we average test scores across all students in the relevant tails of
the SES distribution. For the unconditional gaps, the 90th and 10th percentiles are specific scores in the
achievement distribution, and we use these values to calculate gaps and not the average performance in the tails.

9

cohorts for younger students, these gains do not carry forward to age 17, the time when students are
leaving the secondary schooling system.

4.1 Unconditional Achievement Disparities
We begin by estimating changes in the overall distribution of achievement. At the top of Figure 1, we
plot the unconditional gaps measured in initial standard deviations for the 90-10 and the 75-25 gaps
over the past half century. The nonlinear trend estimates are based on Equation (2) where trends are
extracted by taking a quadratic function of the birth year. The gap between those at the 90th and 10th
percentile of the achievement distribution among those born in 1954 is close to 2.4 s.d. 9 Over the next
fifty years, this gap (measured in units of the initial s.d.’s) closes slightly to 2.16 s.d., indicating some
shrinkage in the overall variance of achievement.
The unconditional 75-25 gap, or inter-quartile range, in the achievement distribution is, by definition,
smaller than the 90-10 gap. For students born in 1954 it is 1.3 s.d. Over the next fifty years, the interquartile range declines modestly by 0.15 s.d. In sum, the overall distribution of achievement, while
narrowing a little, has shown only limited change. Students at the bottom of the achievement
distribution have seen the same (or slightly more favorable) change in achievement as those at the top.
Looking at results by subject, in math both the 90-10 gap and the 75-25 gap close somewhat over the
first half of the observation period but remain mostly flat at the end of the period (not shown). Gaps in
reading are even more constant, with a very slight tendency to increase initially and a slightly smaller
tendency to fall over the second half of the observation period (not shown). We also find no difference
by age group (not shown).

4.2 Achievement Disparities by SES
The pattern of the trends in SES-achievement gaps in Figure 1 is startling: The connection between SES
and achievement hardly wavers over this half century. In the 1954 birth cohort, the achievement gap
between the average of those in the top and bottom deciles of the SES distribution stood at slightly less
than 1.2 s.d. 10 For those born in 2001, the gap is slightly less—about 1.05 s.d. That is, the most
disadvantaged students in terms of SES background have seen essentially the same change in
achievement as the most advantaged students.
The gap between students in the top and bottom quartiles of the SES distribution was about 0.9 s.d. for
the 1954 birth cohort. As the trend line in Figure 1 indicates, this gap declines to barely below 0.8 s.d.
for the cohort born in 2001.
Trends are quite similar for math and reading separately. The gap in math achievement, particularly for
the 90-10 comparison, shows a little movement over the period—narrowing in the early years but
returning to a position below the initial level in recent decades (Figure 2a). The 75-25 math gap narrows
slightly over time. In reading, the pattern appears essentially flat for the entire period (Figure 2b).

If measured performances were normally distributed, the 90-10 gap would be 2.56 s.d., but the test
score distribution is obviously truncated at the extremes.
9

As noted above, the unconditional gaps and SES gaps are calculated differently, with the 90-10 SES gaps
indicating differences between the average students in the top and bottom ten percent of the SES distribution.
10

10

Figures in Appendix C display plots of unconditional gaps and SES gaps for each of the individual
assessments. Generally speaking, the trend lines for gaps within each assessment resemble those for
the aggregate trend lines reported above. The plots for the LTT-NAEP 13-year-old and 17-year-old
scores resemble one another, and both show very little fluctuation over time (Appendix Figure C.1). The
Main-NAEP math assessments (Appendix Figure C.2A) and the TIMSS assessments (Appendix Figure C.3)
show slight increases in the 90-10 SES gaps but not in the 75-25 SES gaps. On the other side, the PISA
math, reading, and science assessments (Appendix Figure C.4) all show some narrowing of the SES gaps
for the 1985 birth cohorts and later. Overall, the four underlying assessments produce patterns of the
SES gaps that are all similar—and yield the unwavering trends of Figure 1. 11
Our findings confirm Reardon’s (2011) identification of large gaps in academic performance between
students at the extremes of the SES distribution, 12 but we are unable to replicate his finding that
achievement differentials have risen by as much as 75 percent over the past fifty years. His results may
be a function of a reliance upon cross-sectional studies that use disparate methods for collecting both
income and achievement information. Whatever the reason, the size and trends estimated there differ
markedly from the trend in SES-achievement gaps estimated from intertemporally linked surveys
administered consistently over time.
In sum, any increase in the disparities in wealth, earnings, and income that may have occurred over the
past half century do not translate into an increased connection between students’ family backgrounds
and their achievement levels in adolescence. Instead, all the trend lines in SES-achievement disparities
are basically unchanged with no indication of any long-term upward trajectory.

4.3 Additional Analyses of Achievement Disparities
These findings are confirmed by estimations based on student eligibility for free and reduced-price
lunch, on racial groups, and on data adjusted for changes in the ethnic composition of the population.
Eligibility for free and reduced-price lunch program. As a robustness check, we estimate the gap
between students who are eligible and those who are not eligible for participation in the federal free
lunch program at school. 13 As can be seen in Figure 3, the gap between the extremely poor students
and other students in the 1982 birth cohort is a sizeable 0.71 s.d. When the extremely poor are
combined with the poor, the gap for this cohort is nearly as large – still 0.64 s.d. Over the next twenty
years, the gap between the extremely poor and students from families above the eligibility line narrows

Note that LTT-NAEP for 13-year-olds, Main-NAEP, and TIMSS show some increase in the 90-10 SES gap
since the mid-1970s, while PISA shows steady declines since the 1985 birth cohort (the first observed). As a
sensitivity analysis, we drop the PISA tests from the trend estimation. As shown in Appendix Figure D.1, this
produces somewhat more bow in the trend line of the 90-10 SES gap (but not the 75-25 SES gap). For the
equivalent of Figure 1 without PISA, the 90-10 gap starts at 1.25 s.d., falls to 0.95 s.d. for the 1980 birth cohort, and
rises back to 1.16 s.d. for the 2001 birth cohort. We do not see a reason, however, why the PISA data should be
less valid than the other data.
11

From the figures in Reardon (2011), we estimate an average 90-10 income gap of close to one s.d.,
virtually the same as the average 1.03 s.d. gap that we identify for the 90-10 SES disparity.
12

The analysis of free and reduced-price lunch eligibility relates solely to assessments from Main-NAEP,
the only survey to include such information.
13

11

by 0.06 s.d. and the gap between ineligible students and all those eligible for participation in the
program narrows by 0.01 s.d.
Just like the results based on the SES index, this measure of the earnings-achievement gap reveals only
miniscule change over the course of two decades. These results are entirely consistent with the trends
for both the 75-25 and the 90-10 SES-achievement gaps reported above.
Achievement by racial group. To facilitate a comparison of trends in the SES-achievement and raceachievement gaps, we also report the black-white test-score gap in Figure 3. Our results confirm – and
update to a more recent period – what other scholars have shown. The black-white gap declines from
about 1.3 s.d. for the 1954 cohort to about 0.8 s.d. for those born thirty years later – a closing of greater
than 0.1 s.d. per decade. But the gains do not continue to accumulate after that point. This stalled
progress pointed out by Magnuson and Waldfogel (2008) is consistent with the evidence in Reardon
(2011) that shows a decline of about 0.5 standard deviations in the black-white test-score gap in reading
for cohorts born between 1950 and 1980 and a slower subsequent rate of change.
Clearly, efforts to close the racial achievement gap in the United States have been more successful than
endeavors to close the SES-achievement divide, at least until about 20 years ago. For the past two
decades of student cohorts, both the race-achievement gap and the SES-achievement gap have
remained essentially flat.
Ethnic composition. Some have hypothesized that the lack of success in diminishing the size of the SES
gap is due to changes in the racial and ethnic composition of the school population, as the ethnic makeup of the U.S. population has changed dramatically over the past half century. In 1980, the population
age 5-17 was 74.6 percent white, 14.5 percent black, 8.5 percent Hispanic, and 2.5 percent other. In
2011, the corresponding figures were 54.2 percent white, 14.0 percent black, 22.8 percent Hispanic, and
8.9 percent other. 14
To see whether trends in achievement gaps are driven by shifts in ethnic composition, we estimate the
SES-achievement gap just for white students (Figure 4). As expected, the unconditional 90-10 and 75-25
gaps are slightly smaller than in the full population. The gaps have declined slightly over the first half of
the observation period and flattened out since.
Turning to the SES divide, the substantively meaningful 90-10 SES-achievement gap for the white cohort
born in 1954 was 0.97 s.d. By the middle of the period, the divide had declined by about 0.3 s.d., but it
then rose by a commensurate amount so that 90-10 SES gap for the 2001 white birth cohort is just 0.1
s.d. smaller than the gap for the 1954 cohort.
The 75-25 SES-achievement gap among whites stood at about 0.8 s.d. for the 1954 birth cohort. It eased
by about 0.25 s.d. toward the middle of the period only to return to just under its original level by the
end. In other words, the minor fluctuations for whites parallel the minimal ones observed for all
students (Figure 1), supporting the conclusion that changes in the ethnic composition of student cohorts
do not account for the unwavering SES-achievement gap.

The large jump in the “other” category includes a substantial jump in the Asian population (to 4.4
percent) and the addition of 4.6 percent identified as two or more races—a category that was not reported in
1980 (U.S. Department of Education (2013), Table 20).
14

12

4.4 Achievement Levels
The disappointing lack of improvement in the distributional patterns might be less of a concern if they
were offset by improvements in the overall level of achievement. Using the time series data on student
outcomes, we can directly evaluate whether there are any gains in student achievement and,
importantly, whether they persist until the completion of secondary schooling.
Figure 5 shows a significant upward trend in the overall mean achievement level of adolescent students
of approximately 0.3 s.d. over the course of the last half century, or approximately 0.06 s.d. per decade.
The nonlinear trend estimates based on Equation (1) are again extracted by taking a quadratic function
of the birth year. Importantly, the gains are concentrated on the performances of adolescents who are
age 14 or less, where an overall increase of about 0.46 s.d. is observed, approximately 0.09 s.d. per
decade. By contrast, gains among students at the age of 17 are only about 0.1 s.d., and no gains are
observed for older students after the 1970 birth cohort. The rising tide of student achievement does
not extend to students on the cusp of moving into careers and college.
The average improvement seen in test performance among those at age 14 (LTT-NAEP, Main-NAEP, and
TIMSS) are larger than those registered in the PISA tests, which are administered at age 15 (not
shown). 15 This may be due to differences in test design or it may suggest that the aggregate score fade
out begins in the early years of high school. 16
Nonetheless, it is natural to expect gains realized by ages 13 to 15 to remain intact or even grow by age
17. We return to this puzzle below, although we have no easy answer for this break in learning gains.
There are significant heterogeneities in the trends in achievement level by subject. Mean achievement
gains by cohorts are largely concentrated in mathematics. Younger adolescents register a math
improvement of 0.9 s.d., while the older ones show an overall shift upward of 0.2 s.d. (Figure 6a).
Reading gains are smaller. The trend among older adolescents shows no improvement, while the trend
among younger adolescents amounts to only 0.23 s.d. over the half century (Figure 6b). 17 These subject
differences are consistent with a general finding that schools and teachers appear to have a significantly
stronger impact on math than on reading, something generally attributed to lesser parental influence on
math learning (e.g., Hanushek and Rivkin (2010)).

The performance levels of 17-year-old students are not significantly affected by changes in ethnic
composition discussed earlier. To see this, it is possible to estimate the LTT-NAEP scores for 2012 if the population
had the same ethnic distribution as in 1980. In particular, we can weight the 2012 math and reading scores of
white, black, Hispanic, and other groups by the 1980 population distribution of these groups. The estimated 2012
math score for 17-year-olds is 309 versus the actual score of 306, or a difference of 0.08 s.d. over the entire period.
For reading, the estimated score with 1980 weights is 289 versus the actual score of 287, or a difference of 0.07
s.d. over the time period.
15

16

9 and 11.

Two-thirds of PISA students are in grade 10 with the remainder roughly evenly divided between grades

We do not analyze science separately because the number of science observations is limited and the
period is shorter than for the other two subjects.
17

13

Importantly, the trends in achievement gaps considered earlier are essentially the same for both the
younger and older students (not shown). In both cases, we detect very little temporal change in
achievement gaps.

4.5 Summary of Results
Performance disparities are both large and extraordinarily persistent. The SES-achievement gap within
the United States has remained essentially as large as in 1966 when James Coleman wrote his report on
Equality of Educational Opportunity and the United States launched a national “war on poverty” in
which compensatory education was the centerpiece. In terms of learning, students at the 90th
percentile of the SES distribution are three to four years ahead of those at the 10th percentile by 8th
grade. These SES-achievement gaps are amazingly large and unwavering.
Nor does this constancy reflect broad success where all SES groups have benefitted from improved
outcomes over time. Students in their early adolescent years show achievement gains over the past half
century. Students appear better prepared for entry into high school than they were five decades earlier.
The gain is about 0.46 s.d. or about 0.09 s.d. per decade. The achievement gains of young U.S.
adolescents are comparable to average gains in other countries that have tracked student progress over
time. Between 1995 and 2009, the PISA and TIMSS test score performances of elementary students and
young adolescents in 47 countries improved in math, reading and science by 0.12 s.d. per decade
(Hanushek, Peterson, and Woessmann (2012)), somewhat larger than the 0.08 s.d. gains per decade
over the near 50-year period reported above.
But these gains lead to a puzzle: Over the past quarter century, achievement gains apparent among
students at age 14 disappear by the age of 17. As students reach the point of entering college or the
labor market, advances in performance are no longer seen.

5. Discussion
Despite the paucity of trend studies, static consideration of achievement gaps and gains has long been a
topic for systematic research and policy discussion. A simple educational production function model
underlies much of the public and academic discourse, namely:

achievement
= family inputs + schools + other

(3)

Our aggregate trend data cannot of course identify the causal effect of each component of this
relationship, but it is possible to see if performance trends are consistent with either demographic
changes or policy shifts, or both. To generate hypotheses for future research, we therefore summarize
major changes in family inputs and school policies to see whether one or another (or both) might
plausibly account for the trends.
A substantial body of existing research on student achievement attempts to parse components of
schools ( S1 , S 2 , S3 , . . . ) that are causally related to student outcomes, and some, albeit fewer, pursue
estimates of the impacts of family components ( F1 , F2 , F3 , . . . . ). From these studies, one can at times
obtain credibly estimated relationships for individual factors under specific circumstances – generally

14

from micro-level studies of student achievement. However, there are few if any attempts to consider
the aggregate impacts of these demographic shifts and policy thrusts.

5.1 Assessing Trends in Achievement Levels
To open further inquiry into this topic, we discuss here what can be learned from the demographic
changes and policy innovations that have taken place over the past half century. Conceptually, we
difference Equation 1 between two time points ( t0 and t1 ) and write a linear version in terms of one
family or school input factor ( X l ):
t0
t1
Oisa
α X l ( X lt1 − X lt0 ) + ηisa
− O=
isa

(4)

As we have discussed, Figure 5 shows gains in average achievement for 14-year-olds but not for 17-yearolds. 18 We do not have a full set of impact parameters ( α X l ), so it is not possible to solve for the
relative impact of various demographic and school factors. Nonetheless, many presume that the gains
for young adolescents are plausibly a function of positive changes in family demographic characteristics
known to be correlated with educational performance, such as parental education, household income,
family size, and age of mother at child’s birth (Hoxby (2003); Magnuson and Waldfogel (2008)).
Grissmer, Kirby, Berends, and Williamson (1994) correlate shifts in a battery of demographic factors with
changes in student performance on the LTT-NAEP between 1970 and 1990. Their estimate (p. 92) shows
that changes in family background characteristics can account for all of the math gains in student
achievement among students at age 13 and 17. Changes in family background actually over-predict
reading gains. Similarly, Duncan, Kalil, and Ziol-Guest (2017), drawing upon longitudinal data available
from the Panel Survey of Income Dynamics (PSID), identify income, education, number of siblings, and
age of the mother as positive factors affecting years of education and college completion rates.
According to this analysis shifts in family background factors can account for all the gains in student
performances among young adults over the past half century. 19 That the gains in the United States are
comparable to the average gains registered on international tests elsewhere in the industrialized world
adds weight to this interpretation (Hanushek, Peterson, and Woessmann (2012)).
The puzzling disappearance of achievement gains by age 17 that has occurred over the past quarter
century makes the trends more difficult to interpret. It cannot easily be attributed to family background
factors, because one assumes that family cultural and economic resources to be no less important for
the performances of older students than they are for those in eighth grade.
While this difference between trends for younger and older students has been noted previously, no
satisfactory explanations have been found (Krueger (1998); Hanushek (1998)). Blagg and Chingos (2016)
consider four potential reasons for the fade out but reject each. The decline does not appear to be due
to increases in the share of the cohort in school at age 17, because trends in performance are
uncorrelated with trends in graduation rates. Nor do they attribute it to changes in ethnicity and other
18

Note that the PISA observations for 15-year-olds are included in the 14-year-old plot.

Note, however, that neither of these analyses includes any measures of schools, so that the
demographic factors implicitly include correlated differences in school quality.
19

15

family background characteristics, because the differential trends persist even when adjusted for
demographic changes. Nor do they think it could be a function of a decoupling of the LTT-NAEP from
the high-school curriculum, as fade out is also apparent on the Main-NAEP, which has been designed to
test performance on material that is part of the curriculum. 20 Nor does it seem to be a function of
changes in “senioritis,” the propensity of 17-year-olds to take tests less seriously than younger students,
as they find no change over time in the number of unanswered questions and other indicators of
disengagement.
We offer two hypotheses for the perplexing discrepancy between achievement trends for younger and
older students. First, the changes in factors likely to affect teacher quality (discussed further below)
may be more unfavorable for instruction at the upper secondary level than at the elementary and
middle school levels. Teacher salaries have become more compressed (Hoxby and Leigh (2004)), a likely
indication that secondary teacher salaries have declined relative to those earned by elementary
teachers. Second, policy initiatives have focused primarily on elementary and middle school. School
accountability under No Child Left Behind, for example, required testing each year in grades three
through eight but only required one examination in high school. Nonetheless, given available evidence,
it is difficult to assess the relative importance of each factor.

5.2 Assessing Trends in Achievement Gaps
When we turn to the story on achievement gaps, we find an even larger puzzle. In terms of changing
achievement disparities across SES groups, the key is the relative inputs received by SES group. We
define λXt l jk as the difference in input X l received by group j relative to group k in year t. Then,
parallel to the level patterns, the trend in achievement gaps for j relative to k is simply a function of the
change in relative resources of the two groups:
t0
t1
∆=
β X l (λXt1l jk − λXt0l jk ) + ωias
jk − ∆ jk

(5)

where X l is the given school or family input. If we knew the β X , say from appropriate micro-studies,
we could assess the importance of changes in various school inputs.
When we look at the patterns of SES achievement gaps, however, we see that in general there is not a
time trend:

∆t1jk − ∆tjk0 = 0

(6)

Interpreting the pattern in the SES-achievement gap is challenging when no clear trend—either upward
or downward—is detected. But, as Jencks and Phillips (1998), p. 27, observe in their classic collection on
the black-white test score gap, “we have to explain stability as well as change.”

Note that 17-year-old assessments are found only in the LTT-NAEP sample, and these assessments are
designed to test a consistent body of material over time.
20

16

We can consider this as a general problem of reverse engineering in the policy space. In particular, we
do not have reliable estimates for the

β X that apply to most major policy initiatives (as discussed

below), but from Equations 5 and 6 we know that

0 β X l (λXt1l jk − λXt0l jk ) + ωias
=

(7)

Two hypotheses are worthy of consideration. The first is the simple null hypothesis, which attributes
the lack of any trend to the absence of a significant causal factor that might have closed or widened the
gap, i.e.,

β X = 0 , along with the expected value of the error term being zero, E (ωias ) = 0 . An

alternative to the null hypothesis is one that identifies equally powerful but opposing forces which
cancel one another out, i.e., E (ωias ) ≠ 0 because of one or more other correlated factors. For example,
changes in society may have aggravated achievement inequalities, while schools have offset their
impact. Or vice versa.
Reardon (2011) attributes the rising achievement gap he observes to the widening differential in
household income. It is also possible that SES differences in the age of the mother at the birth of the
child that have opened up in the past fifty years enter negatively (Duncan, Kalil, and Ziol-Guest (2017)).
And, the incidence of single-parent households is concentrated at the lower end of the SES spectrum.
But all these negative factors could be offset by other, countervailing demographic changes. Most
importantly, SES differences in parental education have narrowed. So have SES differences in the
number of siblings in the household. Both factors have been identified as among the most important
determinants of student achievement. The balance between these countervailing factors may well have
left the achievement gap pretty much at the same level today as it was for cohorts born in the 1950s.
As for schools, following the null hypothesis, one might conclude that little of significance for
achievement has changed. The organization of the country’s K-12 education system is much the same in
the 21st Century as it was in the middle of the 20th Century. Schools are still operated by relatively
autonomous school districts under the control of (mainly) elected school boards. The length of the
school year has not changed. Teacher recruitment policies remain substantially the same, and teachers
are still compensated according to a standardized salary schedule that rewards experience and
academic credentials, not classroom effectiveness.
Yet there have been a set of major policies designed to close achievement gaps. Since 1960 – the year
the earliest cohort entered school – a variety of significant policy changes have been adopted as a way
of meeting the needs of disadvantaged students; i.e.,

(λSt2l jk − λSt1l jk ) > 0 :

•

The 1954 Supreme Court decision in Brown v. Board of Education led to substantial school
desegregation particularly in the South (Welch and Light (1987); Rivkin and Welch (2006); Rivkin
(2016)).

•

With the advent of the war on poverty, the Title I of the Education and Secondary Education Act
(ESEA) of 1965 directed federal compensatory education resources to school districts with
disproportionately large shares of low-income students, though a portion might have been
offset by reduced state and local funding (Cross (2014)).

17

•

In 1974, the Education for All Handicapped Children Act, later renamed the Individuals with
Disabilities Education Act, authorized grants to school districts with accompanying restrictions
that assured the provision of educational and other services to those with disabilities, a group
disproportionately comprised of students from low-income families (Morgan, Farkas, Hillemeier,
and Maczuga (2017)).

•

States systematically changed their funding of local schools, often in response to court orders
requiring greater fiscal equality among school districts. (For a history and discussion of school
finance litigation, see Peterson and West (2007) and Hanushek and Lindseth (2009); see also
Jackson, Johnson, and Persico (2016) and Lafortune, Rothstein, and Schanzenbach (2018).)
These changes led to more funding equality between districts serving the most disadvantaged
and those serving the least disadvantaged.

•

The federal Head Start program and expanded state programming provided new opportunities
for early childhood education for low-income families (Friedman-Krauss et al. (2018)).

•

Accountability for student performance was introduced, first by individual states and then
nationally with the enactment in 2002 of the No Child Left Behind Act. The law’s accountability
requirements were disproportionately directed toward schools serving low-income students
(Hanushek and Raymond (2005); Peterson (2010); Figlio and Loeb (2011)).

Of these items, school desegregation is noteworthy for its bivariate credibility. In the aftermath of
Brown, it took considerable time before schools were substantially desegregated, but by the 1970s and
1980s there was noticeable desegregation of schools, which is also the time when the black-white test
score gap closes. After 1980, the rate of desegregation slows to a near stop, and so does the closing of
the black-white gap (Figure 3). Micro-studies generally find that school desegregation boosts black
achievement, though the evidence is mixed. 21
However, it is not clear whether school desegregation mitigated SES-achievement disparities. The
achievement gains from desegregation may have been disproportionately concentrated on black
students from high SES families. If so, its contribution to the closing of the SES gap remain uncertain.
Other changes in school policy may have had positive effects on low-SES students. Overall school
funding increased dramatically on a per pupil basis, quadrupling in real dollars between 1960 and 2015.
A large portion of this spending increase went toward reductions in pupil-teacher ratios (see Hanushek
and Rivkin (1997)). While we do not have clear evidence as to whether these policies disproportionately
affected low-SES students, a large share of the monies was directed toward central-city school districts.
Alternatively, programs that advantage neither group may affect achievement gaps if the

β S differ

across the groups. Jackson, Johnson, and Persico (2016) find that resource increments have larger
impacts on the performances of disadvantaged students, implying that the increases in overall funding
induced by court orders have led to a significant reduction in achievement gaps. However, they express
doubt as to whether their results generalize to most spending increases.

There is substantial causal evidence from micro-studies that indicates a positive impact on black
achievement with desegregation (see Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin (2009)), but there is earlier mixed evidence
(Schofield (1995)).
21

18

It is nonetheless more likely that the unwavering gap is due to counter-vailing forces within the
educational system that are offsetting one another. Most significantly, the quality of the teaching
force—a centrally important school input affecting student achievement—may well have declined over
the course of the past several decades. 22 Women have greater access to opportunities outside the field
of teaching (Eide, Goldhaber, and Brewer (2004); Corcoran, Evans, and Schwab (2004a, 2004b); Bacolod
(2007)). Teacher performance on standardized tests and indicators of teacher selectivity have slipped
(Corcoran, Evans, and Schwab (2004a); Bacolod (2007)). Teacher salaries have declined relative to those
earned by other four-year college degree holders (Corcoran, Evans, and Schwab (2004a); Hoxby and
Leigh (2004); Hanushek (2016a)), and salary levels for teachers are currently low relative to comparable
workers in other occupations (Hanushek, Piopiunik, and Wiederhold (forthcoming)).
These changes affecting the quality of the teaching force are likely to have had a disproportionately
adverse effect on disadvantaged students. More experienced teachers have acquired seniority rights,
and new entrants into the labor force are assigned to more disadvantaged students (Hanushek, Kain,
and Rivkin (2004); Loeb, Kalogrides, and Béteille (2012); Kalogrides, Loeb, and Béteille (2013)).
The flat pattern of achievement gaps suggests that the combined positive impact of all of the major
policies has not been sufficient to offset any decline in teacher quality.

5.3 Summary
The SES-achievement gap may persist because changes within families and within schools have largely
offset one another. When it comes to family background, reduced disparities in family education and
family size could have been counterbalanced by rising gaps in family structure, age of the mother, and
household income. When it comes to schools, compensatory education policies at both pre-school and
K-12 levels may have been offset by an inability to prevent rising gaps in teacher quality across the SES
spectrum.
Without adequate estimates of the causal impact of the various changing inputs, it is not possible to
reach firm conclusions about impacts and offsets of existing demographic patterns and policy initiatives.
But the overall patterns of performance give little confidence that current policies are having much
overall influence on improving social outcomes in terms of the level or distribution of achievement.

6. Conclusions
Two startling results emerge from this analysis of long-term trends in student achievement gaps and
levels across the SES distribution. First, gaps in achievement between low and high SES groups are
mostly unchanged over the past half century. Second, while gains in the level of achievement are steady
and significant at the 8th grade level, they have not translated into gains at the end of high school. Thus,
the continuing unequal opportunities of the haves and the have nots are not compensated for by
enhanced overall opportunities.
Because cognitive skills as measured by standard achievement tests are a strong predictor of future
income and economic well-being, the unwavering achievement gaps across the SES spectrum do not
For discussions of the measurement of teacher quality and its importance in school performance, see
Hanushek and Rivkin (2006) and Chetty, Friedman, and Rockoff (2013).
22

19

bode well for improvements in intergeneration mobility in the future. Perhaps more disturbingly, the
U.S. has introduced and expanded a set of programs designed to lessen achievement gaps through
improving the education of disadvantaged students, but they individually and collectively appear able to
do little to close gaps beyond offsetting the probable decline in teacher quality in schools serving lower
SES students. These unwavering gaps suggest reconsidering existing policy thrusts.
Two areas for further policy exploration seem especially critical. First, researchers have uniformly found
that teacher effectiveness is a predominant factor affecting school quality. While there has been
considerable public discussion of teacher evaluations and programs aimed at teacher effectiveness, few
programs and policies at scale directly focus on enhancing this resource, particularly for disadvantaged
students. Second, the trend line for those in their final year of high school is much less favorable than
for students at an earlier age. Yet most policy interventions have left high schools essentially
untouched.

20

References
Altonji, Joseph G., and Richard K. Mansfield. 2011. The role of family, school, and community
characteristics in inequality in education and labor-market outcomes. In Whither Opportunity?
Rising Inequality and the Uncertain Life Chances of Low-Income Children, edited by Richard J.
Murnane and Greg J. Duncan. New York: Russell Sage Foundation Press: 339-358.
Alvaredo, Facundo, Lucas Chanel, Thomas Piketty, Emmanuel Saez, and Gabriel Zucman, eds. 2017.
World Inequality Report 2018. Paris: World Inequality Lab.
Astone, Nan Marie, and Sara S. McLanahan. 1991. "Family Structure, Parental Practices and High School
Completion." American Sociological Review 56, no. 3 (June): 309-320.
Autor, David H. 2014. "Skills, education, and the rise of earnings inequality among the “other 99
percent”." Science 344, no. 843 (May 23): 843-851.
Bacolod, Marigee P. 2007. "Do Alternative Opportunities Matter? The Role of Female Labor Markets in
the Decline of Teacher Quality." Review of Economics and Statistics 89, no. 4 (November): 737751.
Bertrand, Marianne, and Emir Kamenica. 2018. "Coming Apart? Cultural Distances in the United States
Over Time." Becker Friedman Institute for Research in Economics Working Paper No. 2018-47.
Chicago: (July 5).
Blagg, Kristin, and Matthew M. Chingos. 2016. Varsity Blues: Are High School Students Being Left
Behind? Washington, DC: Urban Institute (May).
Burdick-Will, Julia, Jens Ludwig, Stephen W. Raudenbush, Robert J. Sampson, Lisa Sanbonmatsu, and
Patrick Sharkey. 2011. "Converging Evidence for Neighborhood Effects on Children’s Test Scores:
An Experimental, Quasi-Experimental, and Observational Comparison." In Whither Opportunity?,
edited by Greg J. Duncan and Richard J. Murnane: Russell Sage Foundation: 255-276.
Burtless, Gary, ed. 1996. Does money matter? The effect of school resources on student achievement and
adult success. Washington, DC: Brookings.
Camera, Lauren. 2018. NAEP Shows Little to No Gains in Math, Reading for U.S. Students: Latest NAEP
scores show growing gap between those at the top and bottom of the achievement spectrum.
U.S. News and World Report, April 10.
Carneiro, Pedro, and James J. Heckman. 2003. "Human capital policy." In Inequality in America: What
role for human capital policies?, edited by Benjamin M. Friedman. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press:
77-239.
Cheng, Albert, and Paul E. Peterson. 2018. "Experimental Estimates of Impacts of Cost-Earnings
Information on Adult Aspirations for Children’s Postsecondary Education." Journal of Higher
Education: forthcoming.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, and Jonah E. Rockoff. 2013. "Measuring the impacts of teachers II:
Teacher value-added and student outcomes in adulthood." Mimeo. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University.
Chingos, Matthew M. 2016. No more free lunch for education policymakers and researchers. Evidence
Speaks Reports. Washington, DC: Economic Studies at Brookings (June 30).
Coleman, James S., Ernest Q. Campbell, Carol J. Hobson, James McPartland, Alexander M. Mood,
Frederic D. Weinfeld, and Robert L. York. 1966. Equality of educational opportunity. Washington,
D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.

21

Corcoran, Sean P., William N. Evans, and Robert M. Schwab. 2004a. "Changing labor-market
opportunities for women and the quality of teachers, 1957-2000." American Economic Review
94, no. 2 (May): 230-235.
Corcoran, Sean P., William N. Evans, and Robert M. Schwab. 2004b. "Women, the labor market, and the
declining relative quality of teachers." Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 23, no. 3
(Summer): 449-470.
Cross, Christopher T. 2014. Political education: Setting the course for state and federal policy. Second
ed. New York, NY: Teachers College, Columbia University.
Dahl, Gordon B., and Lance Lochner. 2012. "The Impact of Family Income on Child Achievement:
Evidence from the Earned Income Tax Credit." American Economic Review 102, no. 5 (August):
1927-1956.
Duncan, Greg J., Ariel Kalil, and Kathleen M. Ziol-Guest. 2017. "Increasing Inequality in Parent Incomes
and Children’s Schooling." Demography 54: 1603-1626.
Duncan, Greg J., Pamela A. Morris, and Chris Rodrigues. 2011. "Does money really matter? Estimating
impacts of family income on young children's achievement with data from random-assignment
experiments." Developmental Psychology 47, no. 5 (September): 1263-1279.
Duncan, Greg J., and Richard J. Murnane. 2014. Restoring opportunity: The crisis of inequality and the
challenge for American education. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education Press.
Duncan, Greg J., and Richard J. Murnane, eds. 2011. Whither opportunity? Rising inequality, schools, and
children's life chances. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Edsell, Thomas. 2012. "The Reproduction of Privilege." New York Times: March 12.
Egalite, Ann J. 2016. "How Family Background Influences Student Achievement." Education Next 16, no.
2 (Spring): 70-78.
Eide, Eric, Dan Goldhaber, and Dominic Brewer. 2004. "The teacher labour market and teacher quality."
Oxford Review of Economic Policy 20, no. 2: 230-244.
Fetters, Williamn B., Peter S. Stowe, and Jeffrey A. Owings. 1984. Quality of Responses of High School
Students to Questionnaire Items. High School and Beyond: a national longitudinal study for the
1980's. Washington, DC: National Center for Education Statistics (September).
Figlio, David, and Susanna Loeb. 2011. "School accountability." In Handbook of the Economics of
Education, Vol. 3, edited by Eric A. Hanushek, Stephen Machin, and Ludger Woessmann.
Amsterdam: North Holland: 383-421.
Friedman-Krauss, Allison H., W. Steven Barnett, G.G. Weisenfeld, Richard Kasmin, Nicole DiCrecchio, and
Michelle Horowit. 2018. The state of preschool 2017: State preschool yearbook: Rutgers
University.
Friedman, Benjamin M., ed. 2003. Inequality in America: What role for human capital policies?
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ganzeboom, Harry B. G., and Donald J. Treiman. 2003. "Three internationally standardised measures for
comparative research on occupational status." In Advances in Cross-National Comparison, A
European Working Book for Demographic and Socio-Economic Variables, edited by J.H.P.
Hoffmeyer-Zlotnik and C. Wolf. New York: Kluwer Academic Press: 159-193.
Gould, Eric, Avi Simhon, and Bruce A. Weinberg. 2019. "Does Parental Quality Matter? Evidence on the
Transmission of Human Capital Using Variation in Parental Influence from Death, Divorce, and

22

Family Size." NBER Working Paper No. 25495. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
Research (January).
Goyette, Kimberly A. 2008. "College for some to college for all: Social background, occupational
expectations, and educational expectations over time." Social Science Research 37, no. 2 (June):
461-484.
Greenberg, Erica. 2018. New Measures of Student Poverty: Replacing Free and Reduced-Price Lunch
Status Based on Household Forms with Direct Certification Wasnington, DC: Urban Institute
(November).
Grissmer, David, Ann Flanagan, and Stephanie Williamson. 1998. "Why did the Black-white score gap
narrow in the 1970s and 1980s?" In The Black-white test score gap, edited by Christopher Jencks
and Meredith Phillips. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press: 181-226.
Grissmer, David W., Sheila Nataraj Kirby, Mark Berends, and Stephanie Williamson. 1994. Student
achievement and the changing American family. Santa Monica, CA: Rand Corporation.
Guryan, Jonathan, Erik Hurst, and Melissa Kearney. 2008. "Symposia: Investment in Children: Parental
Education and Parental Time with Children." Journal of Economic Perspectives 22, no. 3
(Summer): 23-46.
Hanushek, Eric A. 1998. "Conclusions and controversies about the effectiveness of school resources."
FRBNY Economic Policy Review 4(March): 11-28.
Hanushek, Eric A. 2016a. "School human capital and teacher salary policies." Journal of Professional
Capital and Community 1, no. 1: 23-40.
Hanushek, Eric A. 2016b. "What Matters for Achievement: Updating Coleman on the Influence of
Families and Schools." Education Next 16, no. 2 (Spring): 22-30.
Hanushek, Eric A., John F. Kain, and Steve G. Rivkin. 2004. "Why public schools lose teachers." Journal of
Human Resources 39, no. 2 (Spring): 326-354.
Hanushek, Eric A., John F. Kain, and Steve G. Rivkin. 2009. "New evidence about Brown v. Board of
Education: The complex effects of school racial composition on achievement." Journal of Labor
Economics 27, no. 3 (July): 349-383.
Hanushek, Eric A., and Alfred A. Lindseth. 2009. Schoolhouses, courthouses, and statehouses: Solving
the funding-achievement puzzle in America's public schools. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Hanushek, Eric A., Paul E. Peterson, and Ludger Woessmann. 2012. Achievement growth: International
and U.S. state trends in student achievement. Cambridge, MA: Program on Education Policy and
Governance, Harvard Kennedy School.
Hanushek, Eric A., Marc Piopiunik, and Simon Wiederhold. forthcoming. "The value of smarter teachers:
International evidence on teacher cognitive skills and student performance." Journal of Human
Resources.
Hanushek, Eric A., and Margaret E. Raymond. 2005. "Does school accountability lead to improved
student performance?" Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 24, no. 2: 297-327.
Hanushek, Eric A., and Steven G. Rivkin. 1997. "Understanding the twentieth-century growth in U.S.
school spending." Journal of Human Resources 32, no. 1 (Winter): 35-68.
Hanushek, Eric A., and Steven G. Rivkin. 2006. "Teacher quality." In Handbook of the Economics of
Education, Vol. 2, edited by Eric A. Hanushek and Finis Welch. Amsterdam: North Holland: 10511078.

23

Hanushek, Eric A., and Steven G. Rivkin. 2010. "Generalizations about using value-added measures of
teacher quality." American Economic Review 100, no. 2 (May): 267-271.
Hanushek, Eric A., Guido Schwerdt, Simon Wiederhold, and Ludger Woessmann. 2015. "Returns to skills
around the world: Evidence from PIAAC." European Economic Review 73: 103-130.
Hanushek, Eric A., Guido Schwerdt, Simon Wiederhold, and Ludger Woessmann. 2017. "Coping with
change: International differences in the returns to skills." Economic Letters 153(April): 15-19.
Hanushek, Eric A., and Ludger Woessmann. 2011. "The economics of international differences in
educational achievement." In Handbook of the Economics of Education, Vol. 3, edited by Eric A.
Hanushek, Stephen Machin, and Ludger Woessmann. Amsterdam: North Holland: 89-200.
Hart, Betty, and Todd R. Risley. 1995. Meaningful Differences in the Everyday Experience of Young
American Children Baltimore, MD: Paul H. Brookes Publishing Co.
Hart, Betty, and Todd R. Risley. 2003. "The early catastrophe: The 20 million word gap by age 3."
American Educator(Spring).
Hedges, Larry V., and Amy Nowell. 1998. "Black-white test score convergence since 1965." In The Blackwhite test score gap, edited by Christopher Jencks and Meredith Phillips. Washington, DC:
Brookings Institution Presss: 149-181.
Hoff, Erika. 2003. "The Specificity of Environmental Influence: Socioeconomic Status Affects Early
Vocabulary Development via Maternal Speech." Child Development 74, no. 5 (SepemberOctober): 1368-1378.
Hoxby, Caroline M. 2003. "School choice and school competition: Evidence from the United States."
Swedish Economic Policy Review 10, no. 3: 9-65.
Hoxby, Caroline M., and Andrew Leigh. 2004. "Pulled away or pushed out? Explaining the decline of
teacher aptitude in the United States." American Economic Review 94, no. 2 (May): 236-240.
Jackson, C. Kirabo, Rucker C. Johnson, and Claudia Persico. 2016. "The Effects of School Spending on
Educational and Economic Outcomes: Evidence from School Finance Reforms." Quarterly Journal
of Economics 131, no. 1 (February): 157-218.
Jacob, Brian A., and Tamara Wilder Linkow. 2011. "Educational Expectations and Attainment." In
Whither Opportunity?, edited by Greg J. Duncan and Richard J. Murnane: Russell Sage
Foundation: 133-162.
Jencks, Christopher, and Meredith Phillips, eds. 1998. The black-white test score gap. Washington, D.C.:
The Brookings Institution.
Kalogrides, Demetra, Susanna Loeb, and Tara Béteille. 2013. "Systematic Sorting: Teacher Characteristics
and Class Assignments." Sociology of Education 86, no. 2 (April): 103-123.
Kao, Grace, and Marta Tienda. 1998. "Educational Aspirations of Minority Youth." American Journal of
Education 106, no. 3 (June): 349-384.
Kaufman, Philip, and Kenneth A. Rasinski. 1991. Quality of the Responses of Eighth-Grade Students in
NELS:88. National Education Longitudinal Study of 1988. Washington, DC: National Center for
Education Statistics (September).
Kayser, Brian D., and Gene F. Summers. 1973. "The Adequacy of Student Reports of Parental Ses
Characteristics." Sociological Methods & Research 1, no. 3: 303-315.
Krueger, Alan B. 1998. "Reassessing the view that American schools are broken." FRBNY Economic Policy
Review 4, no. 1 (March): 29-43.

24

Krueger, Alan B. 2003. "Inequality, too much of a good thing." In Inequality in America: What role for
human capital policies?, edited by Benjamin M. Friedman. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press: 1-75.
Ladd, Helen F., ed. 1996. Holding Schools Accountable: Performance-Based Reform in Education.
Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.
Lafortune, Julien, Jesse Rothstein, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. 2018. "School Finance Reform
and the Distribution of Student Achievement." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics
10, no. 2: 1-26.
Loeb, Susanna, Demetra Kalogrides, and Tara Béteille. 2012. "Effective Schools: Teacher Hiring,
Assignment, Development, and Retention." Education Finance and Policy 7, no. 3 (Summer):
269–304.
Magnuson, Katherine, and Jane Waldfogel, eds. 2008. Steady gains and stalled progress: Inequality and
the black-white test score gap. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Maxie, Tre. 2012. "Education Challenge for the Next 50 Years is the Achievement Gap." Seattle Times:
September 28.
Mayer, Susan E. 1997. What money can't buy: Family income and children's life chances. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Morgan, Paul L., George Farkas, Marianne M. Hillemeier, and Steve Maczuga. 2017. "Replicated
Evidence of Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Disability Identification in U.S. Schools." Educational
Researcher 46, no. 6 (August/September): 305-322.
Murray, Charles. 2012. Coming apart: The state of white America, 1960-2010. New York: Crown Forum.
National Center for Education Statistics. 2012. Improving the Measurement of Socioeconomic Status for
the National Assessment of Educational Progress: A Theoretical Foundation. Washington, D.C.
National Center for Education Statistics. 2013. The Nation's Report Card: Trends in Academic Progress
2012. Washington, DC: Institute of Education Sciences.
Neff, Walter S. 1938. "Socioeconomic status and intelligence: A critical survey." Psychological Bulletin
35, no. 10 (December): 727-757.
Nelson, Charles A., and Margaret A. Sheridan. 2011. "Lessons from Neuroscience Research for
Understanding Causal Links Between Family and Neighborhood Characteristics and Educational
Outcomes." In Whither Opportunity?, edited by Greg J. Duncan and Richard J. Murnane: Russell
Sage Foundation: 27-46.
Nielsen, Eric R. 2015. "The Income-Achievement Gap and Adult Outcome Inequality." Finance and
Economics Discussion Series 2015-041. Washington, DC: Federal Reserve Board.
OECD. 2017a. PISA 2015 results (volume III): Students’ well-being. Paris: Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development.
OECD. 2017b. PISA 2015 Technical Report. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development.
Perna, Laura W. 2006. "Studying College Access and Choice: A Proposed Conceptual Model." In Higher
Education: Handbook of Theory and Research, edited by John C. Smart. Dordrecht: Springer
Netherlands: 99-157.
Peterson, Paul E. 2010. Saving schools: From Horace Mann to virtual learning. Cambridge, MA: Belknap
Press of Harvard University Press.
Peterson, Paul E., and Martin R. West, eds. 2007. School money trials. Washington: Brookings.

25

Putnam, Robert D. 2015. Our kids: The American dream in crisis. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Reardon, Sean F. 2011. The widening academic achievement gap between the rich and the poor: New
evidence and possible explanations. In Whither Opportunity? Rising Inequality and the Uncertain
Life Chances of Low-Income Children, edited by Richard J. Murnane and Greg J. Duncan. New
York: Russell Sage Foundation Press: 91-116.
Rivkin, Steve G. 2016. "Desegregation since the Coleman Report: Racial composition of schools and
student learning." Education Next 16, no. 2 (Spring): 29-37.
Rivkin, Steven G., and Finis Welch. 2006. "Has school desegregation improved academic and economic
outcomes for blacks?" In Handbook of the Economics of Education, edited by Eric A. Hanushek
and Finis Welch. Amsterdam: North Holland: 1019-1049.
Rothstein, Richard. 2004. Class and schools: Using social, economic, and educational reform to close the
black-white achievement gap. Washington, DC: Economic Policy Institute.
Saez, Emmanuel, and Gabriel Zucman. 2016. "wealth inequality in the United States since 1913:
Evidence from capitalized income tax data." Quarterly Journal of Economics 131, no. 2 (May):
519-578.
Schofield, Janet Ward. 1995. "Review of research on school desegregation's impact on elementary and
secondary school students." In Handbook of research on multicultural education, edited by
James A. Banks and Cherry A. McGee Banks. New York: Macmillan Publishing: 597-616.
Slesnick, Daniel T. 1993. "Gaining Ground: Poverty in the Postwar United States." Journal of Political
Economy 101, no. 1 (February): 1-38.
Smith, Marshall. 1972. "Equality of educational opportunity: the basic findings reconsidered." In On
equality of educational opportunity, edited by Frederick Mosteller and Daniel P. Moynihan. New
York: Random House: 230-342.
Taverise, Sabrina. 2012. "Education Gap Grows Between Rich and Poor, Studies Say." New York Times:
February 9.
U.S. Department of Education. 2013. Digest of Education Statistics, 2012. Washington, DC: National
Center for Education Statistics.
Weissmann, Jordan. 2012. "Occupy Kindergarten." Atlantic: Feb. 11.
Welch, Finis, and Audrey Light. 1987. New evidence on school desegregation. Washington, D.C.: U. S.
Commission on Civil Rights.
Wilson, William Julius. 1987. The truly disadvantaged: The innercity, the underclass, and public policy.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Wilson, William Julius. 2011. ""The Declining Significance of Race": Revisited & Revised." Daedalus 140,
no. 2 (Spring): 55-69.
Wilson, William Julius. 2012. The declining significance of race: Blacks and changing American
institutions. 3rd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Zernicke, Kate. 2016. "Test Scores Show a Decline in Math Among High School Seniors." New York Times:
April 27.

26

Appendix A: Data Sources for Educational Achievement
We use four surveys to investigate achievement gaps over time: two assessments of the National
Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP), the Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study
(TIMSS), and the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA). All four are widely used in
studying long-term trends in student achievement. Appendix Table A.1 indicates the specific years in
which the different surveys were administered. Appendix Table A.2 provides the data used in our trend
analyses.
Each dataset is comprised of microdata at the student level, which we aggregate by demographic
groups. PISA and TIMSS national microdata are available to the public on the website of the National
Center for Education Statistics (NCES), but to use NAEP microdata the user must gain access to
restricted-use data files.
All four exams include student questionnaires that include questions about students’ background,
attitudes, and experiences in school. Questionnaire responses are linked to students’ test scores for
each subject. We combine these data to study achievement trends by groups of students.

LTT-NAEP
We use two datasets provided by NAEP and treat them separately. The Long-Term Trend (LTT)
assessment dates back to 1969 and assesses students aged 9, 13, and 17 years. LTT-NAEP data are
available for math in select years from 1978-2008 and for reading from 1971-2008. We create a panel of
math and reading scores for 8th and 12th graders.

Main-NAEP
Main-NAEP assesses students in grades 4, 8, and 12. Main-NAEP trend data are available for select years
in 1990-2013; we create a panel of math and reading scores for 8th graders. All NAEP data come from
the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) and were analyzed in a restricted-use data room.

TIMSS
TIMSS assesses 4th and 8th graders in math and science, and there are data available every four years
from 1995-2015. We create a panel of 8th grade microdata using national data files from 2003, 2007,
and 2011, and international data files from 1995, 1999, and 2015. The only apparent difference
between our national and international data years is that the international data do not contain an
indicator of race or ethnicity. For this reason, our estimates of the achievement gap by race for TIMSS
are only available for 2003, 2007, and 2011.

PISA
Rather than testing children at certain grade levels, PISA assesses math and reading in children at age
15. By testing children who are nearing the end of their compulsory schooling in most countries, it
attempts to measure the “yield” of a country’s education system. We use national PISA data, available
every three years from 2000-2015.

27

Appendix B: Measuring Socio-economic Status
To be able to observe percentiles of the SES distribution in each survey and year, we construct a
continuous measure of SES. A single composite measure of SES allows us to identify the inter-quartile
range of the SES distribution and identify the 90-10 SES-achievement gap, which provides a clearer
picture of the impact of SES on student achievement than the use of ever-changing categorical groups.
None of the intertemporally linked surveys include indicators of earned income or other household
receipts other than the free and reduced lunch indicators in NAEP surveys, and only the PISA survey
contains information on parental occupation. Thus, we measure SES by use of an index that includes
levels of parental educational attainment and the amount and variety of durable and educational goods
available within the household. In a separate survey with parent-reported income data, the index is
highly correlated with an estimate of permanent income.

B.1 The PISA Index of Economic, Social, and Cultural Status (ESCS)
Across the different PISA waves, the OECD provides a measure of socio-economic status called the PISA
Index of Economic, Social, and Cultural Status (ESCS). The ESCS, according to the PISA 2015 Technical
Report, is “a composite score built by the indicators parental education (pared), prestige of the
occupation of the parent with the highest occupational ranking (hisei), and home possessions (homepos)
including books in the home via principal component analysis (PCA)…. The rationale for using these
three components was that socio-economic status has usually been seen as based on education,
occupational status and income. As no direct income measure has been available from the PISA data,
the existence of household items has been used as a proxy for family wealth” (OECD (2017b)).
To compute the ESCS index, PISA uses a combination of highest parental education (in years), parental
occupation (transformed into an International Socio-Economic Index of Occupational Status (ISEI), see
Ganzeboom and Treiman (2003)), and home possessions (derived from 10-15 yes/no questions such as
“do you have a computer in your home?” and 3-5 questions such as “how many cars does your family
own?”). PISA standardizes the three variables, performs Principal Components Analysis (PCA), and
defines ESCS as the component score for the first principal component. Materials in the home included
in PISA 2000 included the following: dishwasher, own bedroom, educational software, a link to the
Internet, a dictionary, a quiet place to study, a desk, textbooks, classic literature, books of poetry, and
works of art. In PISA 2015, the items included the number of personal computers and cell phones in the
home.
The benefit of using this method to investigate trends by socio-economic status, rather than simply
using one or a combination of categorical variables like eligibility for national school lunch programs,
parent education, or books in home, is that it can account for changes in the share of students within
these categories over time. In any of these categorical variables, shifts in culture and technology can
alter the distribution of students between categories over time, reducing the validity of their use as
proxies for SES. For example, the proportion of students having no books in their home versus over 200
books in their home has changed dramatically during the past fifteen years (Appendix Figure B.1, Panel
A). Meanwhile, the proportion of children with internet access has increased to almost 100 percent,
rendering the variable useless if used on its own (Appendix Figure B.1, Panel B).

28

B.2 Our SES Index
In the construction of our SES index, we follow closely the spirit of PISA’s ESCS index, making
appropriate adjustments to enable implementation in all our four surveys. Neither NAEP nor TIMSS
provide a similar index, although NAEP is considering adding a similar measure to their series (see
National Center for Education Statistics (2012)). Therefore, we construct a comparable SES index for the
four underlying surveys ourselves. While we have to make adjustments because the other surveys in
our analysis do not include all the information available to PISA, using the PISA data we show that our
SES index is highly correlated with PISA’s ESCS index.
Our SES index differs from the PISA ESCS index in the following ways.
Parental education. Instead of using the highest parental education in years (pared), we use the
categorical variable of highest parental education (hisced) to construct our index. Hisced and pared
have the exact same distribution, but instead of being measured in years of education, hisced is
measured categorically on the International Standard Classification of Education (ISCED). We choose to
use hisced instead of pared for consistency with the other two assessments, which both measure
highest parental education on the ISCED scale, so that we do not have to rely on a potentially errorprone transformation into years of education.
Parental occupation. Unlike PISA, the student questionnaires in NAEP and TIMSS do not include
measures of the parents’ occupations that would allow for estimating occupational prestige (hisei). We
therefore exclude measures of parents’ occupations from our index. Though it is unfortunate to lose
this element in our measure of socio-economic status, the category is largely redundant of the
education and income items that remain in the index, as the prestige of an occupation is estimated from
the education and income of the average member of the occupation. Estimations of the SESachievement gap in the PISA data set closely resemble estimates obtained when PISA’s ESCS index is
employed (see below).
Home possessions. To create ESCS, the OECD uses an index of home possessions (homepos) which is “a
summary index of all household and possessions items” (OECD (2017b)). NAEP and TIMSS include
similar questions about students’ home possessions, but they do not provide a summary index. 23 For all
estimations of SES, we therefore use a simple sum of the home possessions variables as our indicator of
home possessions (homepos). That is, we simply add up each of the home possessions students
reported owning and used this number as our homepos variable in the specific survey and year. 24
Construction of the index. Using homepos and hisced, we simply follow the ESCS construction process
of performing PCA and assigning each student a composite score.

NAEP surveys also ask different questions about home possessions across years. Generally speaking,
they ask ten to fifteen yes/no questions such as “do you have a computer in your home?” and three to five
questions where answers can vary across a continuum, such as “how many cars does your family own?”
23

Because some home possessions variables are missing for some students, we also considered
computing homepos as a ratio of owned items to known items. In this case, homepos would be the sum of items
possessed divided by the number of non-missing items. We did not make this adjustment, as it had a slightly lower
correlation with the ESCS index.
24

29

In the construction, we differ slightly from the ESCS process in the treatment of missing variables. The
OECD treats missing variables in the following way: “For students with missing data on one out of the
three components, the missing variable was imputed. Regression on the other two variables was used to
predict the third (missing) variable, and a random component was added to the predicted value. If there
were missing data on more than one component, ESCS was not computed and a missing value was
assigned for ESCS” (OECD (2017b)). As this method requires the assumption of a positive, linear
relationship among the variables and in any case only applied to 2% of the observations, instead of
imputing missing variables we choose to discard them from the analysis.
Comparing our SES index to the PISA ESCS index. The joint impact of these alterations is the
construction of an index that remains highly correlated with the PISA ESCS index. When we calculate
both our SES index and PISA’s ESCS index within the same PISA data set, the overall correlation between
the two is 0.876. It ranges from 0.87 to 0.91 when broken down by years.
Because we are interested in examining trends for students at the extremes of the distribution, we
compared trends in the 90-10 gap in PISA using both the ESCS and our SES index. No qualitatively
significant differences between the trends estimated by the two indices are observed (see Appendix
Figure B.2).

B.3 SES Index and Earned Income
To estimate the relationship between our index and family income, we use data from the 1988 and 2002
Education Longitudinal Study (ELS), which contain home possessions variables (quite similar to those in
PISA), parent education, and income. Annual income, obtained from parent questionnaires, is defined
as “total family income from all sources [for the previous calendar year]”, reported in thirteen
categories ranging from “None” to “$200,001 or more.” In the 1988 ELS, family income is available on
the base year survey (1987 income) and on the second follow-up survey (1991 income). We built the
SES index in the same way as in our main analysis (using home possessions and parent education).
The correlation between the SES index and reported family income is displayed in Appendix Table B.1.
The two variables are strongly but not perfectly correlated. Interestingly enough, at 0.66 the SES index
is more highly correlated with the average of the annual earnings estimates obtained in 1987 and 1991
than with either of the annual estimates, suggesting that the average is a better measure of permanent
income, a concept similar to socio-economic status. 25

Using 2002 ELS data, where family income is available only on the base year survey (2001 income), the
correlation between the SES index and reported income is 0.503.
25

30

Table A.1: Survey and Subject by Test Date, 1971-2015
LTT-NAEP
13-year-olds

17-year-olds

Math

Math

1971
1973

X

X
X

1986

X

1988
1990

8th graders

15-year-olds

8th graders

Math

Reading

Math

Reading

Science

Math

Science

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X

1982

TIMSS

X

X

1980

Reading

PISA

X

X

1975
1978

Reading

Main-NAEP

X
X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

1991
1992
1993
1994

X

1995
1996

X

X

X

X

X

1997
1998
1999

X
X

X

X

X

2000

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

2001
2002

X

2003
2004

X

X

X

X

2005

X

X

2006

X

2007
2008

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

2009

X

X

X

2010
2011
2012
2013

X

X

X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

2014
2015

Note: LTT-NAEP math data for 1973 are available for levels but not gaps.

Table A.2: Data for Trend Analyses by Survey, Test Year, Age, and Subject
Test
pisa
pisa
pisa
pisa
pisa
pisa
pisa
pisa
pisa
pisa
pisa
pisa
pisa
pisa
pisa
pisa
pisa
timss
timss
timss
timss
timss
timss
timss
timss
timss
timss
timss
timss
naep
naep
naep
naep
naep
naep
naep
naep
naep
naep
naep
naep
naep
naep
naep
naep
naep
naep
naep
naep

Test year
2000
2003
2006
2009
2012
2015
2000
2003
2009
2012
2015
2000
2003
2006
2009
2012
2015
1995
1999
2003
2007
2011
2015
1995
1999
2003
2007
2011
2015
1990
1992
1996
2000
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
1990
1992
1994
1998
2002
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013

Age
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14

Subject
math
math
math
math
math
math
reading
reading
reading
reading
reading
science
science
science
science
science
science
math
math
math
math
math
math
science
science
science
science
science
science
math
math
math
math
math
math
math
math
math
math
reading
reading
reading
reading
reading
reading
reading
reading
reading
reading

Mean
493
482
474
488
481
470
504
494
500
497
498
499
490
489
502
497
496
487
502
504
509
509
518
521
515
527
520
524
529
259
262
271
276
279
281
283
284
285
282
255
254
254
263
264
262
263
264
265
268

Unconditional gaps
90-10
75-25
2.622
1.364
2.564
1.329
2.394
1.293
2.429
1.302
2.371
1.285
2.386
1.262
2.632
1.372
2.495
1.332
2.423
1.304
2.237
1.214
2.497
1.347
2.525
1.409
2.560
1.410
2.733
1.522
2.487
1.355
2.349
1.298
2.502
1.384
2.577
1.413
2.463
1.327
2.314
1.222
2.213
1.190
2.199
1.154
2.406
1.286
2.588
1.365
2.379
1.257
1.991
1.048
2.002
1.074
1.982
1.053
2.007
1.059
2.589
1.427
2.940
1.590
2.785
1.487
2.817
1.475
2.774
1.454
2.742
1.443
2.776
1.456
2.767
1.458
2.771
1.460
2.832
1.496
2.554
1.345
2.542
1.337
2.554
1.355
2.320
1.199
2.228
1.156
2.351
1.219
2.303
1.177
2.267
1.160
2.269
1.172
2.280
1.180

SES gaps
90-10
75-25
1.572
1.273
1.325
1.050
1.249
0.946
1.185
0.936
1.140
0.885
0.999
0.802
1.469
1.133
1.287
1.012
1.188
0.932
1.016
0.793
0.806
0.649
1.487
1.153
1.308
1.041
1.374
1.058
1.255
0.955
1.154
0.868
0.923
0.753
0.741
0.653
0.847
0.685
0.915
0.677
0.901
0.616
0.897
0.620
0.945
0.718
0.642
0.563
0.916
0.684
0.844
0.620
0.939
0.608
0.914
0.589
0.818
0.616
1.198
1.045
1.255
1.056
1.126
0.943
1.201
1.018
1.450
1.105
1.455
1.092
1.315
1.163
1.458
1.121
1.436
1.037
1.467
1.077
0.955
0.825
1.050
0.852
1.085
0.888
1.067
0.842
1.137
0.843
1.202
0.907
1.212
0.892
1.079
0.923
1.235
0.919
1.230
0.842

Table A.2 (continued)
Test
naep
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt
naepltt

Test year
2015
1978
1982
1986
1990
1992
1994
1996
1999
2004
2008
2012
1971
1975
1980
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1999
2004
2008
2012
1973
1973
1978
1982
1986
1990
1992
1994
1996
1999
2004
2008
2012
1971
1975
1980
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1999
2004
2008
2012

Age
14
13
13
13
13
13
13
13
13
13
13
13
13
13
13
13
13
13
13
13
13
13
13
13
14
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
17

Subject
reading
math
math
math
math
math
math
math
math
math
math
math
reading
reading
reading
reading
reading
reading
reading
reading
reading
reading
reading
reading
math
math
math
math
math
math
math
math
math
math
math
math
math
reading
reading
reading
reading
reading
reading
reading
reading
reading
reading
reading
reading

Mean
265
264
268
269
270
273
275
275
275
281
281
285
255
256
258
258
257
260
258
258
259
259
260
263
266
304
300
298
302
305
307
306
307
308
307
306
306
286
285
285
290
290
290
288
287
288
285
286
287

Unconditional gaps
90-10
75-25
2.321
1.188
2.846
1.532
2.442
1.298
2.276
1.183
2.314
1.208
2.273
1.202
2.372
1.236
2.334
1.209
2.415
1.256
2.399
1.247
2.470
1.253
2.535
1.318
2.025
1.053
2.026
1.027
1.944
1.041
1.907
1.025
2.029
1.050
2.218
1.162
2.224
1.141
2.228
1.135
2.156
1.146
2.054
1.070
2.072
1.045
2.067
1.062
2.580
2.425
2.305
2.314
2.215
2.278
2.264
2.328
2.172
2.174
2.246
2.536
2.447
2.335
2.110
2.298
2.429
2.466
2.339
2.349
2.445
2.484
2.372

1.408
1.305
1.251
1.287
1.196
1.178
1.203
1.246
1.152
1.164
1.169
1.327
1.278
1.232
1.115
1.202
1.232
1.290
1.220
1.215
1.234
1.268
1.229

SES gaps
90-10
75-25
1.201
0.847
1.372
0.999
1.040
0.729
0.966
0.819
0.933
0.805
1.038
0.830
1.065
0.880
1.039
0.847
1.082
0.923
1.127
0.872
1.061
0.847
1.125
0.934
0.959
0.740
0.955
0.719
0.843
0.685
0.610
0.479
0.774
0.614
0.889
0.744
0.903
0.682
0.891
0.737
0.888
0.705
0.843
0.563
0.990
0.683
0.868
0.721
1.251
1.050
1.100
1.010
0.937
1.018
0.943
0.875
0.964
0.952
1.027
1.220
1.146
1.146
0.802
0.900
0.975
0.983
0.901
0.985
1.096
1.084
1.058

0.993
0.808
0.921
0.891
0.746
0.815
0.690
0.717
0.852
0.752
0.840
0.901
0.864
0.863
0.633
0.743
0.799
0.797
0.750
0.791
0.816
0.773
0.844

Table B.1: Correlation between SES Index and Family Income in the ELS
SES index

1987 income

1991 income

Permanent income

1

0.51

0.59

0.66

1987 income

0.51

1

0.75

0.94

1991 income

0.59

0.75

1

0.94

Permanent income

0.66

0.94

0.94

1

SES index

Note: Data source: 1988 Education Longitudinal Study (ELS).

Figure B.1: Changing Proportion of Students with Books and Internet in their Homes,
Birth Cohorts 1985-2000
Panel A: Students Falling into Top and Bottom Categories of Books in Home

Panel B: Students with Internet in their Homes

Note: U.S. student population in PISA.

Figure B.2: Achievement Trends of the Top and Bottom Quartile in PISA based on PISA’s
ESCS Index and our SES Index by Test Year

Note: U.S. student population in PISA. Each point represents roughly 400-700 students. Mean scores for the top
and bottom quartiles in each index were averaged across math, reading, and science.

Appendix C: Achievement Gaps in Individual Tests
Figures C.1-C.4 plot achievement gaps in each individual test—Main-NAEP, LTT-NAEP, TIMSS, and PISA—
by birth year.

Figure C.1: Unconditional and SES Achievement Gaps in LTT-NAEP, Birth Cohorts 19541999
Panel A: 13-year-old Math

Panel B: 13-year-old Reading

Panel C: 17-year-old Math

Panel D: 17-year-old Reading

Figure C.2: Unconditional and SES Achievement Gaps in Main-NAEP, Birth Cohorts
1977-2001
Panel A: 8th Grade Math

Panel B: 8th Grade Reading

Figure C.3: Unconditional and SES Achievement Gaps in TIMSS, Birth Cohorts 1981-2001
Panel A: 8th Grade Math

Panel B: 8th Grade Science

Figure C.4: Unconditional and SES Achievement Gaps in PISA, Birth Cohorts 1985-2000
Panel A: 15-year-old Math

Panel B: 15-year-old Reading

Panel C: 15-year-old Science

Figure D.1: Unconditional and SES Achievement Gaps Excluding PISA, Birth Cohorts
1954-2001

Note: See Figure 1 for data and methods. This figure is identical to Figure 1 except that it excludes PISA data.

Table 1: Description of Achievement Data
Test

Age/
grade

Birth
cohorts

LTT-NAEP

age 13

1958-1999

Observations by Test and Subject

Waves:
Students:

LTT-NAEP

age 17

1954-1995

Waves:
Students:

Main-NAEP

grade 8

1977-2001

Waves:
Students:

TIMSS

grade 8

1982-2001

Waves:
Students:

PISA

age 15

1985-2000

Waves:
Students:

Total

Waves:
Students:

Math

Reading

Science

Total

12

12

–

24

99,450

115,780

12

12

88,740

108,450

10

11

1,004,650

1,122,980

6

–

57,032

215,230
–

24
197,190

–

21
2,127,630

6

12

57,032

114,064

6

5

6

17

29,125

25,225

29,119

83,469

46

40

12

98

1,278,997

1,372,435

86,151

2,737,583

Note: LTT-NAEP math is first tested in 1973, as opposed to reading which starts in 1971. For the 1973 math, data
are only available for achievement levels and not for achievement gaps. Sample sizes for NAEP data are rounded
to the nearest 10.

Figure 1: Unconditional and SES Achievement Gaps of U.S. Students, Birth Cohorts 19542001

Note: All tests administered by LTT-NAEP, Main-NAEP, PISA, and TIMSS. 1954-2001 birth cohorts, all subjects, all
students. 90-10 (75-25) gap: unconditional achievement difference between the students at the 90th and 10th
percentiles (75th and 25th percentiles) of the achievement distribution. SES 90-10 (75-25) gap: achievement
difference between the students in the top and bottom deciles (quartiles) of the SES distribution. Normalized
achievement is measured in standard deviations. The s.d. presented is the difference between the year the test
was administered and 2000 (or the closest year to that date available for a specific test series). Each marker
indicates years where there are one or more underlying observations.

Figure 2: Unconditional and SES Achievement Gaps by Subject, Birth Cohorts 1954-2001
Panel A: Math

Panel B: Reading

Note: See Figure 1 for data and methods.

Figure 3: Achievement Gaps for Eligibility for Free and Reduced-Price Lunch and for
Race, Birth Cohorts 1954-2001

Note: Samples: For free and reduced price lunch, 1982-2001 birth cohorts, Main-NAEP surveys, math and reading,
all students; for White-Black gap, 1954-2001 birth cohorts, LTT-NAEP and Main-NAEP surveys, math and reading,
black and white students. See Figure 1 for data and methods. Data on free and reduced-price lunch eligibility are
only available for Main-NAEP tests, starting with the 1982 birth cohort.

Figure 4: Unconditional and SES Achievement Gaps among White Students, Birth Cohorts
1954-2001

Note: Sample: 1954-2001 birth cohorts, LTT-NAEP and Main-NAEP surveys, math and reading, white students. See
Figure 1 for data and methods.

Figure 5: Achievement Levels of Younger and Older Students, Birth Cohorts 1954-2001

Note: Sample: 1954-2001 birth cohorts, all surveys, all subjects, all students. Younger students are those between
ages 13 and 15 or in 8th grade, depending on the test. For expositional purposes, younger students are referred to
as 14-year-olds. Older students are those aged 17 or in 12th grade, depending on the test. See Figure 1 for data
and methods.

Figure 6: Achievement Levels of Younger and Older Students by Subject, Birth Cohorts
1954-2001
Panel A: Math

Panel B: Reading

Note: See Figures 1 and 5 for data and methods.

