                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      OPTIMAL TIME-CONSISTENT MONETARY, FISCAL AND DEBT MATURITY
                                POLICY

                                       Eric M. Leeper
                                      Campbell B. Leith
                                          Ding Liu

                                      Working Paper 25658
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25658


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2019




We thank Fabrice Collard, Wouter Den Haan, the editor Urban Jermann and the two anonymous
referees for constructive suggestions. We also thank the participants of the 2015 CEF conference
in Taipei, the 2015 EEA meeting in Mannheim and the 2016 China Meeting of Econometric
Society in Chengdu for comments. However, all errors remain our own. Ding Liu would like to
gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of
China (Grant NO.71601160) as well as the SIRE Conference Presenter Grant from Scottish
Institute for Research in Economics. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Eric M. Leeper, Campbell B. Leith, and Ding Liu. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Optimal Time-Consistent Monetary, Fiscal and Debt Maturity Policy
Eric M. Leeper, Campbell B. Leith, and Ding Liu
NBER Working Paper No. 25658
March 2019
JEL No. E62,E63

                                         ABSTRACT

The textbook optimal policy response to an increase in government debt is simple—monetary
policy should actively target inflation, and fiscal policy should smooth taxes while ensuring debt
sustainability. Such policy prescriptions presuppose an ability to commit. Without that ability,
the temptation to use inflation surprises to offset monopoly and tax distortions, as well as to
reduce the real value of government debt, creates a state-dependent inflationary bias problem.
High debt levels and short-term debt exacerbate the inflation bias. But this produces a debt
stabilization bias because the policy maker wishes to deviate from the tax smoothing policies
typically pursued under commitment, by returning government debt to steady-state. As a result,
the response to shocks in New Keynesian models can be radically different, particularly when
government debt levels are high.

Eric M. Leeper                           Ding Liu
Department of Economics                  Southwestern University of Finance and Economics
University of Virginia                   School of Economics
248 McCormick Rd                         Room 1001
Charlottesville, VA 22903                555, Liutai Avenue
and NBER                                 Chengdu 611130
eml3jf@virginia.edu                      China
                                         dingliumath@swufe.edu.cn
Campbell B. Leith
Department of Economics
University of Glasgow
Glasgow, G12 8QQ
Scotland
campbell.leith@glasgow.ac.uk
Optimal Time-Consistent Monetary, Fiscal and Debt

                                     Maturity Policy


                                        ∗                           †                   ‡
                    Eric M. Leeper             Campbell Leith              Ding Liu




1 Introduction


Conventional monetary-scal policy analysis assigns monetary policy the task of controlling
demand and ination and scal policy the job of ensuring scal sustainability. Optimal policy
analyses support this policy assignment. In sticky price New Keynesian models with one-
period government debt, Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2004b) show that even a mild degree of
price stickiness implies negligible use of ination surprises to stabilize debt and near random
walk behavior in government debt and tax rates when policy makers can commit to time-
inconsistent monetary and scal policies, in response to shocks. In other words, monetary
policy should be used to stabilize ination, not debt, while a tax smoothing scal policy
                                 1
ensures scal sustainability.
       Despite this apparent consensus on broad features of a desirable policy mix, empirical
evidence suggests that policy makers, even in recent years, often do not behave in this
way (see Bianchi and Ilut (2017) and Chen et al. (2018) for the United States). And the
ability of policy makers to commit, which is implicit in the consensus policy assignment,
is also doubtful. This paper studies jointly optimal monetary and scal policy when policy
makers cannot commit. We augment a standard New Keynesian model with optimally chosen
distortionary taxation and government spending, as well as government debt issued with a
realistic maturity structure. The policy maker may operate with a mild degree of myopia.
Myopia serves as a proxy for the political frictions in policy making that lead the policy
maker to give more weight to the short-run costs of scal consolidation than to the longer-
                            2
term gains of lower debt.       We solve the non-linear model using global solution methods. The

   ∗
     University of Virginia and NBER; eleeper@virginia.edu
   †
     University of Glasgow; campbell.leith@glasgow.ac.uk
   ‡
     Southwestern University of Finance and Economics; dingliumath@swufe.edu.cn.
   1
     Although Sims (2013) questions the robustness of this result when government can issue long-term
nominal bonds since this implies variations in bond prices can be used as a device to stabilize debt, Leeper
and Leith (2017) nd that, as part of a Ramsey problem, the consensus policy assignment remains largely
optimal.
   2
     See Alesina and Passalacqua (2017) for a recent survey of the political economy of government debt.

                                                     1
             Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy
equilibrium produces a plausible steady-state and, by allowing for switches in the degree of
policy maker myopia, captures the major trends in the American debt-to-GDP ratio that
Figure 1 depicts.
   Four key ndings emerge:

  1. A trade-o between the costs of ination and the desire to generate surprise ina-
     tion drives the equilibrium. That trade-o varies with the level and the maturity of
     government debt.    The policy maker faces a temptation to use ination surprises to
     oset ineciencies that arise from monopolistic competition and distortionary taxa-
     tion. There is an additional temptation to use ination surprises to inuence the real
     value of outstanding government debta temptation that grows with the level of debt
     and shrinks with the average maturity of that debt.      This state-dependent ination
     bias induces the policy maker to return debt to steady state, which the Ramsey policy
     maker would not do, to create a costly debt-stabilization bias.

  2. Changes in how myopically the policy maker behaves allow the model to capture key
     scal trends in the gure. The post-war reduction in debt-to-GDP stems from higher
     taxes and an increase in ination that the debt-dependent inationary bias creates.
     Conversely, increases in debtas in the 1980sarise from signicant tax cuts and a
     sharp reduction in ination when a relatively myopic policy maker discounts the im-
     plications of rising debt levels. This is a new interpretation of the Volcker disination.
     In the long run, though, the patient policy maker who achieves a lower debt-to-GDP
     ratio will enjoy lower tax rates and ination than a myopic policy maker who chooses
     to sustain a higher debt-to-GDP ratio.

  3. The state-dependent ination bias implies that the optimal time-consistent policy re-
     sponse to shocks depends on debt levels.     A relatively myopic policy maker sustains
     higher debt and ination in the long-run. In such a state, the policy maker's response
     to cost-push shocks largely reects a desire to mitigate the scal repercussions of the
     shock. Mark-up shocks are more inationary in a New Keynesian model augmented
     with scal policy and government debt.

  4. Unlike the case of commitment, allowing the policy maker to choose the relative pro-
     portions of short- versus long-term debt as part of the time-consistent policy problem
     does not result in the policy maker constructing an extreme portfolio where a large
     stock of short-term assets is funded by issuing long-term debt in order to benet from
     shifts in the yield curve in the face of shocks (see Debortoli et al. (2017) and the dis-
     cussion in Leeper and Leith (2017)). Instead, the policy maker issues a small amount
     of short-term debt alongside long-term debt which they vary to inuence the policy
     mix. For example, during a period of scal consolidation, increasing the proportion of
     short-term debt leads to a relaxtion of monetary policy ceteris paribus, which supports
     a slower rate of debt reduction.

   These results touch upon a number of literatures, which appendix A discusses.          The
paper proceeds as follows. The benchmark model is described in section 2 and the optimal
time consistent policy problem in section 3. Section 4, describes the solution method and 5
presents the numerical results. Section 6 concludes.


                                              2
                  Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy

2 The Model

The model is a standard New Keynesian model, but augmented to include the government's
budget constraint where government spending is nanced by distortionary taxation and/or
                           3
long-term borrowing.


2.1 Households
The utility function of the representative household takes the specic form

                                     ∞
                                                                                            !
                                                                       1−σ
                                     X          Ct1−σ   G g      Nt 1+ϕ
                                E0         βt         +χ t     −                                                         (1)
                                     t=0
                                                1−σ     1 − σg   1+ϕ

Households appreciate private consumption,                    Ct ,   as well as the provision of public goods,           Gt ,
and dislike supplying labor,      Nt .   Private consumption is made up of a basket of goods dened
by,
                                                Z    1                             −1
                                                                                       t
                                                                     t −1           t
                                         Ct ≡             Ct (j)       t    dj                                          (2)
                                                  0
where     j   denotes the good's variety and           t > 1           is the elasticity of substitution between
varieties. This is assumed to be time-varying, following the AR(1) process,

                        ln(t ) = (1 − ρ ) ln() + ρ ln(t−1 ) + σ εt , εt ∼ N (0, 1)                                 (3)

as a device for introducing mark-up shocks.
       The households' optimal allocation of consumption across individual goods implies their
demand for good       j,                                              −t
                                                              Pt (j)
                                            Ct (j) =                               Ct
                                                               Pt
                                                                                                           R                        1
                                                                                                                                   1−
                                                                                                              1                       t
where    Pt (j) is the price of good j and the aggregate price level is dened as, Pt ≡                      0
                                                                                                                  Pt (j)1−t dj           .

       The budget constraint at time t is given by

                    PtM BtM ≤ Ξt + (1 + ρPtM )Bt−1
                                               M
                                                   + Wt Nt (1 − τt ) − Pt Ct + T rt                                      (4)
          R1
where
       0
         Pt (j)Ct (j)dj = Pt Ct , Ξt is the representative household's share of prots in the
imperfectly competitive rms producing these goods, Wt are wages, and τt is an wage income
tax rate.      There is also an exogenous scal transfer to the household,                           T rt = Pt tr,   which
is introduced to ensure the model reects the data in terms of the breakdown of scal
                                                                         4
expenditures into public consumption and transfers.                           In period     t households buy government
   3
    Most countries issue long-term nominal debt such that even modest changes in ination and interest rates
can have substantial impact on the market value of debt - see Hall and Sargent (2011) and Sims (2013) for
the empirical ndings on the contribution of this kind of scal nancing to the decline in the U.S. debt-GDP
ratio from 1945 to 1974.
   4
    It is important to note that real transfers are an exogenously given constant and are not considered to
be a policy instrument. Allowing transfers to be chosen optimally would enable the policy maker to levy a
lump-sum tax in order to nance a negative distortionary labor income tax and oset the distortion arising
from monopolistic competition,. This is a typical, but unrealistic, assumption in linear-quadratic analyses
of optimal scal and monetary policy in New Keynesian models.

                                                              3
                   Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy

bonds,  BtM , at price PtM , which, following Woodford (2001), are actually a portfolio of many
                                            j
bonds which pay a declining coupon of ρ dollars j + 1 periods after they were issued, where
0 < ρ ≤ β . A measure of the duration of the bond is given by (1 − βρ)−1 , which allows
           −1
                                                                                  5
calibration of ρ to capture the observed maturity structure of government debt. Households
                                    M    M
bring nominal wealth of (1 + ρPt )Bt−1 into period t.
       Households maximize utility subject to the budget constraint (4) to obtain the optimal
allocation of consumption across time and price the declining payo consols,
                                                  σ                                            
                                           Ct               Pt                         M
                                                                                                        = PtM
                                                                                                
                               βEt                                          1+      ρPt+1                                       (5)
                                          Ct+1             Pt+1

It is convenient to dene the stochastic discount factor (for nominal payos) for later use,
                σ       
                                                −1
Qt,t+1 ≡ β CCt+1
               t       Pt
                      Pt+1
                             where Et Qt,t+1 = Rt  is the inverse the short-term interest rate

which is the policy instrument of the monetary authority.
       The second rst order condition (FOC) relates to their labor supply decision and is given
by,                                                                    
                                                                 Wt
                                               (1 − τt )                    = Ntϕ Ctσ                                           (6)
                                                                 Pt
That is, the marginal rate of substitution between consumption and leisure equals the after-
tax wage rate.
       Besides these FOCs, necessary and sucient conditions for household optimization also
require the households' budget constraints to bind with equality.                                               Dening   Dt ≡ (1 +
ρPtM )Bt−1
        M
           , the no-Ponzi-game condition can be written as,

                                                                                   
                                                                  1 DT
                                                    lim Et                              ≥0                                      (7)
                                                T →∞             Rt,T PT
                    −1 
                   TQ           M
                                          
                           1+ρPs+1  Ps
where     Rt,T ≡              M
                             Ps    Ps+1
                                              for   T ≥1     and        Rt,t ≡ 1.
                   s=t


2.2 Government
                                                                                                                    6
Aggregate public consumption takes the same form as private consumption,

                                                      Z    1                              −1
                                                                                              t
                                                                            t −1           t
                                              Gt =              Gt (j)        t    dj                                          (8)
                                                        0

such that government demand for individual goods is given by,

                                                                             −t
                                                                    Pt (j)
                                                Gt (j) =                                 Gt
                                                                     Pt
   5
    In the special case where ρ = 0, the bonds reduce to the familiar single period bonds typically studied
in the literature.
   6
    An alternative modeling approach would be to introduce an `aggregator' rm which converts the indi-
vidual goods to a nal output which is purchased by households and the government. The model implies,
equivalently, that households and the government perform this aggregation themselves.

                                                                    4
                     Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy

       Government expenditures, consisting of transfers,                 T rt , and consumption, Gt , are nanced
                                                                                                          M
by levying labor income taxes at the rate                  τt ,   and    by issuing long-term bonds Bt . The
government's sequential budget constraint is then given, in real terms, by

                                                           bt−1
                               PtM bt = (1 + ρPtM )             − wt Nt τt + Gt + tr                                                           (9)
                                                            Πt
where real debt is dened as,           bt ≡ BtM /Pt ,        and real wages,             wt ≡ Wt /Pt .            Transfers           tr =
T rt /Pt     are xed at a data-consistent average. Fiscal policy instruments are tax rates,                                          τt   and
government consumption,          Gt .

2.3 Firms
Firm     j   faces three constraints, rstly a linear production function,


                                                    Yt (j) = Nt (j)                                                                        (10)


where the real marginal cost of production is dened as                             mct ≡ Wt /Pt = (1 − τt )Ntϕ Ctσ .
Secondly, a demand curve for their product,
                                                                      −t
                                                              Pt (j)
                                               Yt (j) =                       Yt
                                                               Pt
                                                                                          hR              t −1
                                                                                                                       i  −1
                                                                                                                            t
                                                                                             1                            t
which is the sum of private and public demand, where                               Yt =     0
                                                                                                 Yt (j)     t    dj             .   Finally,

quadratic adjustment costs in changing prices, as in Rotemberg (1982), dened for rm                                                      j   as,

                                                                      2
                                                  φ         Pt (j)
                                         ηt (j) ≡                   − 1 Yt                                                                 (11)
                                                  2        Pt−1 (j)
where        φ ≥ 0   measures the degree of nominal price rigidity.                       The adjustment cost, which
accounts for the negative eects of price changes on the customerrm relationship, increases
in magnitude with the size of the price change and with the overall scale of economic activity
Yt .
       The problem facing rm      j    is to maximize the discounted value of nominal prots,

                                                       ∞
                                                       X
                                           max Et             Qt,t+z Ξt+z (j)
                                           Pt (j)
                                                       z=0

subject to these constraints above, where nominal prots are dened as,
                                                                                          2
                                                              φ                 Pt (j)
                       Ξt (j) ≡ Pt (j)Yt (j) − mct Yt (j)Pt −                           − 1 P t Yt
                                                              2                Pt−1 (j)
The FOCs imply the following non-linear Phillips curve relationship,
                                             σ                       
                                         Ct         Yt+1
              Πt (Πt − 1) = βEt                          Πt+1 (Πt+1 − 1) + φ−1 ((1 − t ) + t mct )                                       (12)
                                        Ct+1         Yt
where      Πt ≡ Pt /Pt−1   is the gross rate of ination.


                                                              5
               Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy

2.3.1 Market Clearing                Goods market clearing requires, for each good     j,

                                      Yt (j) = Ct (j) + Gt (j) + ηt (j)

such that, in a symmetrical equilibrium,

                                                     
                                           φ        2
                                     Yt 1 − (Πt − 1) = Ct + Gt                                    (13)
                                           2

There is also market clearing in the bonds market where the portfolio of long-term bonds
held by households evolves according to the government's budget constraint.
   That completes the description of the model. Before analyzing the optimal policy problem
the competitive equilibrium is dened as follows.


Denition  1 (Competitive equilibrium)       . A competitive equilibrium consists of government
policies, Rt, Gt∞, τt, bMt ∞t=0, prices, wt, PtM ∞t=0, and private sector allocations, {Ct, Nt, Yt, Ξt, Πt}∞t=0,
                                        

satisfying ∀ {t}t=0, (i) the private sector optimization taking government policies and prices
as given, that is, the household budget constraint (4), the production function Yt = Nt, and
the optimality conditions, (5), (6) and (12); (ii) the market clearing condition (13); (iii) the
government's budget constraint (9); and (iv) the no-Ponzi-game condition (7), for a given
initial level of government debt b−1.
3 Optimal Policy Under Discretion

The policy under discretion seeks to maximize the value function,

                                     (                                                   )
                                                    1−σ
                                         Ct1−σ    Gt g     (Yt )1+ϕ e
              V (bt−1 , t ) = max             +χ        −         + βEt [V (bt , t+1 )]
                                         1−σ      1 − σg    1+ϕ

subject to the resource constraint (13), the New Keynesian Phillips curve (12), and the
government's budget constraint,(9).            The possibility that the policy maker suers from a
degree of myopia is captured by assuming they may discount the future more heavily than
households,   βe ≤ β.
   In conducting this optimization the policy maker is constrained to act in a time-consistent
manner. In other words the policy maker cannot make time-inconsistent promises as to how
they will behave in the future in order to have a benecial impact on current policy trade-os
through expectations as they would under Ramsey policy. Instead, they take expectations
as given except to the extent that the debt stock they bequeath to the future aects time-
consistent policy choices in the future. To capture this future expectations are replaced by
the following state-dependent auxiliary functions,


                          M (bt , t+1 ) ≡ (Ct+1 )−σ Yt+1 Πt+1 (Πt+1 − 1)                         (14)

                          L(bt , t+1 ) ≡ (Ct+1 )−σ (Πt+1 )−1 (1 + ρPt+1
                                                                      M
                                                                         )                        (15)




                                                      6
                   Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy

                       Ct−σ − λ1t + λ2t σt (1 − τt )−1 Ytϕ Ctσ−1 + σφβCtσ−1 Yt−1 E
                                                                                                      
                                                                                    t [M (b t , t+1 )]
 Ct
                  h                                                                                              i
           +λ3t σβbt Ctσ−1 Et [L(bt , t+1 )] − ρσβ bΠ
                                                     t−1
                                                       t
                                                         Ctσ−1 Et [L(bt , t+1 )] + σ          τt
                                                                                              1−τt
                                                                                                     (Yt )1+ϕ Ctσ−1 = 0
                                                  h                         i
                  ϕ
                              φ          2                   ϕ σ      τt
             −Yt + λ1t 1 − 2 (Πt − 1) + λ3t (1 + ϕ)Yt Ct 1−τt
 Yt
           +λ2t t ϕ(1 − τt )−1 Ytϕ−1 Ctσ − φβCtσ Yt−2 Et [M (bt , t+1 )] = 0
                                                                          

 τt        t λ2t + λ3t Yt = 0
               −σ
 Gt        χGt g − λ1t − λ3t = 0                           h                                            i
 Πt       −λ1t [Yt φ (Πt − 1)] − λ2t [φ (2Πt − 1)] + λ3t bΠt−1   2  (1 +  ρβC   σ
                                                                                t E t  [L(b  , 
                                                                                            t t+1   )])   =0
                          h                        i             t
                      e t λ3t+1 1 (1 + ρP M ) + λ2t φβC σ Yt−1 Et [M1 (bt , t+1 )]
                                                                                                 
                    −βE          Πt+1          t+1                   t
 bt               h                                                                                    i
           +βλ3t Ct Et [L(bt , t+1 )] + bt Ct Et [L1 (bt , t+1 )] − ρ bΠ
                      σ                      σ                           t−1
                                                                           t
                                                                             C σ
                                                                               t  Et  [L  (b  ,
                                                                                         1 t t+1    )]   =0



and the Lagrangian for the policy problem can be written as,
                           (             1−σ
                                                                                     )
                          Ct1−σ       Gt g         (Yt )1+ϕ e
                     L=          +χ            −               + βEt [V (bt , t+1 )]
                          1−σ         1 − σg        1+ϕ
                                                                  
                                       φ             2
                      + λ1t Yt 1 − (Πt − 1) − Ct − Gt
                                       2
                              (1 − t ) + t (1 − τt )−1 Ytϕ Ctσ − φΠt (Πt − 1)
                                                                                     
                      + λ2t                                                                                       (16)
                                        +φβCtσ Yt−1 Et [M (bt , t+1 )]
                                                          − bΠ
                            "                                                                    #
                              βbt Ctσ Et [L(bt, t+1 )]      t−1
                                                                t
                                                                  (1 + ρβCtσ Et [L(bt , t+1 )])
                      + λ3t                             
                                           + 1−τ   τt
                                                      t
                                                          (Yt )1+ϕ Ctσ − Gt − tr

where the model equilibrium also requires us to dene bond prices,                     PtM = βCtσ Et [L(bt , t+1 )]
since these are embedded in the auxiliary function                  L(bt , t+1 ). The policy maker optimizes
(16) by choosing        Ct , Gt , Yt , Πt , τt , bt   and the multipliers,   λ1t , λ2t , λ3t . It should be noted
that even though the policy maker optimizes with respect to all endogenous variables, they
are not acting as a social planner. Instead, they are choosing standard policy instruments in
order to inuence the decentralized equilibrium in a manner which maximizes their objective
function subject to the time-consistency constraint. The FOCs for the policy problem are
detailed below.
    The discretionary equilibrium is determined by the system given by the FOCs, the con-
                                                                         M    σ
straints in (16), the auxiliary equations, (14) and (15), bond prices, Pt = βCt Et [L(bt , t+1 )],
and nally the exogenous process for the markup shock, (3). The solution to this system is
a set of time-invariant Markov-perfect equilibrium policy rules          yt = H(st−1 ) mapping the vec-
tor of states  st−1    = {bt−1 , t } to the optimal decisions for yt = {Ct , Gt , Yt , Πt , τt , bt , PtM , λ1t , λ2t , λ3t }
for all   t ≥ 0.
      Further insight into the trade-os facing the policy maker can be generated considering
specic FOCs. The FOC for taxation reveals a key feature of the underlying policy problem.
In the absence of a need to satisfy the budget constraint through distortionary taxation,
λ3t = 0, the tax instrument would be used to eliminate the costs associated with the output-
ination trade-o implicit in the NKPC, λ2t = 0 . In other words, if it were not for the need
to raise tax revenues to satisfy the government's budget constraint, taxes could be adjusted to


                                                            7
                Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy

eliminate any undesired movements in ination, including that arising from mark-up shocks.
      Similarly, the FOC for ination highlights the nature of the inationary bias contained
in the model. The rst two terms of the FOC capture the standard inationary bias prob-
lem. The rst term measures the costs of raising ination, and the second term the output
benets of doing so (given inationary expectations) which are evaluated positively when
the economy operates at a suboptimally low level due to tax and monopolistic competition
distortions. However, in the presence of debt the third term in the FOC for ination captures
an additional reason for wanting to raise ination relative to expectations - the erosion of
the real value of debt. Economic agents will anticipate that higher debt increases the gov-
ernment's desire to introduce ination surprises, implying that inationary expectations are
increasing in the level of government debt,            Et [M1 (bt , t+1 )] > 0   until ination is suciently
high to eliminate policy surprises (in the absence of further shocks). The state dependence
of the inationary bias will be key in driving the policy maker's desire to reduce debt relative
to what we would observe under a time-inconsistent Ramsey policy - a tendency we label
the debt stabilization bias.
      The remaining key FOC is for government debt which highlights the debt stabilization
bias. This bias can be understood by considering the FOC for debt, which can be simplied
as,                                                                  
                                                    λ3t+1
                                  PtM λ3t   − βEt
                                              e                  M
                                                          (1 + ρPt+1 )
                                                    Πt+1
                                  |                 {z                 }
                                                tax smoothing
                                                                                  
                                                           bt−1
                      σ   −1
                −λ3t Ct φ βEt [M1 (bt , t+1 )] − (bt − ρ      )Et L1 (bt , t+1 )    =0                   (17)
                                                            Πt
                |                              {z                                    }
                                         debt stabilization bias

where   X1 (bt , t+1 ) ≡ ∂X(bt , t+1 )/∂bt for the functions, X = {L, M }.           Equation (17) describes
the policy maker's optimal debt policy which can be decomposed into two elements. The rst
line gives the optimal trade-o between current and future distortions associated with the
need to satisfy the government's intertemporal budget constraint, that is achievable when
the government can commit. The second line, captures wedges which are introduced when
the policy maker is unable to commit, dening the debt stabilization bias.
      Consider the debt policy implied by the standard trade-o between current and future
distortions, reected in the relationship between            λ3t   and   λ3t+1   in the rst line of this expres-
sion. This reects the tax-smoothing argument in Barro (1979), requiring that the marginal
costs of taxation are smoothed over time.
      Initially assume the policy maker is not myopic, so            βe = β .    In this case, when the return
(adjusted for any covariance with the future costs of satisfying the government's intertem-
poral budget constraint,    λ3t+1 ) on holding the government bonds is equal to the household's
rate of time preference, the distortions associated with satisfying the budget constraint are
constant over time and steady-state debt will follow a random walk. Eectively, under tax
smoothing, the policy maker trades-o the short-run costs of reducing the stock of debt
against the discounted value of the long-term benets. When debt service costs are consis-
tent with the household/government's rate of time preference, these will be exactly balanced
at a debt level which depends upon the history of the shocks hitting the economy.
      Reintroducing myopia, such that       βe < β ,   implies that when real interest rates dier from



                                                         8
                 Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy

the policy maker's rate of time preference, then the policy maker will choose to tilt these
distortions backwards (forwards) in time depending on whether debt service costs are below
(above) the policy maker's rate of time preference. For example, when the real rate of return
                            M                                           M
                 h               i                      h                    i
                    1 (1+ρPt+1 )      −1                  λ3t+1 1 (1+ρPt+1 )
on debt, rt = Et
                   Πt+1  PtM
                                   = β , this implies Et λ3t Πt+1 P M          = βe−1 > β −1 such
                                                                      t
that   λ3t   is rising over time. The myopic policy maker would allow debt to rise.
    However (17) is a generalized Euler equation, which, in the second line, includes partial
derivatives of policy functions with respect to debt due to the time-consistency requirement.
In general the form of these auxiliary functions is unknown, which is why the policy prob-
lem needs to be solved numerically. However, that numerical solution robustly gives clear
signs for these derivatives,      M1 (bt , t+1 ) > 0   and   L1 (bt , t+1 ) < 0   which have an intuitive
interpretation.
    The rst term on the second line of (17) reects the fact that ination expectations rise
with debt levels (through the ination biases discussed above - see the FOC for ination),
M1 (bt , t+1 ) > 0, and since this is costly in the presence of nominal inertia, there is a desire to
deviate from tax smoothing, in order to reduce debt and the associated increase in ination.
This is the rst reason for wanting to reduce debt relative to the level that would be supported
by a benevolent Ramsey planner.
    The second term in square brackets in the second line captures the impact of higher
debt on bond prices. Since higher debt raises ination, which in turn reduces bond prices,
L1 (bt , t+1 )< 0,   this term also serves to encourage a reduction in debt levels, when debt is
relatively short-term. Why? High, but falling debt levels imply an upward trend in bond
prices which makes it cheaper to issue new debt, but more costly to buy-back the existing
debt stock. As debt maturity is increased, the latter eect rises relative to the former, and
hence the desire to reduce debt levels is reduced, ceteris paribus.                  This trade-o between
tax-smoothing and time-consistency determines the equilibrium level of debt and ination,
where ination is expected to be closer to zero as debt maturity rises, for a given level of
debt.


4 Solution Method and Calibration

For the model described in the previous section, the equilibrium policy functions cannot
be computed in closed form and local approximation methods are not applicable, as the
model's steady state around which local dynamics should be approximated is endogenously
determined as part of the model solution and thus a priori unknown. This necessitates the
use of global solution methods. Specically, the Chebyshev collocation method with time
iteration.     The detailed algorithm is presented in appendix E. In general, optimal discre-
tionary policy problems can be characterized as a dynamic game between the private sector
and successive governments.         Multiplicity of equilibria is a common problem in dynamic
games of this kind. Since the solution algorithm uses polynomial approximations, it is, in
eect, searching only for continuous Markov-perfect equilibria where agents condition their
strategies on payo-relevant state variables, see Judd (2004) for a discussion.
    Before solving the model numerically, the benchmark values of structural parameters
must be specied.        The calibration of parameters is summarized in Table 1.               We set   β =
       1/4
(1/1.02)       = 0.995,   which implies a   2%   annual real interest rate. The intertemporal elas-
ticity of substitution is set to one half (σ       = σ g = 2) which is in the middle of standard

                                                        9
                  Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy
             7
estimates.       The Labor supply elasticity is set to    ϕ−1 = 1/3. The steady-state elasticity of
substitution between intermediate goods is          chosen as  = 14.33, which implies a monopolis-
tic markup of approximately        7.5%,   similar to Siu (2004), and in the middle of conventional
estimates.
       The scal variables are calibrated to ensure the benchmark model mimics the key ratios
in U.S. data over the period 1954-2008 as discussed in B and reported in the rst column of
Table 2. Parameter       χ = 0.0076   ensures government consumption is 7.8% of GDP, transfers
are set to be 9% and the myopia of the policy maker is set to              βe = 0.982   (an eective time
horizon of just under 20 years) which supports an annualized steady-state debt-to-GDP
ratio of 31%. The coupon decay parameter,           ρ = 0.95,   corresponds to around      5   years of debt
maturity, consistent with U.S. data. The implied ratio of tax revenues to GDP in steady-
state is slightly higher than the data average of 17.5% reecting the fact that actual policy
has often run a decit in recent decades.
       The price adjustment cost parameter,      φ = 50, implies, given the equivalence between the
linearized NKPCs under Rotemberg and Calvo pricing (see Leith and Liu, 2016), that on
average rms re-optimize prices every six months - in line with empirical evidence. Finally,
the cost-push shock process is parameterized as            ρ = 0.939     and   σ = 0.052     in line with
estimates in Chen et al. (2017) and Smets and Wouters (2003).
   With this benchmark parameterization, the model solution generates a maximum Euler
                                                                    −6
equation error over the full range of the grid is of the order of 10 . We plot these errors in
                                                                                   8
F. As suggested by Judd (1998) , this order of accuracy is reasonable.


5 Numerical Results

This section explores the properties of the equilibrium under optimal time-consistent policy.
Subsection 5.1 considers the steady-state under a series of alternative parameterizations.
Subsection 5.2 introduces switches in the degree of policy maker myopia enabling the model
to mimic observed movements in the U.S. debt-to-GDP ratio. The optimal policy response
to shocks is discussed in subsection 5.3 and the debt maturity decision is endogenized in
subsection 5.4.


5.1 Steady State
Table 2 summarizes the steady state values for a variety of parameterizations, contrasting
them with the data averages contained in column 1. Beginning with the benchmark calibra-
tion but temporarily removing policy maker myopia such that               βe = β   - column 3 of Table 2.
We can see the key trade-os underpinning this steady-state equilibrium by considering the
(deterministic) steady-state value of the FOC for debt, equation (17),


                                         1
                                  b(1 − ρ )L1 (b, ) = φ−1 βM1 (b, )                                  (18)
                                         Π
   7
    In the robustness exercises conducted in appendix J the elasticity for public spending is lowered in line
with the evidence in Debortoli and Nunes (2013). However, this does not aect the key results.
   8
    All other model variants considered are equally well approximated - these results are available upon
request.


                                                     10
                 Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy

As noted above, the numerical solution of the policy problem implies                   L1 (b, ) < 0   and
                                                                                                          9
M1 (b, ) > 0.    Assuming   ρ < Π,
                                 this equation can only hold with a negative debt stock.
                                  bP M
This is indeed what we nd with
                                   4Y
                                       = −153% and a steady-state ination rate of −1.1%.
In this equilibrium the policy maker has accumulated assets, but these fall short of the war
                                                                10
chest level needed to support the rst best allocation.               There is a steady-state deation
which ensures the policy maker is not tempted to introduce any further surprise deation to
increase the value of the assets it has accumulated.
       Introducing policy maker myopia can overturn this result - see the second column of
Table 2, labeled benchmark. The benchmark has been calibrated to replicate a positive
                                                                                          11
debt-to-GDP ratio of 31% and government consumption to output of 7.8%.                         The steady-
state rate of ination this implies is 3%. The key equation dening this steady-state is the
FOC for debt given by


                              1                                            βe
                       b(1 − ρ )L1 (b, ) = φ−1 βM1 (b, ) − C −σ P M (1 − )                          (19)
                              Π                                            β
where the myopia can turn the RHS of this condition negative, thereby supporting a positive
steady-state debt-to-GDP ratio. The debt stabilization bias is reduced, as the policy maker
is less inclined to incur the costs of debt reduction in order to achieve longer-term benets.
It is notable that this change does little to aect the other key scal ratios of government
consumption and taxation relative to GDP.
       Column 4 increases policy maker myopia further to             βe = 0.975,   which is equivalent to
reducing the policy maker's time horizon from 20 to 12 years. This more than doubles the
steady-state debt-to-GDP ratio to 75.6% and ination rises to 4.5%.
       Increasing the exibility of prices means both that the costs of ination are lower, and
that monetary policy is less eective in aecting the real economy. As a result the government
is able to sustain a higher debt-to-GDP ratio which rises by 5.5%, as they are less driven to
reduce the state-dependent inationary bias problem. This leads to a larger steady-state rate
of ination of 3.8%, but it should be remembered that ination is now less costly. Finally,
reducing the mark-up is important since it implies the inationary bias problem is lower for
a given level of debt.     As a result the desire to inuence the state-dependent inationary
bias problem by reducing debt is less - the debt stabilization bias has been reduced. This
leads to a substantial increase in the steady-state debt-to-GDP ratio to almost 90% and an
associated increase in the steady-state rate of ination to 3.7%.
       Table 3, considers the impact of changes in the maturity structure of debt. Column 1
adopts the common assumption that debt is only of a single period's duration (one quarter in
the context of the model parameterization). In this case the steady-state debt-to-GDP ratio

   9
    No parameter permutations have been found which imply ρ > Π such that the model without myopia
can sustain a positive steady-state debt stock. Intuitively, unless debt stocks are negative, the economy
remains suciently distorted that the inationary bias problem ensures Π > ρ.
  10
    The war chest asset stock would be 4,636% of GDP.
  11
    An alternative device, that has been used in the literature (see for example Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe
(2004b) and Niemann et al. (2013)), is to introduce a monetary friction to generate a positive steady-state
debt-to-GDP ratio. Embedding such a device in the current model (see appendix G) can achieve this aim
but not robustly. It is only when price stickiness is reduced to implausibly low levels (φ < 4, an eective
average price duration of less than 4 months) that the debt-to-GDP ratio turns mildly positive.

                                                    11
                   Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy

turns negative, -11% and ination is 3.5%. While, increasing debt maturity to 30 years, leads
to a signicant increase in the debt-to-GDP ratio to over 102% of GDP and ination to over
5%. This reects the discussion above - longer maturity debt reduces the debt stabilization
bias allowing the government to sustain a higher steady-state debt-to-GDP ratio.
       In summary, myopia, monopolistic competition distortions and debt maturity are the key
drivers of the equilibrium rate of ination and debt-to-GDP ratio, while other endogenously
determined steady-state scal ratios are largely unaected by these changes. This highlights
the importance of the state-dependent inationary bias and the associated debt stabilization
bias in jointly determining the equilibrium outcomes for ination and debt.


5.2 Transition Dynamics
The model, despite macthing key scal data averages, cannot capture the key trends in the
debt-to-GDP ratio seen in the data.                     For example, the standard deviation of the annual-
ized debt-to-GDP ratio is only 0.7% under the benchmark calibration despite the equivalent
volatility in the data being 9%. This implies that the scal consequences of mark-up shocks
are insucient to capture the movements in debt despite being calibrated in line with empir-
                                                    12
ical estimates of such shock processes.                  Therefore, in order to generate plausible movements
in the debt-to-GDP ratio, there is a need to go beyond standard economic shocks and con-
sider political frictions.
       Specically, the degree of policy maker myopia is assumed switch between two regimes,
{βeL , βeH }   where   βeL > βeH   where the former `L' regime has a low degree of myopia and corre-
spondingly supports a lower level of debt. Conversely, the high myopia regime is consistent
with a higher debt level. There is an associated
                                                transition probability
                                                                       matrix governing the
                                                                       pL   1 − pL
evolution of this two-state Markov process,                                          where   pi   is the probability of
                                                                     1 − pH   pH
remaining in regime         i (i = H, L) given we are currently regime i and 1 − pi is the probability
of exit to the other        regime j , , j = (H, L), j 6= i. The policy maker is assumed to not be
in conict with their future selves but to discount the future in line with whatever degree
of myopia is in place at the time. As a result, the degree of myopia becomes an additional
state variable so that the value function is dened as,

                                      (                                                                         )
                                                    1−σ
                                          Ct1−σ   G g      (Yt /At )1+ϕ e       h                        i
       V (bt−1 , t , βei,t ) = max             +χ t     −             + βi,t Et V (bt , t+1 , βei,t+1 )
                                          1−σ     1 − σg      1+ϕ

subject to the same constraints as before but where all auxiliary functions are based on this
expanded state-space where                 βeit = βeL   or   βeH .   The implications of this model extension for
the description of optimal policy are outlined in H.
       The calibration of this Markov switching process follows Chen et al. (2018) in identifying
key shifts in the trend of the U.S. debt-to-GDP ratio - see Figure 1.                              Between 1954 and
the rst budget of the Reagan presidency in 1981 debt is on a downward trend. Similarly
following Clinton's rst budget until the rst budget of the George W. Bush there is a

  12
    Other shocks such as technology and transfer shocks are also unable to do so. Even allowing for tem-
porarily unstable paths for transfers as in Bi et al. (2013) cannot generate data-consistent movements in
debt-to-GDP ratios as the policy maker aggressively raises taxes to nance the rising transfers.

                                                                 12
              Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy

sustained reduction in the debt-to-GDP ratio. We label these episodes as being periods of
low myopia. In contrast the periods of rising debt-to-GDP ratios covering all other periods
are labeled as high myopia. Given this labeling the implied transition matrices between the
                                       0.9859   1 − 0.9859
two regimes can be estimated as,                              .   βeL = 0.9866   and   βeH = 0.9759
                                     1 − 0.9868   0.9868
are chosen to replicate the peaks and troughs of the debt-to-GDP ratio found in the data,
while the remainder of the benchmark calibration is retained. The success of this exercise
can be seen in Figure 1 where the model implied dynamics of the debt-to-GDP ratio track
the data both in the sense of ensuring the model can achieve the highs and lows seen in the
data, but also the pace at which debt increases or decreases over time.
   The rst set of experiments looks at the transitions between high and low debt regimes.
The solid line in Figure 3 plots the movements of key variables as a relative patient policy
maker seeks to reduce debt (as was the case following the end of WWII). Similarly, the
debt build-up from the 1980s onwards can be explored by examining the implications of a
relatively myopic policy maker inheriting a low level of debt. In both cases the transitional
dynamics are strikingly dierent from the ultimate steady-state (conditional on remaining
in the particular myopia regime). A relatively patient government inheriting a large debt
stock faces, for a given rate of ination, greater incentives to induce ination surprises
to reduce that debt burden.    This induces them to raise taxation sharply and to a lesser
extent reduce government consumption to facilitate the reduction in debt. At the same time
monetary policy is tightened to partially oset the increase in ination. In the longer term,
the successful reduction in the debt-to-GDP ratio allows the economy to sustain lower taxes,
higher government consumption and lower ination.
   The converse is true when a relatively myopic government inherits a low debt stock.
Since they care less about the future costs of servicing debt, their incentives to reduce a
given level of debt through surprise ination are lower. This enables them to dramatically
reduce taxes and, to a lesser extent, increase government consumption in the short-run,
while simultaneously enjoying relatively low ination.    Indeed it is only when the myopic
government has raised the debt-to-GDP ratio by around 15% relative to the patient policy
maker that the paths of ination cross. However, ultimately the myopic policy maker suers
from higher taxation, lower government consumption and higher ination as a result of the
debt they accumulate in the long-run.
   A key element in this is the maturity of the debt stock. Table 3 shows that increasing
debt maturity from the common assumption of single period debt to the ultra long maturity
of 30 years raises the steady-state debt-to-GDP ratio from -11% to 102%. It also impacts
the transitional dynamics. In Figure 3 the initial debt stock is xed to be common across all
experiments at 58% of GDP and the Figure then describes the transition to the steady-state.
The shorter the maturity structure of the debt, the more rapidly the policy maker undertakes
their scal consolidation. Consistent with the analysis above, the inationary bias problem
is notably worse as debt maturity shortens implying much higher rates of ination for an
identical state of the economy.    This in turn encourages the policy maker to reduce debt
levels more rapidly and to a lower steady-state level when debt maturity is shorter i.e. the
debt stabilization bias is greater for a shorter maturity debt stock.




                                              13
                Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy

5.3 Responding to Shocks
In the context of a model which mimics the major movements in the U.S. debt-to-GDP ratio,
this subsection considers how debt levels aect the optimal policy response to shocks. In the
standard New Keynesian economy the only shocks generating meaningful policy trade-os
for the policy maker are cost-push/mark-up shocks.    If we remove all the scal elements
                                                                               εt
of our model and apply a mark-up shock which raises the desired mark-up            by 0.5%
                                                                             εt −1
then the optimal monetary policy response is to tighten policy to reduce ination until the
output costs of further monetary tightening are too great. The paths for output, ination
and interest rate under such a policy are given by the green dotted lines in the bottom three
sub-panels of Figure 4.
       Adding distortionary taxation to such a model potentially introduces a very eective
policy instrument for dealing with such shocks. Temporarily ignoring the implications for
government debt of such a policy, the tax rate entering the NKPC could be varied to oset
the impact of the variations in      εt .    Figure 4 shows the reduction in taxation which would
achieve this negation of the inationary and output consequences of a positive mark-up
shock and leave the economy at its steady-state - see the dotted magenta line in the tax rate
sub-panel of Figure 4.
       Turning now to the benchmark model, such a scal response to shocks is tempered by
the fact that the policy maker must also ensure scal solvency and does not have access to
lump-sum taxes with which to do so. Figure 4 plots the optimal time-consistent response
to a mark-up shock conditional on being in the high (solid blue lines) or low (dashed red
lines) debt regime. The existence of debt amplies the impact of the shock, especially when
we are in the high debt regime.             Moreover, although tax cuts could in theory oset the
inationary consequences of the mark-up shock (the dotted magenta line in Figure 4) this
would exacerbate the increase in debt which drives the inationary bias problem discussed
above.     As a result the policy maker        raises   tax rates to ensure that debt falls as a more
eective way of mitigating the inationary consequences of the mark-up shock. Nevertheless
the higher tax rates do increase ination and monetary policy is tightened to help oset
that. The end result is that the response to the mark-up shock is overwhelmingly driven by
the desire to reduce debt through tax increases and thereby mitigate the state-dependent
inationary bias problem. Government spending largely moves in line with output such that
there is negligible variation in the ratio of      G/Y -     government consumption is hardly used as
                                                                        13
an instrument of either macroeconomic or scal stabilization.


5.4 Debt Management and the Debt Stabilization Bias
Up until this point, the level of debt maturity has been held xed by parameterizing              ρ.   This
subsection allows for the policy maker to have some control over the maturity structure as
part of the time-consistent optimal policy problem, by allowing them to issue a mixture

  13
    If the intertemporal elasticity of substitution for government consumption is reduced to σg = 1 in line
with the evidence summarized in Debortoli and Nunes (2013), the standard deviation of the G/Y ratio rises
from 0.8% to 1.4%, which is closer to the data average of 1.9%. However, this does not have a signicant
impact on either the transition between high/low debt regimes or the response to shocks other than to
marginally enhance the role played by government consumption. See Appendix J.


                                                        14
                Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy

of shorter and longer-maturity debt, possibly of opposite signs (i.e. one can be held as an
asset and the other a liability). The reason why this is conjectured to be an interesting debt
management policy is that the results obtained so far suggest that high debt levels imply
a large state-dependent inationary bias, which can turn to a deationary bias when the
government holds assets even although the economy is still operating at a less than ecient
level. These biases are more acute, ceteris paribus, when the bond is short term. Therefore,
issuing a short-term asset may oset the inationary bias associated with a large stock of
long-term debt.
    To explore this possibility the supply of single-period bonds is no longer assumed to be
                                                                                   M   M
zero. The wealth of the existing bondholders entering period t is now Dt ≡ (1 + ρPt )Bt−1 +
  S                                        M M        S S
Bt−1 , the household then buys bonds, Pt Bt + Pt Bt and as a result the government's
budget constraint becomes,


                                      bSt−1              bM     Wt
                  PtM bM      S S
                       t + P t bt =         + (1 + ρPtM ) t−1 −    Nt τt + Gt + tr
                                       Πt                 Πt    Pt
The remainder of the policy problem is unchanged, except for the fact that policy functions
now have three arguments, the elasticity of substitution between goods, t , and the levels of
                          S
both maturities of bond, bt−1 and bt−1 . Appendix I derives the resultant FOCs.
   By varying the relative proportions of these two types of bonds, the policy maker can
inuence the average maturity of the outstanding stock of debt and the associated ination
bias. Figure 5 plots the transition dynamics for the benchmark calibration, with and without
the government possessing the ability to issue short-term bonds in addition to long-term debt.
Despite the high overall debt-to-GDP ratio, the quantity of short-term debt issued is very
low. Under optimal but time-consistent policy, the policy maker does not issue long-term
                                          14
debt to purchase short-term assets.            Instead, there is an extremely modest issuance of
short-term debt, even when overall debt levels are very high. The short-term debt serves to
support changes in the time-consistent policy mix. Specically, monetary policy is relaxed
relative to the case where no short-term debt is issued. This lower real interest rate slows
the speed of scal consolidation allowing taxation to be lower in the short-run.


6 Conclusions

The existence of nominal debt induces a state-dependent ination bias problem as the policy
maker wishes to utilize ination surprises to oset monopolistic competition and tax distor-
tions and reduce the real value of debt. This temptation is greater with higher debt levels
and shorter debt maturity, resulting in a debt stabilization bias as the policy maker deviates
from Ramsey policy by returning debt to steady state to mitigate the associated ination
biases.
       Allowing for switches in a modest degree of policy maker myopia allows the model to
replicate the key trends in the post-WWII debt-to-GDP ratio in the United States.                    The
response to shocks in such an environment seeks to avoid exacerbating these biases, while
endogenizing the debt maturity decision reduces the speed of scal correction.


  14
    Such portfolios have been used as a hedging device when policy makers can commit (see Debortoli et al.
(2017) and Leeper and Leith (2017)).

                                                   15
               Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy

A Tables



         Parameter Value     Denition
         β            0.995  Quarterly discount factor, household.
         βe           0.982  Quarterly discount factor, policy maker.
         σ            2      Relative risk aversion coecient
         σg           2      Relative risk aversion coecient for government spending
         ϕ            3      Inverse Frish elasticity of labor supply
                     14.33  Elasticity of substitution between varieties
         ρ            0.95   Debt maturity structure (5 years)
         χ            0.0076 Scaling parameter associated with government spending
         ρ           0.939  AR-coecient of cost-push shock
         σ           0.052  Standard deviation of cost-push shock
         φ            50     Rotemberg adjustment cost coecient

                                   Table 1: Parameterization




                                                       Myopia         Price Flexibility      Markup
 Variable     Data        Benchmark No Myopia                                                
                                                      βe = 0.975          φ = 30            −1   = 5%
 bP M
  4Y      31.2%           31.2%        -152.9%       75.6%           36.7%                 89.8%
 (Π4 − 1) 3.5%/2.4%       3.0%         -1.1%         4.5%            3.8%                  3.7%
 (R4 − 1) 5.66%/4.9%      5.1%         0.9%          6.7%            5.9%                  5.8%
 Y        N.A.            0.977        0.985         0.975           0.977                 0.980
 G/Y      7.84%           7.82%        7.93%         7.76%           7.81%                 7.75%
 τ        17.5%           18.9%        15.3%         19.8%           19.0%                 19.5%

Table 2: Steady-State: Myopia, Price Flexibility and Monopolistic Competition. Over the
full sample the average ination rate was 3.5% (with a standard deviation of 2.3%), while
following the Great Moderation (post 1985) the average ination rate falls to 2.4% with a
standard deviation of 0.76%.




                          1 Qtr Maturity     1 Yr Maturity         10 Yr Maturity     30 Yr Maturity
 Variable     Benchmark
                               ρ=0               ρ = 7538            ρ = 0.9799           ρ = 0.9966
 bP M
  4Y          31.2%       -11.1%            12.8%               53.6%                102.0%
 (Π4 −1)      3.0%        1.5%              2.5%                3.62%                5.1%
   4
 (R − 1)      5.1%        3.5%              4.6%                5.7%                 7.2%
 Y            0.977       0.979             0.978               0.976                0.973
 G/Y          7.82%       8.01%             7.80%               7.83%                7.82%
 τ            18.9%       18.2%             18.4%               19.4%                20.4%

                               Table 3: Steady-State: Maturity




                                              16
               Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy

B Figures




                                                 Debt-GDP Ratio (%)
                           55




                           50




                           45




                           40
                  bt /4Y




                           35
               PM
                t




                           30




                           25




                           20




                           15
                            1950   1960   1970         1980           1990   2000   2010




Figure 1: U.S. debt-to-GDP Ratio and Model Simulation. Solid line is the U.S. debt-to-GDP
ratio between 1954 and 2008. For data source see B. The red dashed line is the simulated
debt-to-GDP from benchmark model assuming higher policy maker myopia between rst
Reagan and Clinton administration budgets, and following George W. Bush administration's
rst budget.




                                                   17
             Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy


                             Debt-GDP Ratio (%)                                         Tax rate                                      Govt. Spending
               55                                             0.24

               50                                                                                                    0.077
                                                              0.22                                                  0.0768
               45
                                                                                                                    0.0766
               40                                                 0.2
                                                                                                                    0.0764
               35
                                                                                                                    0.0762
               30                                             0.18
                                                                                                                     0.076
               25
                                                              0.16                                                  0.0758
               20                                                                                                   0.0756

               15                                             0.14                                                  0.0754
                    0   50      100       150     200   250             0   50        100       150     200   250            0   50    100       150   200   250
                                   time t                                                time t                                           time t



                         Nominal Interest Rate (%)                               Annualized Inflation (%)                                Output
               7                                                   5                                                  0.99

              6.5                                                 4.5
                                                                                                                     0.985
               6                                                   4

                                                                                                                      0.98
              5.5                                                 3.5
                                                              t




               5                                                   3
                                                                                                                     0.975

              4.5                                                 2.5
                                                                                                                      0.97
               4                                                   2

              3.5                                                 1.5                                                0.965
                    0   50      100       150     200   250             0   50        100       150     200   250            0   50    100       150   200   250
                                   time t                                                time t                                           time t




Figure 2: Transition between High/Low Debt Regimes. Blue solid line represents the tran-
sition from the high myopia/high debt regime to the low myopia/low debt regime.                                                                                    Red
dot-dashed line is the opposite transition from low myopia/debt regime to high myopia/debt
regime.




                                                                                     18
              Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy



                                                      Debt-GDP Ratio (%)                                                                             Output
                         60                                                                                       0.98

                                                                                                                 0.975
                         40
                bt /4Y                                                                                            0.97




                                                                                                            Yt
                         20
             PM

                                                                                                                 0.965
              t




                             0
                                                                                                                  0.96

                         -20                                                                                     0.955
                                 0   20   40   60      80     100      120     140   160   180   200                     0   20   40   60       80    100     120   140   160   180   200

                                                            Tax Rate                                                                          Govt. Consumption
                     0.28                                                                                        0.078

                     0.26
                                                                                                                 0.076
                     0.24




                                                                                                            Gt
               t




                                                                                                                 0.074
                     0.22
                                                                                                                 0.072
                         0.2

                     0.18                                                                                         0.07
                                 0   20   40   60      80     100      120     140   160   180   200                     0   20   40   60       80    100     120   140   160   180   200

                                                    Annualized inflation (%)                                                                Nominal Interest Rate (%)
                             8                                                                                     12


                                                                                                                   10
                             6
                         t




                                                                                                             Rt
                                                                                                                    8

                             4
                                                                                                                    6


                             2                                                                                      4
                                 0   20   40   60      80     100      120     140   160   180   200                     0   20   40   60       80    100     120   140   160   180   200




Figure 3: Debt Maturity and Fiscal Consolidation. All gures start from a debt-to-GDP of
58% and plot the transition to a low myopia/debt steady-state across dierent debt matu-
rities. 1 year debt (solid blue line), 5 year maturity (red dot-dash line), 10 year maturity
(green dotted line).




                                                                                                       19
               Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy


                                         Debt-GDP Ratio (%)                                             Tax Rate                                             Govt. Consumption (%)
                         0.2                                                     0.01

                           0                                                                                                                   0
                                                                             0.005                                                          -0.05
                         -0.2
                                                                                                                                             -0.1
                         -0.4                                                      0
                bt /4Y



                                                                                                                                            -0.15




                                                                                                                                       Gt
                                                                         t
                         -0.6
             PM




                                                                                                                                             -0.2
              t




                         -0.8                                                -0.005
                                                                                                                                            -0.25
                          -1
                                                                              -0.01                                                          -0.3
                         -1.2                                                                                                               -0.35

                         -1.4                                                -0.015                                                          -0.4
                                0   20      40      60        80   100                  0   20         40       60          80   100                0   20        40      60         80   100




                                     Nominal Interest Rate (%)                                   Annualized inflation (%)                                         Output(%)
                         1.2                                                       1                                                         0.1

                           1                                                      0.8                                                          0

                         0.8
                                                                                  0.6                                                        -0.1
                         0.6
              Rt




                                                                             t




                                                                                                                                       Yt
                                                                                  0.4                                                        -0.2
                         0.4
                                                                                  0.2                                                        -0.3
                         0.2

                           0                                                       0                                                         -0.4


                         -0.2                                                    -0.2                                                        -0.5
                                0   20      40      60        80   100                  0   20         40       60          80   100                0   20        40      60         80   100




Figure 4: Impulse Response to Mark-Up Shock under High/Low Debt Regimes Government
consumption and output measured as percentage deviation from steady-state.                                                                                                                      All other
variations as deviation from steady-state.                                                            New Keynesian model without scal policy -
green dotted line.                  Hypothetical tax rate which would oset shock - dotted magenta line.
Monetary and scal response under high myopia/debt regime - blue solid line.                                                                                                                    Monetary
and scal response under low myopia/debt regime - red dot-dash line.




                                                                                                     20
             Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy




Figure 5: Endogenous Debt Maturity and Fiscal Consolidation. Endogenous debt maturity
- solid blue line. Benchmark case of exogenous debt maturity - red dot-dash line.




                                            21
                 Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy

Appendices
A      Related Literature
The current paper is related to several strands of the optimal monetary and scal policy
literature and the following discussion highlights those that are most closely related in terms
of topics and numerical methods.
       The contribution of the paper is most closely related to the literature that studies optimal
scal and monetary policy in sticky price New Keynesian models using non-linear solution
techniques. Following the work of Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2004b) and Siu (2004), Faraglia
et al. (2013) solve a Ramsey problem using a parameterized expectation algorithm (PEA)
to examine the implications for optimal ination of changes in the level and maturity of
government debt. Similarly, Leeper and Zhou (2013) consider a model similar to the current
one, nding that ination surprises are a small but signicant part of the optimal policy
response to shocks. We study the discretionary equivalent of this policy, which is radically
dierent in terms of equilibrium outcomes. Niemann and Pichler (2011) globally solve for
optimal scal and monetary policies under both commitment and discretion in an economy
featuring a cash-in-advance constraint which alters the inationary bias problem relative to
                                                                              15
that obtained in our more standard cashless New Keynesian model.                   Additionally, they do
not consider debt levels as large as recently observed in a number of advanced economies.
Niemann et al. (2013) study time-consistent policy in the model of Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe
(2004b) and identify a simple mechanism that generates ination persistence. Government
spending is exogenous in the latter two papers which also do not consider long-term debt.
Similarly, abstracting from long-term debt, Matveev (2014) compares the ecacy of discre-
tionary government spending and labor income taxes for the purpose of scal stimulus at the
liquidity trap. In contrast the analysis presented here considers large deviations of debt from
steady-state and debt of dierent maturities (both features which can radically aect the
optimal policy response to shocks), time-consistent optimal policy making, and endogenous
determination of the maturity structure and government consumption as part of the policy
problem.
       Aside from the relatively small literature exploring optimal monetary and scal policy
in non-linear New Keynesian models, there is a vast literature on Ramsey scal and mon-
etary policy in the tradition of Lucas and Stokey (1983), which tends to focus on real or
exible-price economies. In exible-price environments, the government's problem consists
in nancing an exogenous stream of public spending by choosing the least disruptive com-
bination of ination and distortionary income taxes.           In an incomplete-markets version of
Lucas and Stokey (1983), Aiyagari et al. (2002) simulate the model globally and show that
the level of welfare in Ramsey economies with and without real state-contingent debt is vir-
tually the same. In addition, they rearm the random-walk results of debt and taxes from
Barro (1979).      Angeletos et al. (2013) introduce collateral constraints and a liquidity role
for government bonds into Aiyagari et al. (2002).           They use the Value Function Iteration
(VFI) method to globally solve the modied model and nd that the steady-state level of

  15
    Monetary frictions are sometimes introduced as a means of ensuring a positive steady-state debt to GDP
ratio. This modeling device is discussed in Appendix G.


                                                   22
               Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy

debt is no longer indeterminate, when government bonds can serve as collateral. Cao (2014)
extends Angeletos et al. (2013) with long-term debt and studies how the cost of ination for
commercial banks aects the design of scal and monetary policy. Likewise, Faraglia et al.
(2014) use PEA methods to solve a Ramsey problem with incomplete markets and long-term
bonds. They show that many features of optimal policy are sensitive to the introduction of
long-term bonds, in particular tax variability and the long run behavior of debt. The cur-
rent ndings convey the same message that maturity lengths like those observed in actual
economies can substantially alter the nature of optimal policies, but the policy problem in a
sticky price economy where the policy maker is unable to commit is fundamentally dierent.
   There is also a literature on optimal scal and monetary policy in monetary models, which
do not contain nominal inertia, but may contain a cost to ination. Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe
(2004a) study Ramsey policy in a exible-price model with cash-in-advance constraint, which
essentially extends the model of Lucas and Stokey (1983) to an imperfectly competitive
environment.   A global numerical method is used to characterize the dynamic properties
of the Ramsey allocation.    In a cash-in-advance model, Martin (2009) studies the time
consistency problems that arise from the interaction between debt and monetary policy,
since ination reduces the real value of nominal liabilities. He uses projection methods to
deal with the generalized Euler equations, see also Martin (2011), Martin (2013) and Martin
(2014) where time consistent policies are studied in variants of the monetary search model
of Lagos and Wright (2005). Monetary frictions are considered in Section G, but most of
the analysis abstracts from such frictions and emphasizes nominal price stickiness as the
conventional approach to generating sizable real eects from monetary policy.
   Moving away from models which jointly model monetary and scal policy, there is also
a literature on optimal time-consistent scal policy in real models. This literature typically
focuses on Markov-perfect policy, where households' and the government's policy rules are
functions of payo-relevant variables only.   Local approximations around a non-stochastic
steady state are typically infeasible for these models, since optimal behavior is characterized
by generalized Euler equations that involve the derivatives of some equilibrium decision rules,
and thus it is impossible to compute the steady state independent of these rules.       Hence
global solution methods are required.    Klein and Rios-Rull (2003) compare the stochastic
properties of optimal scal policy without commitment with those properties under a full-
commitment policy in a neoclassical growth model with a balanced government budget, see
also Krusell et al. (2006) and Klein et al. (2008). Ortigueira (2006) studies Markov-perfect
optimal taxation under a balanced-budget rule, while Ortigueira et al. (2012) deal with the
case of unbalanced budgets. In a version of Lucas and Stokey (1983) model with endogenous
government expenditure, Debortoli and Nunes (2013) nd that when governments cannot
commit, debt is no longer indeterminate and often converges to a steady-state with no debt
accumulation at all. This is a quite striking dierence in the behavior of debt between the
full commitment and the no-commitment cases. Similarly, Grechyna (2013) also considers
endogenous government spending in the environment of Lucas and Stokey (1983) with only
one-period debt and shows that around the steady state, the properties of the scal variables
are very similar, regardless of commitment assumptions.       More recently, Debortoli et al.
(2017) consider a Lucas and Stokey (1983) economy without state-contingent bonds and
commitment, and show that the government actively manages its debt positions and can
approximate optimal policy by conning its debt instruments to consols. Solving the policy


                                              23
                 Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy

problem set out below shares the same technical problem due to the presence of generalized
Euler equations, but nominal rigidities make the model setup quite dierent from these
papers.
   Finally, the new political economy literature (see Alesina and Passalacqua (2017) for
a comprehensive survey) considers how various aspects of the political process aect the
accumulation of government debt, and the tendency of some economies to be prone to a decit
bias. While there are numerous mechanisms through which political economy considerations
inuence scal policy, including the use of debt as a strategic variable, wars of attrition over
who bears the burden of scal reforms and the nature of the budgetary process itself, in
essence these political frictions imply that policy makers may not fully internalize the long-
term benets of lower debt, while remaining acutely aware of the short-term costs of any
scal correction. This implicit myopia is captured informally, by considering the implications
of the policy maker discounting the future at a rate which is higher than that of society as
a whole.




B Data

We follow Chen et al. (2018) and Bianchi and Ilut (2017) in constructing our scal variables.
The data for government spending, tax revenues and transfers, are taken from National
Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) Table 3.2 (Federal Government Current Receipts and
Expenditures) released by the Bureau of Economics Analysis. These data series are nominal
and in levels.
   Government Spending.          Government spending is dened as the sum of consumption
expenditure (line 21), gross government investment (line 42), net purchases of nonproduced
assets (line 44), minus consumption of xed capital (line 45), minus wage accruals less
disbursements (line 33).
   Total tax revenues.        Total tax revenues are constructed as the dierence between
current receipts (line 38) and current transfer receipts (line 16).
   Transfers.      Transfers is dened as current transfer payments (line 22) minus current
transfer receipts (line 16) plus capital transfers payments (line 43) minus capital transfer
receipts (line 39) plus subsidies (line 32).
   Federal government debt.         Federal government debt is the market value of privately
held gross Federal debt, which is downloaded from Dallas Fed web-site
  The above three scal variables are normalized with respect to Nominal GDP. Nominal
GDP is taken from NIPA Table 1.1.5 (Gross Domestic Product).
  Real GDP. Real GDP is take download from NIPA Table 1.1.6 (Real Gross Domestic
Product, Chained Dollars)
   The GDP deator.           The GDP deator is obtained from NIPA Table 1.1.5 (Gross
Domestic Product).
   Eective Federal Funds Rate.           Eective Federal Funds Rate is taken from the St.
Louis Fed website.
   The implied ratios are presented in the rst column of Table 2.




                                               24
                    Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy

C Summary of Model

We now summarize the model and its steady state before turning to the time-consistent
policy problem. Consumption Euler equation,

                                                             σ              
                                                         Ct              Pt
                                        βRt Et                                       =1                   (20)
                                                        Ct+1            Pt+1

Pricing of longer-term bonds,

                                                 σ                                  
                                            Ct             Pt                   M
                                                                                             = PtM
                                                                                     
                                βEt                                    1+    ρPt+1                        (21)
                                           Ct+1           Pt+1

Labour supply,                                                         
                                                                   Wt
                                      Ntϕ Ctσ    = (1 − τt )                ≡ (1 − τt )wt
                                                                   Pt
Resource constraint,                                     
                                               φ        2
                                         Yt 1 − (Πt − 1) = Ct + Gt                                        (22)
                                               2
Phillips curve,


                                 0 = (1 − t ) + t mct − φΠt (Πt − 1)                                    (23)
                                                   σ                     
                                                Ct      Yt+1
                                   + φβEt                    Πt+1 (Πt+1 − 1)
                                               Ct+1      Yt

Government budget constraint,

                                                                           
                                                bt−1                 τt
                       PtM bt   = (1 +   ρPtM )           −                     (Yt )1+ϕ Ctσ + Gt + tr    (24)
                                                 Πt                1 − τt

Technology,
                                                           Yt = Nt                                        (25)

Marginal costs,
                                         mct = Wt /Pt = (1 − τt )−1 Ytϕ Ctσ
   The objective function for social welfare is given by,

                                       ∞
                                                                                              !
                                                                       1−σ
                                       X            Ct1−σ   G g      (Yt )1+ϕ
                                 E0          βt           +χ t     −                                      (26)
                                       t=0
                                                    1−σ     1 − σg    1+ϕ

There are two state variables, real debt                  bt   and the elasticity of substitution between good
varieties,   t .




                                                               25
              Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy

C.1 The Deterministic Steady State
Given the system of non-linear equations, the corresponding steady-state system can be
written as follows:
                                            βR
                                                =1
                                             Π
                                     β
                                         1 + ρP M = P M
                                                 
                                     Π
                                      (1 − τ )w = N ϕ C σ
                                                   
                                        φ         2
                                  Y 1 − (Π − 1) = C + G
                                         2
                         (1 − ) + mc + φ (β − 1) [Π (Π − 1)] = 0
                                                   
                       M            M b        τ
                      P b = (1 + ρP ) −               Y 1+ϕ C σ + G + tr
                                       Π      1−τ
                                              Y =N
                                   mc = w = (1 − τ )−1 Y ϕ C σ
                                                 β
                                           PM =
                                              Π − βρ
                                                 −1
                                     mc = w =
                                                    
                                                 1/σ
                             C                −1            ϕ+σ
                                = (1 − τ )                Y− σ
                             Y                 
                                                         1/σ
                       G        C                    −1           ϕ+σ
                         = 1 − = 1 − (1 − τ )                    Y− σ
                       Y        Y                      
                                                          
                               M     β          −1        G
                            P b=            τ            −     Y
                                    1−β                   Y
Note that,
                                            σ                 
                                 ϕ+σ       G                 −1
                             Y          1−      = (1 − τ )                             (27)
                                           Y                  
which will be used to contrast with the allocation that would be chosen by a social planner.




                                                26
               Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy

D First-Best Allocation

In some analyses of optimal scal policy (e.g., Aiyagari et al., 2002), it is desirable for the
policy maker to accumulate a `war chest' which pays for government consumption and/or
scal subsidies to correct for other market imperfections. In order to assess to what extent
our optimal, but time-consistent policy attempts to do so, it is helpful to dene the level
of government accumulated assets that would be necessary to mimic the social planner's
allocation under the decentralized solution. The rst step in doing so is dening the rst-
best allocation that would be implemented by the social planner. The social planner ignores
the nominal inertia and all other ineciencies, and chooses real allocations that maximize
the representative consumer's utility, subject to the aggregate resource constraint and the
                                                                   ∗    ∗    ∗
aggregate production function. That is, the rst-best allocation {Ct , Nt , Gt } is the one that
maximizes utility (26), subject to the technology constraint (25), and aggregate resource
constraint   Yt = Ct + Gt .
   The rst order conditions imply that


                              (Ct∗ )−σ = χ (G∗t )−σg = (Nt ∗ )ϕ = (Yt ∗ )ϕ

That is, given the resource constraints, it is optimal to equate the marginal utility of private
and public consumption to the marginal disutility of labor eort and the optimal share of
government consumption in output is

                                          G∗t      1         ϕ+σg
                                                          ∗ − σg
                                              = χ σg
                                                     (Y t  )
                                          Yt∗
In a deterministic steady state and assuming                σ = σg ,   this implies the optimal share of
government consumption in output is

                                           G∗        − σ1
                                                           −1
                                              = 1 + χ
                                           Y∗
and the rst-best level of steady-state output is given by,
                                                               σ
                                                         G∗
                                                   
                                           ∗ ϕ+σ
                                         (Y )          1− ∗         =1                              (28)
                                                         Y
   It is illuminating to contrast the allocation achieved in the steady state of the decen-
tralized equilibrium with this rst best allocation. We do this by nding policies and prices
that make the rst-best allocation and the decentralized equilibrium coincide. Appendix C
shows that the steady-state level of output in the decentralized economy is given by,
                                              σ                 
                                   ϕ+σ       G                 −1
                               Y          1−      = (1 − τ )                                        (29)
                                             Y                  

Comparing (29) and (28), and assuming the steady state share of government consumption
is the same, then the two allocations will be identical when the labor income tax rate is set
optimally to be,
                                                          −1
                                         τ∗ = 1 −       =                                           (30)
                                                    −1   −1

                                                       27
                 Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy

Notice that the optimal tax rate is negative, that is, it is eectively a subsidy which osets
the monopolistic competition distortion.                  This, in turn, requires that the government has
accumulated a stock of assets dened as,

                             P M ∗ b∗
                                                               −1 tr 
                                            β      −1     − σ1
                                      =              − 1+χ         −
                              4Y ∗      4 (1 − β)                   Y
Using our benchmark calibration below, this would imply that a stock of assets of                                       4636%
of GDP would be required to generate sucient income to pay for government expenditure
(consumption and scal transfers) and a labor income subsidy which completely osets the
eects of the monopolistic competition distortion. In the absence of policy maker myopia,
the steady-state level of debt in our optimal policy problem while negative, falls far short of
this `war chest' value.
   It is also interesting to note the implied optimal share of government spending in GDP
that would be chosen by the social planner is 7.7% which is very close to that chosen by the
policy maker in our decentralized (7.82%) distorted economy implying that G is 3.9% lower
than the rst best while GDP is 5.4% smaller than it would be under the social planner's
allocation.


E Numerical Algorithm

This section describes the Chebyshev collocation method with time iteration used in the
paper. See Judd (1998) for a textbook treatment of the involved numerical techniques.
   Let   st = (bt−1 , t )    denote the state vector at time                t,   where real stock of debt              bt−1   is
endogenous and elasticity of substitution between goods                           t   is exogenous and respectively,
with the following laws of motion:

                                                             bt−1
                                PtM bt = (1 + ρPtM )              − wt Nt τt + Gt + tr
                                                              Πt
                        ln(t ) = (1 − ρ ) ln() + ρ ln(t−1 ) + σ εt , εt ∼ N (0, 1)
where   0 ≤ ρ < 1.
   There are   7 endogenous          variables and       3
                                              Lagrangian multipliers. Correspondingly, there
                                                                                  M
are 10 functional equations associated with the 10 variables Ct ,Yt ,Πt ,bt ,τt ,Pt ,Gt ,λ1t ,λ2t ,λ3t .
                               2     10
Dening a new function X : R → R , in order to collect the policy functions of endogenous
variables as follows:


      X(st ) = Ct (st ), Yt (st ), Πt (st ), bt (st ), τt (st ), PtM (st ), Gt (st ), λ1t (st ), λ2t (st ), λ3t (st )
                                                                                                                        

Given the specication of the function               X,      the equilibrium conditions can be written more
compactly as,
                          Γ (st , X(st ), Et [Z (X(st+1 ))] , Et [Zb (X(st+1 ))]) = 0
where    Γ : R2+10+3+3 → R10 summarizes                 the full set of dynamic equilibrium relationships,
and                                                                                                         
                           Z1 (X(st+1 ))                        M (bt , t+1 )
           Z (X(st+1 )) = Z2 (X(st+1 ))
                                                          ≡  L(bt , t+1 )                                  
                                                                (Πt+1 )−1 1 + ρPt+1
                                                                                 M
                                                                                    
                           Z3 (X(st+1 ))                                              λ3t+1

                                                              28
              Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy

with
                             M (bt , t+1 ) = (Ct+1 )−σ Yt+1 Πt+1 (Πt+1 − 1)
                             L(bt , t+1 ) = (Ct+1 )−σ (Πt+1 )−1 (1 + ρPt+1
                                                                         M
                                                                            )
and                                ∂Z1 (X(st+1 ))
                                                               ∂M (bt ,t+1 )                   
                                         ∂bt                          ∂bt
                                    ∂Z2 (X(st+1 ))               ∂L(bt ,t+1 )
            Zb (X(st+1 )) =                            ≡
                                                                                               
                                         ∂bt                          ∂bt                         
                                    ∂Z3 (X(st+1 ))               ∂ [(Πt+1 )−1 (1+ρPt+1
                                                                                    M
                                                                                       )λ3t+1 ]
                                         ∂bt                                    ∂bt
More specically,
                                           ∂ (Ct+1 )−σ (Πt+1 )−1 (1 + ρPt+1
                                                                        M
                                                                             
                                                                            )
                         L1 (bt , t+1 ) =
                                                          ∂bt

                                                              ∂Ct+1
               = −σ(Ct+1 )−σ−1 (Πt+1 )−1 (1 + ρPt+1
                                                 M
                                                    )
                                                               ∂bt
                                                        ∂Πt+1                       ∂P M
               − (Ct+1 )−σ (Πt+1 )−2 (1 + ρPt+1
                                             M
                                                )             + ρ(Ct+1 )−σ (Πt+1 )−1 t+1
                                                         ∂bt                         ∂bt
and
                                           ∂ (Ct+1 )−σ Yt+1 Πt+1 (Πt+1 − 1)
                                                                           
                         M1 (bt , t+1 ) =
                                                          ∂bt

                                                        ∂Ct+1                              ∂Yt+1
        = −σ(Ct+1 )−σ−1 Yt+1 Πt+1 (Πt+1 − 1)                   + (Ct+1 )−σ Πt+1 (Πt+1 − 1)
                                                         ∂bt                                ∂bt
                                          ∂Πt+1                            ∂Πt+1
        + (Ct+1 )−σ Yt+1 (Πt+1 − 1)                  + (Ct+1 )−σ Yt+1 Πt+1
                                           ∂bt                              ∂bt

                                                        ∂Ct+1                             ∂Yt+1
        = −σ(Ct+1 )−σ−1 Yt+1 Πt+1 (Πt+1 − 1)                  + (Ct+1 )−σ Πt+1 (Πt+1 − 1)
                                                         ∂bt                               ∂bt
                                            ∂Πt+1
        + (Ct+1 )−σ Yt+1 (2Πt+1 − 1)
                                             ∂bt
Note we are assuming   Et [Zb (X(st+1 ))] = ∂Et [Z (X(st+1 ))] /bt , which is normally valid using
the Interchange of Integration and Dierentiation Theorem. Then the problem is to nd a
vector-valued function   X   that   Γ maps to the zero function.          Projection methods can be used.
   Following the notation convention in the literature, we simply use s = (b, ) to denote
the current state of the economyst = (bt−1 , t ), and s0 to represent next period state that
evolves according to the law of motion specied above. The Chebyshev collocation method
with time iteration, which we use to solve this nonlinear system, can be described as follows:


  1. Dene the collocation nodes and the space of the approximating functions:


        •   Choose an order of approximation (i.e., the polynomial degrees)                nb and n for each
            dimension of the state space         s = (b, ), then there        are   Ns = (nb + 1) × (n + 1)
            nodes in the state space.         Let S = (S1 , S2 , ..., SNs )    denote the set of collocation
            nodes.


                                                        29
               Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy

     •   Compute the           nb + 1 and n + 1 roots of the Chebychev polynomial of order nb + 1
         and     n + 1   as
                                                          
                                                 (2i − 1)π
                                      zbi= cos               ,                      for   i = 1, 2, ..., nb + 1.
                                                 2(nb + 1)
                                                          
                                       i         (2i − 1)π
                                      z = cos               ,                      for   i = 1, 2, ..., n + 1.
                                                 2(n + 1)

     •   Compute collocation points                        i   as

                               max + min max − min i max − min i     
                      i =                +           z =           z + 1 + min
                                    2           2             2
         for    i = 1, 2, ..., n + 1,         which map             [−1, 1]        into    [min , max ].      Note that the number
         of collocation nodes is               n + 1 .         Similarly, compute collocation points                              bi   as

                               bmax + bmin bmax − bmin i bmax − bmin i     
                      bi =                +           zb =           zb + 1 + bmin
                                    2           2             2
         for    i = 1, 2, ..., nb + 1,         which map             [−1, 1]    into       [bmin , bmax ].      Note that


                                S = {(bi , j ) | i = 1, 2, ..., nb + 1, j = 1, 2, ..., n + 1}

         that is, the tensor grids, with                        S1 = (b1 , 1 ), S2 = (b1 , 2 ),             ...,   SNs = (bnb +1 , n +1 ).
     •   The space of the approximating functions, denoted as                                                  Ω,     is a matrix of two-
         dimensional Chebyshev polynomials. More specically,

                                                                         Ω (S )             
                                                                              1
                                                                         Ω (S2 )            
                                                                                            
                                                                         .                  
                                                                         .
                                                                         .
                                                                                             
                                                                Ω (S) =                     =
                                                                                             
                                                                         Ω (Sn +1 )        
                                                                                            
                                                                         .                  
                                                                         .
                                                                            .
                                                                                             
                                                                            Ω (SNs )

                                                                                                                                            
              1       T0 (ξ(b1 )T1 (ξ (1 ))               T0 (ξ(b1 )T2 (ξ (1 ))                ···    Tnb (ξ(b1 )Tn (ξ (1 ))
             1
                     T0 (ξ(b1 )T1 (ξ (2 ))               T0 (ξ(b1 )T2 (ξ (2 ))                ···    Tnb (ξ(b1 )Tn (ξ (2 ))             
                                                                                                                                             
             .       .                                    .                                            .
                                                                                                                                             
             .       .                                    .                                            .                                    
             .       .                                    .                                     ···    .                                    
           =                                                                                                                                
             1
                     T0 (ξ(b1 )T1 (ξ (n +1 ))           T0 (ξ(b1 )T2 (ξ (n +1 ))            ···    T0 (ξ(b1 )Tn (ξ (n +1 ))          
                                                                                                                                             
             .       .                                    .                                            .
                                                                                                                                             
             .       .                                    .                                            .
                                                                                                                                             
             .       .                                    .                                     ···    .                                    
              1       T0 (ξ(bnb +1 )T1 (ξ (n +1 ))       T0 (ξ(bnb +1 )T2 (ξ (n +1 ))        ···    T0 (ξ(bnb +1 )Tn (ξ (n +1 ))          Ns ×Ns


         where     ξ(x) = 2 (x − xmin ) / (xmax − xmin )−1 maps the domain of x ∈ [xmin , xmax ]
         into    [−1, 1].
     •   Then, at each node                 s ∈ S,         policy functions               X(s)         are approximated by                   X(s) =
         Ω(s)ΘX ,
         where
                                        ΘX = θc , θY , θΠ , θb , θτ , θpe, θG , θλ1 , θλ2 , θλ3
                                                                                               

         is a   Ns × 10     matrix of the approximating coecients.


2. Formulate an initial guess for the approximating coecients,                                                      Θ0X ,   and specify the
                               −6
   stopping rule tol , say, 10 .


                                                                     30
            Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy

3. At each iteration       j,   we can get an updated               ΘjX   by implement the following time
  iteration step:


     •   At each collocation node s ∈ S , compute the possible values of future policy
                      0
         functions X(s ) for k = 1, ..., q . That is,


                                                    X(s0 ) = Ω(s0 )Θj−1
                                                                    X

         where   q    is the number of Gauss-Hermite quadrature nodes. Note that


                                               Ω(s0 ) = Tjb (ξ(b0 ))Tj (ξ(0 ))
                                                                                           p
         is aq × Ns matrix, with b0 = bb(s; θb ), ln(0 ) = (1 − ρ ) ln() + ρ ln() + zk 2σ2 ,
         jb = 0, ..., nb , and j = 0, ..., n . The hat symbol indicates the corresponding
         approximate policy functions, so b      b is the approximate policy for real debt, for
         example. Similarly, the two auxiliary functions can be calculated as follows:

                                                   −σ                                     
                                 0 b 0 ; θc )                   0 y b 0 π          0 π
                          M (s ) ≈ C(s                      Y (s ; θ )Π(s ; θ ) Π(s ; θ ) − 1
                                                            b                    b

         and,
                                                                                               !
                                            −σ            −1                 ρP
                                                                                  d M s0 ; θ pe
                         L(s0 ) ≈ C(s
                                   b 0 ; θc )      b 0 ; θπ )
                                                  Π(s                         1+
                                                                                    1 − ρβ

         Note that we use        PetM = (1 − ρβ) PtM         rather than      PtM   in numerical analysis, since
         the former is far less sensitive to maturity structure variations.

     •   Now calculate the expectation terms                 E [Z (X(s0 ))]    at each node     s.   Let   ωk   denote
         the weights for the quadrature, then

                           q
                  0    1 X  b 0 c −σ b 0 y b 0 π  b 0 π                  
         E [M (s )] ≈ √       ωk C(s ; θ ) Y (s ; θ )Π(s ; θ ) Π(s ; θ ) − 1 ≡ M (s0 , q)
                        π k=1

                          q                                                            M s0 ; θ pe
                                                                                                  !
               0      1 X  b 0 c −σ  b 0 π −1                                   ρP
                                                                                     d
         E [L(s )] ≈ √       ωk C(s ; θ ) Π(s ; θ )                              1+                  ≡ L (s0 , q)
                       π k=1                                                           1 − ρβ
         and
                                                                                    
                                                                             M s0 ;θ p
                                                       q                  ρP
                                                                           d  ( e)
                            M
                                              1 X 1 +
                                        
                     1 + ρPt+1                                               1−ρβ            0 λ            0
          Et                         λ3t+1 ≈ √       ωk                              λb3 (s ; θ 3 ) ≡ Λ (s , q) .
                                                                                       
                       Πt+1                    π k=1      b 0 ; θπ )
                                                          Π(s

         Hence,
                                                                 M (s0 , q)
                                                                                             
                                                        h   i
                                         0               0
                                E [Z (X(s ))] ≈ E Zb (X(s )) =  L (s0 , q)                   
                                                                 Λ (s0 , q)
     •   Next calculate the partial derivatives under expectation                      E [Zb (X(s0 ))].

                                                       31
           Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy
                                                                                                                    M
•   Note that we only need to compute                        ∂Ct+1 /∂bt , ∂Yt+1 /∂bt , ∂Πt+1 /∂bt          and   ∂Pt+1 /∂bt ,
    which are given as follows:
                               nb X n
                      ∂Ct+1   X           2θjcb j
                            ≈                          Tj0b (ξ(b0 ))Tj (ξ(0 )) ≡ C
                                                                                   bb (s0 )
                       ∂b              b
                              j =0 j =0 max
                                            −    b min
                                      b        

                               nb X n
                      ∂Yt+1   X           2θjyb j
                            ≈                          Tj0b (ξ(b0 ))Tj (ξ(0 )) ≡ Ybb (s0 )
                       ∂bt             b
                              j =0 j =0 max
                                            −    b min
                                      b        
                                      nb X
                                         n
                     ∂Πt+1            X                   2θjπb j
                           ≈                                           Tj0b (ξ(b0 ))Tj (ξ(0 )) ≡ Π
                                                                                                   b b (s0 )
                      ∂bt    j
                                                      b max −    b min
                                      b =0 j      =0
                        nb X n
                  M
               ∂Pt+1   X                 2θjpeb j
                     ≈                                   Tj0b (ξ(bi ))Tj (ξ(j )) ≡ PbbM (s0 )
                ∂bt    j =0 j =0
                                 (bmax − bmin ) (1 − ρβ)
                          b       

    Hence, we can approximate the two partial derivatives under expectation

                                                              ∂E [M (s0 )]
                                                                  ∂b
                                          −σ−1                                                                    
                                  b 0 ; θc )
                              −σ C(s               Yb (s0 ; θy )Π(s
                                                                b 0 ; θπ ) Π(s
                                                                             b 0 ; θπ ) − 1 C   bb (s0 )
              q                                                                                                       
          1 X                                   −σ                                                                
        ≈√      ωk                    b 0 ; θc )
                                   + C(s               b 0 ; θπ ) Π(s
                                                       Π(s           b 0 ; θπ ) − 1 Ybb (s0 )                          
           π k=1                             −σ                                 
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                       
                                           0 c              0 π           0 π           b b (s0 )
                                  + C(s ; θ )
                                      b               Π(s ; θ ) 2Π(s ; θ ) − 1 Π
                                                      b              b

                                                  ≡M cb (s0 , q) ,
                                                   ∂E [L(s0 )]
                                                        ∂b
                                               −σ−1                −1          M s0 ;θ p
                                                                                                                   
                                                                                     ( e) b 0
                                                                               ρPd
                                      b 0 ; θc )
                                  −σ C(s                   b 0 ; θπ )
                                                           Π(s            (1 + 1−ρβ )C          b (s )
                q                                                                                                 
            1 X                                −σ              −2        ρP   ( e) b 0
                                                                                 M s0 ;θ p                         
          ≈√
                                                                               d
                  ωk                 b 0 ; θc )
                                   − C(s                b 0 ; θπ )
                                                        Π(s             (1 + 1−ρβ )Π         b (s )
                                                                                                                   
             π k=1                                      −σ              −1
                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                   
                                        +ρ C(s   b 0 ; θc )       b 0 ; θπ )
                                                                  Π(s            PbbM (s0 )
                                                              bb (s0 , q) .
                                                             ≡L
    That is,                                                                      "                  #
                                                         i   h                        cb (s0 , q)
                                                                                      M
                         E [Zb (X(s0 ))] ≈ E Zbb (X(s0 )) =                           bb (s0 , q)
                                                                                      L
4. At each collocation node               s,   solve for     X(s)     such that
                                                     i h h            i
                              Γ s, X(s), E Zb (X(s0 )) , E Zbb (X(s0 )) = 0

    The equation solver       csolve written by Christopher A. Sims is employed to solve the re-
    sulted system of nonlinear equations. With      X(s) at hand, we can get the corresponding
    coecient                                         −1
                                                T
                                        j
                                      ΘX = Ω (S) Ω (S)
                                      b                    Ω (S)T X(s)

                                                                 32
                        Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy

  5. Update the approximating coecients,                                                                                              ΘjX = η Θ
                                                                                                                                               b j + (1 − η) Θj−1 ,
                                                                                                                                                 X            X                                                                           where                 0≤η≤1     is
      some dampening parameter used for improving convergence.


  6. Check the stopping rules. If                                                                ΘjX − Θj−1
                                                                                                          X   < tol ,                                                         then stop, else update the approxi-
      mation coecients and go                                                                back to step 3.


   When implementing the above algorithm, we start from lower order Chebyshev poly-
nomials and some reasonable initial guess.                                                                                             Then, we increase the order of approximation
and take as starting value the solution from the previous lower order approximation. This
informal homotopy continuation idea facilitates obtaining the solution.
   Remark.                                    M
              Given the fact that the price Pt uctuates signicantly for larger ρ, in numer-
                              M                                 etM = (1 − ρβ)PtM . In this way,
ical analysis, the rule for Pt  is scaled by (1 − ρβ), that is, P
                        M                           M
the steady state of P e is very close to β , and Pe does not dier hugely as we change the
                       t                           t
maturity structure.


F Euler Equation Errors

To assess the accuracy of solutions, we calculate the Euler equation errors on an evenly-
spaced grid that consists of                                                  40          points of                       bt       and         40          points of                           log(t ).                 The results are similar
on a ner grid.

                                Errors in RC                                      Errors in NKPC                                   Errors in GBC                                  Errors in Bond Pricing                                  Errors in FOC for C

         ×10-8                                                 ×10
                                                                     -7
                                                                                                                 ×10-8                                             ×10-8                                               ×10-8
                 2                                                    6                                             10                                                     5                                                5

                 1                                                    4
                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                      5                                                                                                     0
                 0                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                       -5
             -1                                                       0
                                                                                                                      0                                                                                                    -5
                                                                                                                                                                      -10
             -2                                                      -2

             -3                                                   -4                                                -5                                                -15                                                 -10
            0.2                                                  0.2                                               0.2                                                0.2                                                 0.2
               0.15                                        3        0.15                                     3        0.15                                     3         0.15                                      3         0.15                                     3
                      0.1                                                  0.1                                               0.1                                                0.1                                                 0.1
                                                2.5                                                2.5                                              2.5                                                 2.5                                                2.5
                         0.05                                                 0.05                                              0.05                                               0.05                                                0.05
           Debt b t-1            0   2                           Debt b t-1           0   2                        Debt b t-1          0   2                         Debt b t-1            0   2                         Debt b t-1            0   2
                                               log(ǫ t )                                         log(ǫ t )                                         log(ǫ t )                                           log(ǫ t )                                          log(ǫ t )



                            Errors in FOC for G                                  Errors in FOC for Y                            Errors in FOC for tau                                 Errors in FOC for Pi                                Errors in FOC for b

         ×10-9                                                 ×10-7                                             ×10-8                                             ×10-7                                               ×10-7
            1.5                                                       2                                               4                                               1.5                                                   1

                 1                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                      1                                               2                                                                                                     0
            0.5                                                                                                                                                       0.5
                                                                      0                                               0                                                                                                    -1
                 0                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                     -1                                              -2                                                                                                    -2
            -0.5                                                                                                                                                      -0.5

             -1                                                   -2                                                -4                                                 -1                                                  -3
            0.2                                                  0.2                                               0.2                                                0.2                                                 0.2
                                                           3                                                 3                                                 3                                                   3                                                  3
                      0.1                                                  0.1                                               0.1                                                0.1                                                 0.1
                                                2.5                                                2.5                                              2.5                                                 2.5                                                2.5

           Debt b t-1            0   2                           Debt b t-1           0   2                        Debt b t-1          0   2                         Debt b t-1            0   2                         Debt b t-1            0   2
                                               log(ǫ t )                                         log(ǫ t )                                         log(ǫ t )                                           log(ǫ t )                                          log(ǫ t )




Figure 6: Euler equation errors in the state space used to the solve the benchmark model.
This gure plots the Euler equation errors on an evenly-spaced grid. Euler equation errors
for other model variants are available upon request.




                                                                                                                                       33
                        Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy



                               Errors in RC                        Errors in NKPC                        Errors in GBC                 Errors in Bond Pricing                Errors in FOC for C

                 10-8                                 10-6                                 10-6                                 10-7                                10-7
                   4                                    3                                    1                                    3                                   4

                    2                                                                                                             2
                                                        2                                  0.5
                                                                                                                                                                      2
                    0                                                                                                             1
                                                        1                                    0
                   -2                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                        0                                  -0.5
                   -4                                                                                                            -1

                   -6                                  -1                                   -1                                   -2                                  -2
                  0.5                                 0.5                                  0.5                                  0.5                                 0.5
                                                  4                                    4                                    4                                   4                                            4
                           0                                   0                                     0                                   0                                   0
                                          3                                    3                                    3                                   3                                         3
               Debt bt-1       -0.5   2   log( t ) Debt bt-1        -0.5   2   log( t ) Debt bt-1        -0.5   2   log( t ) Debt bt-1       -0.5   2   log( t ) Debt bt-1       -0.5     2       log( t )



                           Errors in FOC for G                 Errors in FOC for Y                  Errors in FOC for tau                Errors in FOC for Pi                Errors in FOC for b
                                                                                                                                                                                        Low debt regime
                 10-8                                 10-7                                 10-7                                 10-7                                10-6                High debt regime
                   4                                    2                                    1                                    6                                   6

                                                        1                                                                         4
                    2                                                                      0.5                                                                        4
                                                        0                                                                         2
                    0                                                                        0                                                                        2
                                                       -1                                                                         0
                   -2                                                                      -0.5                                                                       0
                                                       -2                                                                        -2

                   -4                                  -3                                   -1                                   -4                                  -2
                  0.5                                 0.5                                  0.5                                  0.5                                 0.5
                                                  4                                    4                                    4                                   4                                            4
                           0                                   0                                     0                                   0                                   0
                                          3                                    3                                    3                                   3                                         3
               Debt bt-1       -0.5   2   log( t ) Debt bt-1        -0.5   2   log( t ) Debt bt-1        -0.5   2   log( t ) Debt bt-1       -0.5   2   log( t ) Debt bt-1       -0.5     2       log( t )




Figure 7: Euler equation errors in the state space used to the solve the benchmark model
augmented with switching in the degree of policy maker myopia. This gure plots the Euler
equation errors on an evenly-spaced grid. Euler equation errors for other model variants are
available upon request.



G Model with Money

In this Section we introduce a monetary friction which has been used as a device to achieve
a positive steady-state debt-to-GDP ratio in models similar to the model analyzed in our
paper.


G.1 Households' Problem
The budget constraint at time                                         t    is given by
 Z    1
          Pt (j)Ct (j)dj(1 + s(vt )) + PtM BtM + Mt ≤ Ξt + (1 + ρPtM )Bt−1
                                                                       M
                                                                           + Mt−1 + Wt Nt (1 − τt )
  0

where Pt (j) is the price of variety j , Ξ is the representative household's share of prots in the
imperfectly competitive rms, W are wages, and τ is an wage income tax rate. Money, Mt ,
facilitates consumption purchases since consumption purchases are subject to a proportional
transaction cost                 s(vt ),      which depends on consumption-based money velocity,


                                                                                                          34
                Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy

                                                     R1
                                                      0
                                                          Pt (j)Ct (j)dj
                                            vt =
                                                             Mt−1
The transaction cost function satises the same assumptions as in Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe
(2004b).    Specically,   s(v)   satises:(i)     s(v)     is non-negative and twice continuously dier-
entiable; (ii)there is a satiation level of velocity,               v , such that s(v) = s0 (v) = 0; (iii)
                                                    0
(v − v)s0 (v) > 0 for v 6= v ; and (iv)2s0 (v) + vs0 (v) >               0 for all v ≥ v .    Note, however, following
Niemann et al. (2013), that we have changed the timing assumption of Schmitt-Grohe and
Uribe (2004b) to make this more akin to a cash in advance constraint. This ensures that
unanticipated ination is costly in the absence of sticky prices, just as anticipated ination
is.
      As a result of introducing this transactions cost, the households' rst order conditions
become,                                                                
                                                     µt+1          Pt
                                        βRt Et                                =1                                 (31)
                                                      µt          Pt+1
where
                                                         Ct−σ
                                        µt ≡
                                                 (1 + s(vt ) + s0 (vt )vt )
and the declining payo consols,

                                                                               
                                        µt+1        Pt                   M
                                                                                      = PtM
                                                                              
                              βEt                              1+     ρPt+1                                      (32)
                                         µt        Pt+1

Their second FOC relates to their demand for money,

                                                               
                                            µt+1           Pt
                            1 = βEt                                   (1 + s0 (vt+1 )vt+1
                                                                                      2
                                                                                          )
                                             µt           Pt+1

The nal FOC relates to their labour supply decision and is given by,

                                                              
                                                          Wt
                                         (1 − τt )                 = Ntϕ µ−1
                                                                          t
                                                          Pt

That is, the marginal rate of substitution between consumption and leisure equals the after-
tax wage rate.


G.2 Firms' Problem
The problem facing rms is the same as previously except    the  stochastic discount factor
                                                            µt+1
used to discount future prots is now given by, Qt,t+1 = β
                                                             µt
                                                                  Π−1
                                                                    t+1 , such that the NKPC
becomes,


                             0 = (1 − ) + mct − φΠt (Πt − 1)                                                   (33)
                                                                
                                          µt+1 Yt+1
                               + φβEt               Πt+1 (Πt+1 − 1)
                                           µt    Yt

                                                           35
                   Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy

G.3 Market Clearing
Goods market clearing requires, for each good                 j,

                                    Yt (j) = Ct (j)(1 + s(vt )) + Gt (j) + ηt (j)

which allows us to write,
                                            Yt = Ct (1 + s(vt )) + Gt + ηt
              R1
with   ηt =   0
                   ηt (j) dj .   In a symmetrical equilibrium,
                                                   
                                         φ        2
                                   Yt 1 − (Πt − 1) = Ct (1 + s(vt )) + Gt
                                         2

G.4 The Government
The government's sequential budget constraint is adjusted to account for the seigniorage
revenues,


            PtM BtM + PtS BtS + Mt + τt Wt Nt = Pt Gt + Bt−1
                                                         S
                                                             + (1 + ρPtM )Bt−1
                                                                           M
                                                                               + Mt−1

which can be rewritten in real terms

                                                            bt−1 mt−1 Wt
                           PtM bt + mt = (1 + ρPtM )            +    −    Nt τt + Gt                               (34)
                                                             Πt   Πt   Pt
                                                                                                 Mt
where real debt is dened as,             bt ≡ BtM /Pt ,   and real money balances,      mt =    Pt
                                                                                                    .


G.5 The Discretionary Policy Problem
The policy under discretion can be described as a set of decision rules for                 {Ct , Yt , Πt , bt , τt , Gt }
which maximize the following Lagrangian,
                    (                                                               )
                                1−σ
                Ct1−σ        Gt g         (Yt )1+ϕ
          L=            +χ            −                + βEt [V (bt , mt , t+1 )]
               1−σ           1 − σg        1+ϕ
                                                                          
                             φ              2
           + λ1t Yt 1 − (Πt − 1) − Ct (1 + s(vt )) − Gt
                             2
                    (1 − ) + (1 − τt )−1 Ytϕ µ−1
                                                                              
                                                        t − φΠt (Πt − 1)
           + λ2t                                                                                                   (35)
                            +φβµ−1       −1
                                  t Yt Et [M (bt , mt , t+1 )]

                     βbt µ−1                   t+1 )] − bΠ                −1
                  "                                       t−1
                                                                                                         #
                          t Et [L(b t , mt ,              t
                                                               1 +   ρβµ   t   E t [L(b t , mt , t+1 )]
           + λ3t                         τt            1+ϕ −1                       mt−1
                                  + 1−τ      t
                                                 (Y t )   µ t − Gt + mt − Πt

           + λ4t 1 − βµ−1
                                                      
                           t Et N (bt , mt , t+1 )
                                    Ct−σ
                                                       
           + λ5t µt −
                          (1 + s(vt ) + s0 (vt )vt )
                        Ct Πt
           + λ6t [vt −        ]
                        mt−1

                                                            36
                Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy

where the auxiliary functions are dened as,


                                      M (bt , mt , t+1 ) = µt+1 Yt+1 Πt+1 (Πt+1 − 1)                   (36)


                                      L(bt , mt , t+1 ) = µt+1 (Πt+1 )−1 (1 + ρPt+1
                                                                                  M
                                                                                     )                  (37)

                           N (bt , mt , t+1 ) = µt+1 (Πt+1 )−1 (1 + s0 (vt+1 ) (vt+1 )2 )              (38)

We can write the rst order conditions (FOCs) for the policy problem as follows:
   The FOC for consumption,

                                                                             vt
                                             Ct−σ − λ1t [1 + s(vt )] − λ6t
                                                                             Ct

                                                    + λ5t µt σCt−1 = 0                                  (39)

output,                                                                        
                                                                   φ
                                             −Ytϕ   + λ1t       1 − (Πt − 1)2
                                                                   2
                 +λ2t ϕ(1 − τt )−1 Ytϕ−1 µ−1       −1 −2
                                                                                     
                                           t  − φβµ t  Y t E  t [M (b t , mt , t+1 )]
                                                           
                                              ϕ −1      τt
                            + λ3t (1 + ϕ)Yt µt                   =0                                     (40)
                                                      1 − τt
taxation,
                                                     λ2t + λ3t Yt = 0                                  (41)

government consumption,
                                                     −σg
                                                χGt        − λ1t − λ3t = 0                              (42)

ination


                                        −λ1t [Yt φ (Πt − 1)] − λ2t [φ (2Πt − 1)]
                                                                              
                               bt−1             −1
                                                                        mt−1          vt
                + λ3t                  1 + ρβµt Et [L(bt , mt , t+1 )] +        − λ6t    =0            (43)
                                Π2t                                        Πt2
                                                                                       Πt
marginal utility,   µt ,
                                              −1 ϕ
                           λ2t µ−2                      −1
                                t [−(1 − τt ) Yt − φβYt Et [M (bt , mt , t+1 )]]

                                                   bt−1                               τt
      + λ3t µ−2
             t [−βbt Et [L(bt , mt , t+1 )] +          ρβEt [L(bt , mt , t+1 )] −        (Yt )1+ϕ ]   (44)
                                                    Πt                              1 − τt
                                      +λ4t βµ−2
                                                                      
                                             t Et [N (bt , mt , t+1 )] + λ5t = 0

and velocity,
                                                   −λ1t Ct s0 (vt ) + λ6t
                                                     (2s0 (vt ) + s00 (vt )vt )
                                                                               
                                         + λ5t µt                                 =0                    (45)
                                                    (1 + s(vt ) + s0 (vt )vt )



                                                                37
                      Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy

    The remaining FOCs are for government debt,

                                                            
                                           λ3t+1
                                                 (1 + ρPt+1 ) + λ2t φβµ−1
                                                         m                 −1
                                                                                                    
                     0 = −βEt                                          t Yt Et [M1 (bt , mt , t+1 )]
                                           Πt+1
                                                                                                                
                                                                                  bt−1 −1
   + βλ3t           µ−1
                     t Et    [L(bt , mt t+1 )] +      bt µ−1
                                                       [L1 (bt , mt , t+1 )] − ρ
                                                           t Et                       µ Et [L1 (bt , mt , t+1 )]
                                                                                   Πt t
                                                                                                                (46)
                                                   −1                          
                                              −λ4t βµt Et [N1 (bt , mt , t+1 )]
and money balances,

                                                            1             vt+1
                                              βEt [−λ3t+1       + λ6t+1          ]
                                                          Πt+1             mt
                                              + λ2t φβµ−1      −1
                                                                                             
                                                          t Y t   E t [M2 (b t , m t , t+1 )]
                                                                                                             
                                  −1                                           bt−1 −1
                    +βλ3t β            +    bt µ−1
                                                t Et[L2 (bt , mt , t+1 )] − ρ     µ Et [L2 (bt , mt , t+1 )]
                                                                                Πt t
                                               − λ4t βµ−1
                                                                                   
                                                         t Et [N2 (bt , mt , t+1 )] = 0                               (47)

    The discretionary equilibrium is determined by the system given by the FOCs, (39),
                                                                                     M
- (47), the constraints in (35) , the auxiliary equations, (36)-(38), bond prices, Pt  =
   σ
βCt Et [L(bt , t+1 )], and the exogenous process for the markup shock,

                                 ln(t ) = (1 − ρ ) ln() + ρ ln(t−1 ) + σ εt , εt ∼ N (0, 1)

The solution to this system is a set of time-invariant Markov-perfect equilibrium policy rules
yt = H(st−1 ) mapping the vector of states st−1 = {bt−1 , mt−1 , t } to the optimal decisions for
yt = {Ct , Gt , Yt , Πt , τt , bt , mt , PtM , λ1t , λ2t , λ3t , λ4t , λ5t , λ6t } for all t ≥ 0.
    Solving this model can generate a positive steady-state debt-to-GDP ratio. However, it
is only when price stickiness is reduced to implausibly low levels (φ                             < 4,   an eective average
price duration of less than 4 months) that the debt-to-GDP ratio can be turned mildly
positive. For example with                    φ = 2.5    (equivalent to a Calvo probability of no price change of
0.14 and an average price duration of just under 3.5 months), the steady-state debt-to-GDP
ratio is 13.3%, but this implies very large ination response to shocks alongside negligible
movements in the debt-to-GDP ratio. This suggests that the mild myopia adopted in this
paper is a more data-consistent motivation for existence of a positive steady-state debt
and the observed uctuations in debt relative to that steady-state, which also facilitates a
comparison with the commonly used cashless economy framework of much New Keynesian
analysis of optimal policy.


H Switches in Policy Maker Myopia

In order to replicate the observed uctuations in the debt-to-GDP ratio in the US, it is
necessary to allow the degree of policy maker myopia to uctuate between
                                                                        high and low
                                                                                    
                                                                                                             pH   1 − pH
levels,   βeH   and    βeL   as a two state Markov process with transition matrix,
                                                                                                           1 − pL   pL

                                                                     38
                        Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy

where       pi    is the probability of remaining in regime i,                     i = H, L   from the current period to the
next. As a result of this change the policy problem is reformulated as,

                    (                                                                   )
                               1−σ
                 Ct1−σ       Gt g       (Yt )1+ϕ e
           L=          +χ            −              + βi,t Et [V (bt , t+1 , βei,t+1 )]
                1−σ         1 − σg       1+ϕ
                                                         
                             φ           2
            + λ1t Yt 1 − (Πt − 1) − Ct − Gt
                             2
                    (1 − t ) + t (1 − τt )h−1 Ytϕ Ctσ − φΠt (Πit − 1)
                  "                                                             #
            + λ2t                                                                                                             (48)
                         +φβCtσ Yt−1 Et M (bt , t+1 , βei,t+1 )
                              h                      i                              h                     i 
                    βbt Ctσ Et L(bt , t+1 , βei,t+1 ) − bΠ t−1
                                                              t
                                                                  1  +   ρβC    σ
                                                                                t E t  L(b  , 
                                                                                           t t+1 , β
                                                                                                   e i,t+1 )
            + λ3t                                   
                                                              1+ϕ σ
                                                                                                               
                                                   τt
                                            + 1−τt (Yt )          Ct − Gt − tr

The policy maker optimizes this Lagrangian by choosing                                  Ct , Gt , Yt , Πt , τt , bt   and the mul-
tipliers,        λ1t , λ2t , λ3t .   The only dierence between these FOCs and those in the benchmark
model are that the FOC for debt now depends upon the myopia of the current policy maker,
βei,t ,   such that
                                                                                      
                                                                    λ 3t+1
                                               PtM λ3t   − βei,t Et               M
                                                                           (1 + ρPt+1 )
                                                                     Πt+1
                                               |                    {z                  }
                                                               tax smoothing
                                                   i                                          
                           h                                   bt−1
                   σ   −1
             −λ3t Ct φ βEt M1 (bt , t+1 , βi,t+1 ) − (bt − ρ
                                            e                       )Et L1 (bt , t+1 , βi,t+1 )
                                                                                        e          =0                         (49)
                                                                Πt
             |                                      {z                                           }
                                                         debt stabilization bias

      The solution to the resultant system of FOCs is a set of time-invariant Markov-perfect
equilibrium policy rules                yt = H(st−1 ) mapping the vector of states st−1 = {bt−1 , t , βei,t } to the
optimal decisions for                yt = {Ct , Gt , Yt , Πt , τt , bt , PtM , λ1t , λ2t , λ3t } for all t ≥ 0. In formulating
the policy problem in this way the policy maker does not try to tie the hands of their future
selves. They simply accept that there are periods in which they will be relatively more or
less patient. To allow for conict between two policy makers of dierent degrees of myopia, it
would be necessary for each policy maker to evaluate the anticipated policy outcomes when
their opponent was in power using their own discount factor and adjust policies in inuence
their opponent's behavior. It would be interesting to consider these strategic interactions in
future work.




                                                                     39
                 Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy

I Optimal Policy Under Discretion With Endogenous Short-Term
  Debt

The Lagrangian for the policy problem can be written as,
               (                                                                    )
                            1−σ
              Ct1−σ       Gt g         (Yt )1+ϕ
        L=          +χ            −             + βEt [V (bt , t+1 , βeit+1 ,bSt )]
             1−σ         1 − σg         1+ϕ
                                                        
                          φ             2
         + λ1t Yt 1 − (Πt − 1) − Ct − Gt
                          2
                 (1 − t ) + t (1 − τht )−1 Ytϕ Ctσ − φΠt (Πt i− 1)
               "                                                           #
         + λ2t
                     +φβCtσ Yt−1 Et M (bt , t+1 , βeit+1 , bSt )
                           h                          i                 h                 i            
                      σ                             S          S σ                        S
                 βbt Ct Et L(bt , t+1 , βit+1 , bt ) + βbt Ct Et K bt , t+1 , βit+1 , bt
                                            e                                           e
                                                         h                         i                   
         + λ3t                − bΠt−1
                                          1 + ρβC    σ
                                                       E     L(b  ,   , β     , bS
                                                                                    )
                                                                                                         
                                                         t       t t+1     it+1 t
                                                                         e
                                               t
                                     t
                                                                                                          
                                       bS
                                                                                                         
                                                  τt          1+ϕ σ
                                   − Πt + 1−τt (Yt )
                                        t−1
                                                                    Ct − Gt − tr

where
                          M (bt , t+1 , βeit , bSt ) = (Ct+1 )−σ Yt+1 Πt+1 (Πt+1 − 1)
                          L(bt , t+1 , βeit , bSt ) = (Ct+1 )−σ (Πt+1 )−1 (1 + ρPt+1
                                                                                   M
                                                                                      )
                                                             
                                                                     −σ −1
                                     K bt , t+1 , βeit , bSt = Ct+1    Πt+1
We can write the rst order conditions for the policy problem as follows: consumption,
                           h                                                    h                           ii
        Ct−σ   − λ1t + λ2t σ(1 − τt )  −1
                                             Ytϕ Ctσ−1   +   σφβCtσ−1 Yt−1 Et                            S
                                                                                 M (bt , t+1 , βit+1 , bt )
                                                                                                e
                     h                            i                    h                      i 
         σβbt Ctσ−1 Et L(bt , t+1 , βeit+1 , bSt ) + σβbSt Ctσ−1 Et K bt , t+1 , βeit+1 , bSt
  +λ3t                            h                            i           
                                                                                      1+ϕ σ−1
                                                                                                   =0
              −ρσβ bΠt−1
                       t
                         C σ−1
                           t   E t  L(b   , 
                                         t t+1     , β
                                                     e    ,
                                                      it+1 tbS
                                                               )  + σ    τt
                                                                        1−τt
                                                                               (Y t )    C t

government spending,
                                               −σg
                                          χGt        − λ1t − λ3t = 0
output,                                                          
                                                     φ          2
                                      −Ytϕ
                                         + λ1t 1 − (Πt − 1)
                                                     2
                     h                                       h                             ii
                 +λ2t ϕ(1 − τt )−1 Ytϕ−1 Ctσ − φβCtσ Yt−2 Et M (bt , t+1 , βeit+1 , bSt )
                                                             
                                                 ϕ σ      τt
                               +λ3t (1 + ϕ)Yt Ct                   =0
                                                        1 − τt
taxation,
                                               λ2t + λ3t Yt = 0
ination,
                                 −λ1t [Yt φ (Πt − 1)] − λ2t [φ (2Πt − 1)]

                                                         40
               Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy
                                                                       bSt−1
                                                                              
                                   bt−1        σ
                                                                  S
                        +λ3t            1 + ρβCt Et L(bt , t+1 , bt ) + 2 = 0
                                    Π2t                                   Πt
and the FOCs for government debt            bt   and   bSt ,   respectively,

                                           
                       λ3t+1                                       h                         i
            −βi,t Et
              e               (1 + ρPt+1 ) + λ2t φβCtσ Yt−1 Et M1 (bt , t+1 , βeit+1 , bSt )
                                         M
                        Πt+1
              h                         i                                    h                         i 
                                      S                          S         S                             S
            Et  L(b  , 
                    t t+1  , β
                             e     ,
                               it+1 tb  )  + b  E
                                               t t  L  (b ,  ,
                                                      1 t t+1 t b  )   + b   E
                                                                           t t   K 1 b  , 
                                                                                       t t+1  , β
                                                                                                e     ,
                                                                                                  it+1 tb
+βCtσ λ3t                                   bt−1
                                                     h                         i                              =0
                                                                            S
                                          −ρ Πt Et L1 (bt , t+1 , βit+1 , bt )
                                                                   e

and
                                  λ3t+1            σ −1
                                                          h
                                                                                    S
                                                                                       i
                       −βi,t Et [
                        e               ] + λ2t φβCt Yt Et M3 (bt , t+1 , βit+1 , bt )
                                                                           e
                                  Πt+1

                  h                          i      h                       i         h                         i 
                                           S                                S          S                          S
            bt Et L3 (bt , t+1 , βit+1 , bt ) + Et K bt , t+1 , βit+1 , bt
                                  e                                  e            + bt Et K3 bt , t+1 , βit+1 , bt
                                                                                                         e
+βCtσ λ3t                                                 h                          i                                =0
                                                −ρ bΠ
                                                    t−1
                                                      t
                                                        Et   L (b , 
                                                              3 t t+1  , β
                                                                         e     ,
                                                                          it+1 t bS
                                                                                    )

J Lower Intertemporal Elasticity of Substitution for Govern-
  ment Consumption

This section recreates Figure 4, but reduces the inverse of the elasticity of substitution
for government consumption in utility to               σg = 1 .       This increases the use of government
consumption as a scal policy instrument, but without changing any of the conclusions of
the main paper. See Figure 8 below.




                                                          41
               Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy



                                          Debt-GDP Ratio (%)                                             Tax Rate                                            Govt. Consumption (%)
                          0.2                                                     0.01

                            0                                                                                                                  0
                                                                              0.005
                                                                                                                                             -0.1
                          -0.2
                                                                                                                                             -0.2
                b t /4Y




                          -0.4                                                      0




                                                                                                                                        Gt
                                                                          t
                                                                                                                                             -0.3
             PM




                          -0.6
              t




                                                                              -0.005                                                         -0.4
                          -0.8
                                                                                                                                             -0.5
                                                                               -0.01
                           -1                                                                                                                -0.6

                          -1.2                                                -0.015                                                         -0.7
                                 0   20      40      60        80   100                  0   20         40       60          80   100               0   20        40      60         80   100



                                      Nominal Interest Rate (%)                                   Annualized inflation (%)                                        Output(%)
                          1.2                                                       1                                                        0.1

                            1                                                      0.8
                                                                                                                                               0
                          0.8
                                                                                   0.6
                          0.6                                                                                                                -0.1
              Rt




                                                                              t




                                                                                                                                        Yt
                                                                                   0.4
                          0.4                                                                                                                -0.2
                                                                                   0.2
                          0.2
                                                                                                                                             -0.3
                            0                                                       0

                          -0.2                                                    -0.2                                                       -0.4
                                 0   20      40      60        80   100                  0   20         40       60          80   100               0   20        40      60         80   100




Figure 8: Impulse Response to Mark-Up Shock under High/Low Debt Regimes: Robustness
Check. Government consumption and output measured as percentage deviation from steady-
state. All other variations as deviation from steady-state. New Keynesian model without
scal policy - green dotted line.                                     Hypothetical tax rate which would oset shock - dotted
magenta line. Monetary and scal response under high myopia/debt regime - blue solid line.
Monetary and scal response under low myopia/debt regime - red dot-dash line.




                                                                                                      42
               Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy

References

Aiyagari, S. R., A. Marcet, T. J. Sargent, and J. Seppala (2002). Optimal Taxation without
  State-Contingent Debt.     Journal of Political Economy 110 (6), 12201254.
Alesina, A. and A. Passalacqua (2017). The political economy of government debt. Forth-
  coming in Taylor, J. and H. Uhlig (eds), the Handbook of Macroeconomics, Volume 2 .
Angeletos, G.-M., F. Collard, H. Dellas, and B. Diba (2013). Optimal public debt manage-
  ment and liquidity provision.   NBER Working Paper 18800 .
Barro, R. J. (1979).    On the determination of the public debt.    The Journal of Political
  Economy , 940971.
Bi, H., E. M. Leeper, and C. Leith (2013). Uncertain scal consolidations.      The Economic
  Journal 123 (566), F31F63.
Bianchi, F. and C. Ilut (2017). Monetary/scal policy mix and agent's beliefs.       Review of
  Economic Dynamics .
Cao, Q. (2014). Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy with Collateral Constraints.Mimeo .
Chen, X., T. Kirsanova, and C. Leith (2017). How optimal is US monetary policy? Journal
  of Monetary Economics 92, 96  111.
Chen, X., E. M. Leeper, and C. Leith (2018). US monetary and scal policies-conict or
  cooperation?     mimeograph, University of Glasgow .
Debortoli, D. and R. Nunes (2013). Lack of Commitment and the Level of Debt.         Journal of
  the European Economic Association 11 (5), 10531078.
Debortoli, D., R. Nunes, and P. Yared (2017).      Optimal time-consistent government debt
  maturity.   The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (1), 55102.
Faraglia, E., A. Marcet, R. Oikonomou, and A. Scott (2013). The impact of debt levels and
  debt maturity on ination.    The Economic Journal 123 (566), F164F192.
Faraglia, E., A. Marcet, and A. Scott (2014). Modelling Long Bonds-The Case of Optimal
  Fiscal Policy.   Mimeo .
Grechyna, D. (2013). Debt and Decit Fluctuations in a Time-Consistent Setup.         Available
  at SSRN 1997563 .
Hall, G. J. and T. J. Sargent (2011). Interest Rate Risk and Other Determinants of Post-
  WWII US Government Debt/GDP Dynamics.             American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
  nomics 3 (3), 192214.
Judd, K. L. (1998). Numerical Methods in Economics. MIT press.

Judd, K. L. (2004).     Existence, uniqueness, and computational theory for time consistent
  equilibria: A hyperbolic discounting example.    mimeo, Stanford University .
Klein, P., P. Krusell, and J.-V. Rios-Rull (2008). Time-consistent public policy.   The Review
  of Economic Studies 75 (3), 789808.
                                              43
                Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy

Klein, P. and J.-V. Rios-Rull (2003). Time-consistent optimal scal policy*.     International
  Economic Review 44 (4), 12171245.
Krusell, P., F. Martin, and J.-V. Ríos-Rull (2006). Time-consistent debt.   Mimeo .
Lagos, R. and R. Wright (2005).      A Unied Framework for Monetary Theory and Policy
  Analysis.    Journal of Political Economy 113 (3), pp. 463484.
Leeper, E. and C. Leith (2017).      Understanding ination as a joint monetary-scal phe-
  nomenon.     Taylor, J. and H. Uhlig (eds), the Handbook of Macroeconomics, Volume 2 .
Leeper, E. M. and X. Zhou (2013).          Ination's Role in Optimal Monetary-Fiscal Policy.
  NBER Working Paper No. 19686 .
Leith, C. and D. Liu (2016). The ination bias under Calvo and Rotemberg pricing.     Journal
  of Economic Dynamics & Control 73 (2), 283297.
Lucas, R. E. J. and N. L. Stokey (1983). Optimal scal and monetary policy in an economy
  without capital. Journal of monetary Economics 12 (1), 5593.
Martin, F. M. (2009). A positive theory of government debt. Review of economic Dynam-
 ics 12 (4), 608631.
Martin, F. M. (2011). On the joint determination of scal and monetary policy. Journal of
 Monetary Economics 58 (2), 132145.
Martin, F. M. (2013). Government Policy in Monetary Economies. International Economic
 Review 54 (1), 185217.
Martin, F. M. (2014). The Value of Constraints on Discretionary Government Policy. Mimeo .

Matveev, D. (2014). Time-Consistent Management of a Liquidity Trap: Monetary and Fiscal
  policy with Debt.    Mimeo .
Niemann, S. and P. Pichler (2011). Optimal scal and monetary policies in the face of rare
  disasters.   European Economic Review 55 (1), 7592.
Niemann, S., P. Pichler, and G. Sorger (2013). Public debt, discretionary policy, and ination
  persistence.  Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 37 (6), 10971109.
Ortigueira, S. (2006). Markov-perfect optimal taxation. Review of Economic Dynamics 9 (1),
  153178.

Ortigueira, S., J. Pereira, and P. Pichler (2012). Markov-perfect optimal scal policy: the
  case of unbalanced budgets.    Mimeo .
Rotemberg, J. J. (1982).     Sticky Prices in the United States.    Journal of Political Econ-
  omy 90 (6), 11871211.
Schmitt-Grohe, S. and M. Uribe (2004a). Optimal scal and monetary policy under imperfect
  competition.    Journal of Macroeconomics 26 (2), 183209.
Schmitt-Grohe, S. and M. Uribe (2004b). Optimal scal and monetary policy under sticky
  prices.   Journal of Economic Theory 114 (2), 198230.
                                                44
             Leeper, Leith & Liu: Optimal Time-Consistent Policy

Sims, C. A. (2013). Paper money.   The American Economic Review 103 (2), 563584.
Siu, H. E. (2004). Optimal scal and monetary policy with sticky prices. Journal of Monetary
  Economics 51 (3), 575607.
Smets, F. and R. Wouters (2003).     An estimated dynamic stochastic general equilibrium
  model of the euro area.Journal of the European Economic Association 1 (5), 11231175.
Woodford, M. (2001). Fiscal Requirements for Price Stability. Journal of Money, Credit and
 Banking 33 (3), 669728.




                                            45
