NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE POWER OF THE IUD:
EFFECTS OF EXPANDING ACCESS TO CONTRACEPTION THROUGH TITLE X CLINICS
Andrea M. Kelly
Jason M. Lindo
Analisa Packham
Working Paper 25656
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25656

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2019

We thank Greta Klinger for providing data and for many useful conversations about the
implementation of the Colorado Family Planning Initiative and, more generally, about the
provision of LARCs at Colorado family planning clinics. We also thank Kirk Bol and the
Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment for providing data. For helpful
suggestions, we also thank Melanie Guldi, Phil Levine, Daniel Schroeder, and David Slusky in
addition to conference participants of the Western Economic Association International,
Association for Public Policy Analysis and Management, and Southern Economic Association
2018 meetings. We also thank the National Institute for Health Care Management and the Laura
and John Arnold Foundation for financial support. Lindo discloses having served as an expert
witness for Planned Parenthood Federation of America and the Center for Reproductive Rights.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Andrea M. Kelly, Jason M. Lindo, and Analisa Packham. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Power of the IUD: Effects of Expanding Access to Contraception Through Title X Clinics
Andrea M. Kelly, Jason M. Lindo, and Analisa Packham
NBER Working Paper No. 25656
March 2019
JEL No. I18,J13,J18
ABSTRACT
We estimate the effect of Colorado's Family Planning Initiative, the largest program to have
focused on long-acting-reversible contraceptives in the United States, which provided funds to
Title X clinics so that they could make these contraceptives available to low-income women. We
find substantial effects on birth rates, concentrated among women in zip codes within 7 miles of
clinics: the initiative reduced births by approximately 20 percent for 15-17 year olds and 18-19
year olds living in such zip codes. We also examine how extensive media coverage of the
initiative in 2014 and 2015 altered its reach. After information spread about the availability and
benefits of LARCs, we find a substantial increase in LARC insertions, extended effects on births
among 15-17 year olds living greater than 7 miles from clinics, and significant reductions in
births among 20–24 and 25–29 year olds.
Andrea M. Kelly
Texas A&M University
amkelly@tamu.edu
Jason M. Lindo
Department of Economics
Texas A&M University
4228 TAMU
College Station, TX 77843
and NBER
jlindo@econmail.tamu.edu

Analisa Packham
Department of Economics
Miami University
800 E. High St.
Oxford, OH 45056
apackham@miamioh.edu

1

Introduction
In February 2019, the Trump administration issued a new rule—scheduled to go into

effect 60 days thereafter—that will deny Title X funding to any facility that provides abortion in addition to performing Title X activities, which includes contraception provision
in addition to other forms of reproductive health care. Given the historical importance
of Title X for low-income women’s childbearing (Bailey, 2012), this naturally raises the
questions: how important are Title X clinics in today’s context and to what degree does
it matter how well they are funded?
Underscoring the importance of these questions, a large body of research has demonstrated the remarkable ways in which improving women’s ability to control childbearing
can affect their outcomes. In particular, it’s broadly accepted that expanding access to
birth control pills and abortion during the 1960s and 1970s reduced childbearing and
increased women’s educational attainment, wages, and labor force participation, while
reducing dependence on public assistance and improving resources in households with
children.1 We know much less about the effects of the importance of access to contraception in today’s context.
Even though more US women are using contraception today than at any other point in
history, there is reason to believe that barriers to access may still be important. Nearly
half of today’s pregnancies are unintended (Finer and Zolna, 2016) and one-third of
today’s births are from unintended pregnancies (Buckles, Guldi, and Schmidt, 2019).
Moreover, the fact that one-third of today’s unintended pregnancies are to women using
some form of contraception (National Center for Health Statistics, 2014) highlights that a
relatively small share of women are using most effective forms of contraception. For these
reasons, there is a great deal of enthusiasm for expanding access to long-acting reversible
contraceptives (LARCs), a category comprised of intrauterine devices and subdermal
implants, which have failure rates less than 1% (versus birth control pills, injectables,
1

See Goldin and Katz (2002), Bailey (2006), Guldi (2008), Bailey (2009), Bailey (2012), Bailey,
Guldi, and Hershbein (2013), Myers (2017), Bailey, Malkova, and McLaren (2018), and Beauchamp and
Pakaluk (Forthcoming). Also see Bailey and Lindo (2018) for a review.

1

patches, rings, and condoms, which have failure rates of 6–18%).2 Though several medical
organizations have called on LARCs to be more widely promoted—including the American College of Obstetricians, Gynecologists’ Committee on Adolescent Health Care, the
American Academy of Pediatrics, and the Center for Disease Control and Prevention—
only 12% of women, and only 5% of teenagers, chose a LARC in 2012 (Bailey and Lindo,
2018). Such low take-up is attributed to the fact that women often lack awareness of
LARC availability or effectiveness, have misconceptions about safety, or cannot afford
the high up-front fixed costs. Notably, 49% of residents in obstetrics/gynecology training
programs use LARCs (Zigler, Peipert, Zhao, Maddipati, and McNicholas, 2017), and 65
percent of participants in a contraception counseling program chose a LARC when it was
offered at no cost (Secura, Allsworth, Madden, Mullersman, and Peipert, 2010), implying
that information and financial barriers impede higher usage rates.
In this paper we examine the impact of an initiative that provided funds to Title X
clinics so they could make LARCs available to low-income women for free or at reduced
costs. Specifically, we analyze the effects of the Colorado Family Planning Initiative
(CFPI), a program that allowed Title X clinics in Colorado to substantially expand the
provision of LARCs to their low-income clients beginning in 2009. Whereas earlier work
has shown that the initiative reduced birth rates for 15–19 year olds residing in counties
with Title X clinics (Lindo and Packham, 2017), in this study we leverage more granular
data and more recent years of data to answer several new questions, including: What
kind of “reach” can we expect from a clinic-based initiative like this one? Do the effects
extend to women who live a moderate distance away from a clinic? Are there effects on
high-school-aged teenagers? On older teenagers and women in their twenties? Do the
effects vary across race and ethnicity? Did the extensive media coverage that began in
2014 alter the reach of the program? Is there any evidence of impacts on other outcomes
associated with women’s or newborns’ health?
We answer most of these questions using two separate administrative datasets on
contraception use and births. After providing evidence that the initiative led to increases
2

LARCs are inserted by a doctor and do not require anything of the user, thus eliminating usercompliance errors.

2

in LARC use, we estimate the effects on births using a difference-in-differences design that
compares changes in births for women in zip codes closest to Title X clinics to changes
in births for women in zip codes farther away. We use a non-parametric approach to
identify which zip codes were most affected by the initiative and find that the effects are
largely concentrated among women in zip codes within 7 miles of Title X clinics. We find
that the initiative reduced births by approximately 20 percent for 15–17 year olds and
18–19 year olds living in such zip codes. Averaging across all years, we find no evidence
of significant effects on births among older women, or women living in more distant zip
codes. However, when focusing on the period of time after the initiative received extensive
media attention, we observe a trend break in the number of LARC insertions; that the
effects on births among 15–17 year olds extend out those living a greater distance from
clinics; and that there are significant effects on births among 20–24 and 25–29 year olds.
In other analyses, we consider whether these birth effects vary across income, race and
ethnicity, and explore how the initiative affected births that typically involve relatively
intensive hospital care. We also conduct an analysis of abortion, the results of which are
often imprecise, but which provide suggestive evidence that the initiative also reduced
unintended pregnancies among teenagers that otherwise would have ended in abortion.
These results have several implications for policy. First, the magnitude of the effects
indicates that expanding free and low-cost access to LARCs through Title X clinics can
reduce unintended pregnancy for a large share of young women who live close to such
clinics.3 Second, reducing barriers to highly effective contraceptives can help women
from a broad range of ages—from 15–29—avoid unintended pregnancy. Quite notably,
the effects are especially prominent for 15–17 year olds and also 18–19 year olds, which
suggests that the initiative may have improved women’s ability to invest in their high
school and post-high-school education and thus have important implications for their
economic circumstances. Third, our results indicate that estimates of the effect for all
women living in a county with a clinic (e.g., in Lindo and Packham (2017)) obscure much
larger effects for women who live closest to a clinic. Finally, since 58.9 percent of Colorado
3

Reductions in unintended pregnancy are implied by any reduction in births that results from women
voluntarily opting for more effective methods of contraception.

3

women live in zip codes where we do not find any statistically significant effect of the
initiative, our results highlight that there is more scope for Title X clinics to provide
services to a broader share of the population. These findings have especially important
policy implications in light of recent federal guidelines that will cut funding to clinics
offering abortion in addition to providing Title X services.

2

Background
This section reviews the effectiveness and uptake of long-acting reversible contracep-

tives before providing background information on the Colorado Family Planning Initiative. To do so, we borrow heavily from the discussion in Lindo and Packham (2017).

2.1

Long-Acting Reversible Contraceptives (LARCs)

LARC methods include intrauterine devices (IUDs) and subdermal implants. IUDs
are small, T-shaped devices inserted into the uterus to prevent pregnancy, while implants
are a thin, matchstick-sized plastic rod inserted under the skin of the non-dominant upper
arm. The two most common IUDs are Mirena and ParaGard. Mirena is a hormonal IUD
that releases progestin to prevent sperm motility and lasts for up to 5 years. ParaGard,
a copper IUD, contains no hormones and can last up to 12 years. Nexplanon, the most
popular implant, contains etonogestrel and can last up to 4 years.
During the first year of typical use, fewer than 1 in 1,000 women using an IUD
or implant become pregnant, due to the fact that LARCs eliminate the potential for
user-compliance error as they require nothing of the user after insertion.4 Accordingly,
professional health organizations such as the American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and the American Academy of Pediatrics have endorsed LARCs as preferred
methods for young, sexually active women.
Despite the relative ease and effectiveness of LARCs, take-up is lower than nearly
4
For comparison, oral contraceptives and condoms and have typical-use effectiveness rates of only 91
percent and 82 percent, respectively, and for oral contraceptives, the risk of contraceptive failure is 55
percent higher among women younger than 20 years old (Dinerman, Wilson, Duggan, and Joffe, 2012;
Grady, Hayward, and Yagi, 1986).

4

every other type of contraceptive device. Only 5.8 percent of adolescents and women
aged 15–19 have ever used an implant or IUD, and only 14 percent of US women chose a
LARC in 2014 (Guttmacher Institute, 2018). Substantial barriers to use include patients
lack of familiarity, lack of access, and/or misconceptions about safety.5 For young women
especially, who may face social stigma or large transportation costs, scheduling and attending the procedure itself may also serve as a deterrent. Insertion is uncomfortable and
sometimes painful, and women can experience side effects, such as menstrual pain and
bleeding, spotting, headaches, nausea, and mood changes (Grimes, 2007).6,7 Moreover,
for women wishing to become pregnant in the near future, alternative methods of contraception that do not require a visit to the doctor (for removal) to restore their ability
to become pregnant may be more attractive.
Importantly, the high upfront costs of the devices may also create large barriers to
uptake. LARCs can cost upwards of $500 out-of-pocket, and even insured patients may
pay up to a $160 copayment (Trussell, Lalla, Doan, Reyes, Pinto, and Gricar, 2009;
Planned Parenthood, 2017). And while the Affordable Care Act, which requires insurers
to cover all FDA-approved contraceptives, has reduced or eliminated concerns about costs
for some women since 2011, there is an exemption for employers with a religious or moral
objection that was recently expanded in 2017. Moreover, these contraceptives mandates
may not be as impactful for women that rely on their parents’ health insurance if they
are worried about confidentiality.8 As a result, the costs of LARCs continue to be highly
5
Such safety concerns may be a result of the reputation of the Dalkon Shield. The Dalkon Shield, an
IUD introduced in the 1970s, increased women’s risk for pelvic inflammatory disease and caused an array
of severe injuries, leading the US Food and Drug Administration to ban the device in the 1974. Although
Congress has since passed laws requiring new oversight for IUD approval, and current alternatives do not
suffer from these design flaws, the decades-old controversy is still relevant in shaping attitudes towards
IUDs today (Bailey and Lindo, 2018).
6
Based on their clinical trials, the five IUDs available on the U.S. market (Mirena, Paragard, Sklya,
Liletta, and Kyleena) have discontinuation rates due to adverse reactions between 12 percent and 22
percent. As a point of comparison, clinical trials for the commonly prescribed birth control pill, Ortho
Tri Cyclen, have had discontinuation rates due to adverse reactions between 11 and 21 percent.
7
The more common side effects of LARCs include missed periods, bleeding, and headaches, which are
common side effects for any type of hormonal contraceptive. More serious risks of IUDs include uterus
perforation and ectopic pregnancies, which occur in less than 1 in 1,000 patients (Grimes, 2007).
8
According to a recent survey, 68 percent of teens stated that their primary reason for not using
birth control is because they are afraid that their parents might find out (The National Campaign to
Prevent Teen and Unplanned Pregnancy, 2015).

5

salient for many women.9
In addition to these demand-side concerns, from the provider’s perspective there also
exist barriers that contribute to the low rate of LARC use among U.S. women. First,
doctors and nurses may themselves be unaware or misinformed about LARC technology,
and they must be trained on proper LARC insertion/removal to provide them to patients.
Second, health clinics that provide free and low-cost contraceptives often cannot afford
to offer LARCs to every client. As a result, a large proportion of Title X clinics do not
offer LARCs at all, and those that do usually have to offer them to clients selectively.
For example, just 61 percent of Title X clinics offered implants, 65 percent offered the
copper IUD and 67 percent offered a hormonal IUD in 2015 (Zolna and Frost, 2016).
By allocating funds and technical assistance for LARCs, the CFPI allowed Colorado
Title X clinics to offer these devices to thousands of women for the first time. Below, we
discuss in greater detail the extent of the LARC-focused program and provide details on
its implementation.

2.2

The Colorado Family Planning Initiative (CFPI)

In 2009 the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment (DPHE) established the CFPI in an effort to lower the state’s unintended pregnancy rate through
family planning.10 Over the course of the initiative, the Colorado DPHE received $23
million in provisional funding from the Susan Thompson Buffett Foundation to expand
family planning services, and, in particular, provide free LARC methods to low-income
women in Title X clinics. All of Colorado’s 28 agencies applied for and received funding,
which was distributed to 68 Title X clinics across the state from 2009–2015.11,12
While the specifics of each agency’s implementation strategy varied by clinic capacity
9

Notably, Mestad, Secura, Allsworth, Madden, Zhao, and Peipert (2011) find that 70 percent of
women aged 14–20 choose a LARC when it is offered at no cost.
10
Our description of the implementation of the Colorado Family Planning Initiative draws heavily
from conversations with the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment and the detailed
discussion provided in Ricketts, Klingler, and Schwalberg (2014).
11
Due to the declared success of the program, additional public funding for LARCs was appropriated
in 2016 after the depletion of private funds.
12
Money was allocated proportionally to agencies based on their number of clients and the predicted
number of LARC insertions in the following year.

6

and client population, Title X clinics generally agreed to spend their funds on the following objectives: supplying free IUDs and contraceptive implants to low-income women;
equipping staff and providers with more knowledge about LARC insertion, promotion,
and counseling; and providing technical assistance for billing, coding, and clinic management. Additionally, the CFPI offered general assistance to Title X agencies to increase
LARC usage and supported the provision of vaginal rings, tubal ligations, and vasectomies. However, the use of the ring remained fairly constant among clients after the
CFPI was implemented, and tubal ligations and vasectomies are extremely rare among
young women.13
The foundation allocated funding directly to Title X agencies, which receive federal
and state funds to provide free or low-cost family planning counseling, sexually transmitted disease screening, and contraceptives. The expansion within the existing network of
Title X family planning clinics offered a number of advantages. Due to existing contracts
with agencies within the network, the Colorado DPHE was able to expedite the funding
process and make use of clinic networks and infrastructure in place to better facilitate
collaboration, while current Title X regulations and protocols support high-quality health
care and the ongoing collection of data. Since many Title X clinics already had waiting
lists of women seeking these expensive devices, the goal of the CFPI was to focus efforts
on the unmet demand for highly effective contraceptives and expand access more broadly.
Moreover, Title X clinics are specifically aimed at providing services to low-income
women, who may face the largest hurdles to obtain LARCs. Colorado Title X guidelines
require all contraceptive methods and exam fees be incorporated into a schedule of discounts, or sliding fee schedule. Anyone reporting that their income is at or below 100
percent of the poverty level pays nothing for any service, and no client is denied services
because of an inability to pay. In Colorado, 90 percent of Title X clients report incomes
below this level, meaning that nearly all clients pay nothing for contraceptives and doctor visits.14 Prior to the CFPI, the high upfront costs of LARCs paired with the fact
13

Take-up of rings among Colorado Title X clients aged 15–29 is about 7 percent, while take-up of
ligations and vasectomies is less than 0.5 percent.
14
Agencies must accept verbal communication of income and no verification is required.

7

that clinics provided their services for free meant that widespread provision of LARCs
was prohibited. In the first year of the program, 20 out of 28 Colorado Title X agencies
offered IUDs for the first time, and 16 agencies offered the implant for the first time.
In the following year, all Colorado agencies offered IUDs and all but one agency offered
subdermal implants, suggesting that the CFPI funding was crucial in allowing clinics to
offer LARCs as a contraception option to all women.

3

Empirical Approach
We use data on contraceptive use and childbearing from two separate administrative

datasets. These data allow us to observe the number of women visiting Colorado Title X
clinics and their contraception choices before and after the CFPI, and to analyze trends
in births by age, race, and ethnicity. Below, we provide a detailed description of the data
used in our analysis as well as our strategies for estimating the causal effects of the CFPI.

3.1

Data

To understand how Title X clients’ contraception choices changed in response to
the CFPI, we use administrative family planning agency-level data from the Colorado
Department of Public Health and Environment (DPHE). These data include aggregated,
client-level information on contraceptive methods at the time clients left the clinic (for
various age groups), as well as the total number of LARC insertions per year. The data
span from 2008 to 2015, which allow us to see client’s contraceptive choices, including
whether or not they chose a LARC, from one year prior to the CFPI through the seventh
year of the program. Additionally, we use data from the Colorado DPHE on LARC
insertions from 2008–2015, which contains the total number of new insertions of IUDs
and implants for all Title X clients.
To estimate the effect of the initiative on births for various groups defined by age,
race, and ethnicity, we use restricted-access birth data from the Colorado DPHE. These
data include a record of every birth to Colorado residents from 2003 to 2016. Critically,

8

these data provide mother’s zip code of residence, which allows us to conduct a richer
and more granular analysis than (Lindo and Packham, 2017). These data also include
information on mother’s race, ethnicity, and age in addition to measures of infant health.
For our analysis we assign births to the year of conception based on the mother’s last
menstrual period to construct a measure of births conceived in a particular year.
While nearly all of our analyses focus outcomes measured from birth records, we also
consider effects on abortions using county-level data on abortions by age group collected
by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment for 2004–2016.15,16
Because all Colorado Title X agencies accepted CFPI funding, our primary identification strategy uses distance from a zip code’s population centroid to the nearest Title X
clinic to establish treatment status. This approach is motivated by several recent studies
documenting the significant effects of distance to women’s health clinics on preventative health care utilization, abortion, contraception use and births (Lu and Slusky, 2016;
Lindo, Myers, Schlosser, and Cunningham, Forthcoming; Packham, 2017; Quast, Gonzalez, and Ziemba, 2017; Fischer, Royer, and White, 2018; Lu and Slusky, Forthcoming).
Namely, as distance to a clinic increases, the likelihood that a woman will seek family
planning and health services decreases.17 To measure the distance from a zip code centroid to the nearest Title X clinic, we geocoded the addresses of each Title X clinic in
the state using archived directories of Colorado clinics from 2009–2012. Using GPS coordinates, we calculate total travel distance from a centroid to a clinic using the geonear
15
These data do not separate counts by 15–17 year olds and 18–19 year olds; therefore any analysis
of abortions by age group will consider 15–19, 20–24, and 25–29 year olds.
16
In the event that an observation is censored, we assume that the number of abortions is zero.
17
Specifically, Lu and Slusky (2016) and Lu and Slusky (Forthcoming) use a zip-code-level analyses
to estimate how much Title X clinic closures affect women’s take-up of breast exams, mammograms,
and pap tests. They find that an increase of 100 miles to the nearest clinic leads to a decrease in
these preventative care tests by 11–18 percent, and increases birth rates by 1.2 percent. Lindo, Myers,
Schlosser, and Cunningham (Forthcoming) analyzes the effect of abortion clinic closures on clinic access
and finds that closures affect women living within 200 miles of a clinic, although effects are largest for
women living nearest to a clinic. In particular, increasing the travel distance by 25 miles reduces abortion
by 10 percent. Packham (2017) studies the 2011 Texas Title X funding cuts resulting in 82 clinic closures
and finds that contraception use by Title X clients decreased by 32 percent and teen birth rates increased
by 3.4 percent as a result of reduced access to family planning services. Quast, Gonzalez, and Ziemba
(2017) and Lindo, Myers, Schlosser, and Cunningham (Forthcoming) use variation in abortion facility
closings in Texas and finds that increases in distance to the nearest abortion facility reduces abortion
rates. Fischer, Royer, and White (2018) similarly finds that increasing distance to an abortion provider
reduces abortions, while increasing distance to a family planning clinic increases births.

9

package for Stata, which draws on Google Maps API data (Picard, 2010). Importantly,
these data allow us to observe locations of Title X clinics over time, to account for any
openings or closings during this time period.
To control for time-varying zip-code-level economic conditions, we use data from the
American Community Survey (ACS), which contains yearly estimates of poverty rates and
unemployment. Because population data by race and age is unavailable by zip code, we
additionally include population counts from the National Cancer Institute’s Surveillance,
Epidemiology, and End Results Program (SEER) to construct county-level measures of
demographics, including the fraction of 15–17, 18–19, 20–24, and 25–29 year olds, the
fraction of each age group that are black, the fraction Hispanic and demographic fractions
by single age.

3.2

Identification Strategies

Our primary approach for estimating the effects of the Colorado Family Planning
Initiative is a difference-in-differences design that uses zip codes that are farther from
Title X clinics as the comparison group for zip codes closest to clinics receiving funding.
In our preferred specifications, we define our treated zip codes as those within 7 miles of
a Title X clinic, although we perform additional tests to provide evidence that our results
are not sensitive to this choice.18 The identifying assumption underlying this approach
is that the proportional changes in births in the comparison zip codes provide a good
counterfactual for the proportional changes that would have been observed in the treated
zip codes in the absence of the CFPI.
We begin our analysis by estimating Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) models of the
following form:
Birthszt = αz + αt + βXzt + θCF P Izt + zt

(1)

where Birthszt measures births in zip code z in year t using the inverse hyperbolic sine
(IHS) of the count19 , CF P Izt is an indicator variable that takes a value of one in all
18
19

Results from a range of distances are discussed below in√
Section 4.2.
This transformation takes on the form sinh−1
1 + z 2 ).
z = ln(z +

10

years after the CFPI began for zip codes defined to be “near” a Title X clinic and zero
otherwise, αz are zip code fixed effects to control for systematic differences across zip
codes, and αt are year fixed effects to control for shocks to birth counts that are common
to all zip codes in each year. Given that the outcome variable is the IHS of birth counts, θ
can be interpreted as an elasticity and, unlike a standard log transformation, the analysis
utilizes observations that have zero counts.20 All analyses allow errors to be correlated
within zip codes over time when constructing standard-error estimates.
We also report estimates that consider how the effects evolve over time with OLS
models of the following form:

Birthszt = αz + αt + βXzt +

7
X

θk CF P Iz,t−k + zt

(2)

k=0

where CF P Iz,t−k is an indicator variable that takes a value of one k years after the CFPI
began for zip codes defined to be “near” a Title X clinic and zero otherwise. All other
terms are unchanged from Equation 1.
We consider how the effects to vary over time for several reasons. First, the nature
of contraceptive choice, sexual activity, and childbearing all would suggest that effect
may grow over time after the program’s implementation, even when we assign births
to their year of conception. In particular, the share of sexually active women using
LARCs is expected to increase over time as they visit clinics and, more generally, become
increasingly aware of this option. Second, the program was rolled out at the state level
starting in fiscal year 2008 (i.e. July 2008), with money distributed to agencies each
year.21 Although the donated funds ceased after the summer of 2015, the state decided
to continue funding the program on its own starting in 2016. Accordingly, we may expect
that throughout the program’s duration, effects accumulate as teens and older women
continue to use LARCs and/or as information about the program spreads. At the same
20

We have similarly considered an approach that uses birth rates based on annual population counts
for each of our age subgroups based on zip code-level population counts taken decennially. While this
leads to estimates that are qualitatively similar to those we present, it leads to estimates that are larger
in magnitude but much less precise.
21
The Colorado DPHE disbursed funds to local agencies starting in July 2008; however, the first year
of implementation of the CFPI did not begin until January 2009.

11

time, the effects on specific age groups may vary over time as women naturally age into
other age groups. Finally, while the CFPI was not promoted publicly by the state during
its rollout, in 2014 the Colorado DPHE released an internal report on the achievements
of the initiative, which generated national news attention from 2014–2015 and which may
have altered its effects.
As with any difference-in-differences design, the validity of our approach requires
common trends in the outcome over time for the treatment and control groups (those
near Title X clinics and those farther away, respectively). We provide support for this
assumption with evidence that outcomes for these groups are not diverging from one
another prior to the CFPI. We also examine data from the American Community Survey
to test whether population flows constitute a threat to the the validity of the identifying
assumption.

4

Results

4.1

Effects of the CFPI on LARC Use

Before presenting our estimated effects on births, we first analyze how the CFPI
affected LARC uptake and client caseload. The top panel of Figure 1 shows the per
capita increase in LARC insertions by age group for women visiting Title X clinics in
Colorado. While LARC insertions are increasing for women of all ages over time following
the CFPI, the most striking increases are for women under age 25, with some increases
to women aged 25–29.
In the bottom panel of Figure 1 we also address the notion that the impact of LARCs
on childbearing is likely to depend on both LARC usage and on the rates of childbearing.
Towards this end, the bottom panel of Figure 1 displays the number of Title X clients
choosing a LARC per the number of births by age group in 2008. When accounting
for differences in births across age groups, take-up rates are highest among the youngest
women.
To compare this pattern of LARC use with the use of other contraceptives, Figure 2
12

shows how the primary method of contraception used by women visiting Colorado Title
X clinics evolved over time. In 2008, the year before the initiative began, LARCs had
a usage rate for teenagers and 20–29 year olds of less than 3 percent and 7 percent,
respectively, which was lower than usage rates for condoms, injections, rings, and birth
control pills. By 2015, LARC take-up among women under age 30 had risen to nearly 26
percent, surpassing all methods except oral contraceptives.
This increase in LARC use is mirrored by a decline in the use of oral contraceptives,
indicating that the initiative led to a substitution of LARCs for oral contraceptives.22
That the substitution appears to be along this margin has important implications for the
effects on pregnancy. Most obviously, we would expect this sort of substitution to reduce
unintended pregnancy, because LARCs are more effective than oral contraceptives. It
also suggests that we would likely expect the effects to be smaller than if the program
instead caused substitution away from condoms (as the primary form of contraception),
because condoms are less effective than oral contraceptives.
Importantly, we have data only on Title X clinic visitors.23 Given that IUDs can
last up to 12 years, increases in LARC take-up may also reduce the likelihood that such
clients visit annually, compared to those clients choosing oral contraceptives, who must
visit a clinic yearly. When comparing LARC insertions versus reported LARC usage, over
81,000 more clients had a LARC inserted between 2009–2015 than those reporting using a
LARC in 2015, implying that Colorado Title X clinics were responsible for approximately
28,000 insertions to women aged 15–29 between 2009 and 2015.24
To further demonstrate that the increases in LARC use in Colorado depart from trends
in take-up across the rest of the United States, Figure 3 depicts the difference between
LARC usage among Colorado’s Title X clinic clients and LARC usage among Title X
clinic clients across the United States as a whole. Despite starting at a similarly low rate
22

This evidence is consistent with earlier work on the effects of the CFPI on teenagers (Lindo and
Packham, 2017) and evidence on LARC takeup among teenagers across the United States when longeracting methods—Norplant and Depo Provera—became available (Levine, 2001).
23
If a patient visits a clinic more than once in a given year, we observe only the contraceptives chosen
during the first visit.
24
Data on insertions is unavailable by age. Here we are assuming that the same ratio of visitors using
LARCs to cumulative LARC insertions holds over time.

13

in 2008, LARC usage among women aged 15–29 visiting Title X clinics across the United
States only grew to approximately 13 percent by 2015 versus nearly 30 percent for women
aged 15–29 visiting Title X clinics in Colorado. Overall, these findings indicate that the
CFPI increased the number of women seeking highly effective contraceptives.25

4.2

Estimates of the Geographic Reach of the Initiative

As described in Section 3.2, to estimate the effects of the CFPI on births we rely on
an estimation strategy that compares changes in births for women residing in zip codes
near Title X clinics, who we expect to be affected by expanded access to LARCS, to
changes in births for women residing in more distant zip codes who are less likely to be
affected. Because it is not clear a priori which zip codes should be considered “near” to
Title X clinics in this context, we use a non-parametric data-driven approach to answer
this question in a similar spirit to Muralidharan and Prakash (2017).
Specifically, we use the difference-in-differences model (Equation 1) to estimate the
effects using a rolling distance-window to define the treated group while maintaining
a constant comparison group. We consider “treated” zip codes h to h + 5 miles from a
Title X clinic for h = 0, 1, ...15 and use a comparison group comprised of zip codes greater
than 20 miles from a Title X clinic. In so doing, we generate 16 separate difference-indifferences estimates, each intended to measure the effect on birth rates for a different
set of zip codes defined based on their distance from a Title X clinic. The results are
shown in Figure 4, with separate panels for the estimated effects on births for different
age groups.
As expected, we see significant estimated effects for the specifications in which the
treatment group is comprised of zip codes that are especially near Title X clinics. For
example, the very first estimate plotted in Panel A indicates that after the CFPI births
to 15–17 year olds fell approximately 10 percent more for zip codes 0–5 miles from a
clinic than they fell for zip codes greater than 20 miles from a clinic. The estimated effect
25

The CFPI appears to have had a much smaller impact on contraception use among older women.
For female Title X clients in Colorado over the age of 29, LARC use increased to 24.4 percent in 2015
versus 12.3 percent for clients across the US. It is for this reason that we focus our remaining analyses
on women aged 15–29.

14

becomes larger when we consider women in zip codes 1–6 miles but then shrinks towards
zero as we evaluate the effects on women farther and farther away. The estimated effect
on births to 15–17 year olds is no longer statistically significant at the five-percent level
when we consider those 7–12 miles from a clinic. The pattern of estimates is similar when
we instead consider births to 18–19 year olds (Panel B). There is relatively little evidence
from this analysis that births to 20–24 year olds or births to 25–29 year olds are affected
(Panels C and D).
Overall, these estimates imply that the geographical reach of the CFPI—in terms
of having a measurable impact on birth rates for some groups of women—was 7 miles.
These results determine our definition for treatment and control groups in all subsequent
analyses. In particular, in our subsequent analyses, we define our treatment group as
those zip codes within 7 miles of a Colorado Title X clinic, and compare changes in
births in these zip codes to changes in births in zip codes further than 7 miles from
a clinic. Because clinics did serve some women living in more-distant zip codes, this
approach can be viewed as estimating a lower bound of the true treatment effects. We
also note that any estimates based on this research design will represent intent-to-treat
estimates, because only a small share of the population is treated; thus, our estimates
will understate the effects of the program on the women it actually served.
To better understand how these groups of zip codes compare to one another with respect to observable characteristics, we present summary statistics for variables used in our
zip code-level analysis in Table 1.26 Specifically, Table 1 compares average birth counts,
demographic variables, poverty rates, and unemployment rates for zip codes within 7
miles of a Title X clinic and zip codes more than 7 miles from a Title X clinic. Notably,
the treatment group—zip codes closest to a Title X clinic—has higher average birth
counts in all years (for example, 12.97 versus 3.29 for 18–19 year olds), which in large
part reflects the fact that these zip codes also are more highly populated. This table
additionally reports travel distance information and travel time information, although
26

We also provide a geographical visualization of Title X clinic locations and zip code distance in
Appendix Figure A1.

15

these variables do not change over the sample period.27 While the zip codes in the treatment group may be up to 7 miles from a clinic, on average they are 3.6 miles to their
nearest clinic which corresponds to a 9 minute drive. Zip codes further than 7 miles are
an average of 22.2 miles from the nearest clinic, corresponding to 53 minutes of driving
time.

4.3

Graphical Evidence of Trends

Before discussing our preferred estimates of the effects of the CFPI on childbearing,
we first present graphical evidence to support our main results and the validity of our
research design. In Figure 5 we present an event-study-styled graph showing differencein-differences estimates of the effects on births over time, including periods of time prior
to its implementation. The outcome variable in each panel includes the inverse hyperbolic
sine of births. In each panel, the black circles represent the estimated effects at different
points in time from a baseline model controlling for zip-code and year fixed effects.28 The
comparison group includes all Colorado zip codes farther than 7 miles from a clinic. The
figure also shows estimates based on a model that additionally controls for time-varying
measures of demographics and economic conditions (gray squares).29 Additionally, in
an attempt to compare zip codes that are most alike, we also show estimates from a
third specification that limits the analysis to zip codes within 15 miles of a clinic (blue
diamonds). Effectively, this approach involves a comparison of zip codes within 7 miles
of a clinic to zip codes 7–15 miles from a clinic. Finally, the figure also shows estimates
from a specification that includes year, zip and county-by-year fixed effects to allow for
zip codes in separate counties to experience differential shocks by county over time (green
triangles). Essentially, this specification uses other zip codes within the same county as
the comparison group for each zip code within 7 miles of a clinic.
Although the exact magnitudes for each estimate in Figure 5 are difficult to discern,
27

Driving time is calculated using the geonear command in Stata 15, which is based on information
from Google Maps API.
28
In estimating the effects over time, the year prior to the implementation of the CFPI, 2008, serves
as the omitted category.
29
These controls include zip-code-level unemployment rates and poverty rates and county-level fractions of individuals aged 15–29 by age, ethnicity, and race.

16

the results as a whole reveal some clear patterns. Specifically, the sets of estimates
indicate that births in treated and control zip codes followed a similar trajectory prior to
the adoption of the CFPI, which provides support for our common trends assumption.
This evidence is particularly strong for the 15–17 and 18–19 year old age groups, which
is where we find strongest and clearest evidence of impacts on births. The estimated
effects in the pre-period are more volatile and less precisely estimated for the older age
groups.30 The pattern of estimates also provides evidence that the CFPI reduced births,
particularly for 15–17 and 18–19 year old women. There is suggestive evidence of effects
for older women during the sixth and seventh years of the CFPI, something we explore
in greater detail below.

4.4

Main Results

In Table 2 we present our main results. They are based on the difference-in-differences
model specified by Equation 2 and, motivated by our analysis of the “geographic reach” of
the CFPI, they use women in zip codes more than 7 miles from a clinic as the comparison
group for women in zip codes within 7 miles of a clinic. Specifically, all estimates are
based on a model that includes year and zip code fixed effects; the estimates shown in even
columns are based on a model that additionally controls for time-varying demographic
and economic characteristics. As before, we separately estimate the effects for women
aged 15–17, 18–19, 20–24, and 25–29.
Columns 1–2 and 3–4 present results for 15–17 year olds and 18–19 year olds, respectively. In Columns 1–2, estimates are negative and statistically significant for all years,
and indicate that the CFPI reduced childbearing for women aged 15–17 living within 7
miles of a clinic by 20 percent over 7 years. Estimates shown in Columns 3–4 indicate
a similar, albeit slightly smaller, effect for women aged 18–19. Specifically, they indicate
that the CFPI decreased births for women aged 18–19 living within 7 miles of a clinic by
18 percent. As a point of comparison, (Lindo and Packham, 2017) documented effects
of approximately 6 percent for 15–19 year olds residing in counties with Title X clinics.
30

Confidence intervals are not shown in the figure so the estimates from different specifications can
be seen more clearly.

17

These earlier estimates obviously masked substantial heterogeneity in the effects, which
depend on how far teenagers live from clinics.
We also find that the effects become larger throughout the duration of the program,
suggesting that as more women receive LARCs, more unintended pregnancies are prevented over time. Overall, our estimated effects correspond to over 300 fewer births to
15–17 year olds per year and 586 fewer births to 18–19 year olds per year across the state
of Colorado as a result of the program–or 4,400 births over 7 years.31
In Columns 5–8, we present estimates for women in their twenties. Consistent with
the graphical evidence from Figure 5, there is not any clear evidence of effects for women
women aged 20–24 (Columns 5 and 6) or women aged 25–29 in the short run. However, we
do see evidence of significant effects (ranging from 12–16 percent) on 20–24 year olds 6–7
years after the implementation of the CFPI. Similarly, there is also evidence of significant
effects (ranging from 8–10 percent) on 25–29 year olds 6–7 years after the implementation
of the CFPI. Overall, estimates in Table 2 demonstrate that the CFPI had large and
immediate impacts on births to high-school aged teenagers and older teenagers. While
the CFPI also appears to have reduced births to women in their twenties, these effects are
not evident until many years after the CFPI was implemented. We explore this finding
in greater detail in the next section.

4.5

Exploring the Role of Advertising and Awareness

Though the CFPI was implemented in 2009 and eventually received international
news coverage, it was not covered by any local, national, or international media outlets
for many years.32 The program’s exposure changed after the Colorado DPHE released
an internal report on the achievements of the initiative and published an academic paper
in Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health in 2014, one year before the initiative
31

This is based on the fact that the average annual number of births to 15–17 year olds and 18–19
year olds per zip code is 2.547 and 5.60, respectively, and there are 588 zip codes in our sample.
32
The initiative was not marketed by the state and we have only been able to find a single media
mention of the initiative prior to 2014, which was in the context of an article published 5/6/2013 in
Windsor Now! headlined “Plan B still banned from county clinics.” The Colorado Family Planning
Initiative was simply mentioned in this article as having been approved by Weld county commissioners
at the same hearing where the commissioners said they would stand by their prior decision to keep Plan
B out of county health clinics.

18

was set to run out of funding.33 This sparked media attention to the program beginning
in July 2014 and including a front-page story in the New York Times with the headline
“Colorado Finds Startling Success in Effort to Curb Teenage Births” (Walker, 2015).34
This coverage was sustained through 2015 and 2016 as policy-makers vigorously debated
whether to provide funding to continue the program.35,36
Our main results, shown in Table 2, provide suggestive evidence that media attention heightened the effects of the initiative. Specifically, the widespread coverage of the
program aligns with our finding that the CFPI had significant effects on the number of
births to women in their twenties only in its sixth and seventh years, and not before.
To further assess the role of advertising, we explore the share of clients having a
LARC inserted at Title X clinics in Colorado. Specifically, in Figure 6 we display LARC
insertions per female Title X client for each year, 2009–2015.37 Notably, “insertion” in
this context is different from “usage” (as reported in Figure 1) because usage statistics
reflect both new and existing LARCs at time a woman leaves a clinic. As shown in Figure
6, the number of LARC insertions per Title X client initially grew slowly (by 3.1 percent
from 2009–2010), then grew steadily by 7.3–9.8 percent annually from 2010–2014 before
it spiked by nearly 16 percent from 2014 to 2015. This jump is consistent with the idea
that the significant media attention in 2015 caused a spike in women’s interest in visiting
Colorado’s Title X clinics to obtain a LARC. It is also important to note, however, that
the CFPI was covered by some media outlets in the second half of 2014 and we do not see
any evidence of a trend break between 2013 and 2014. As such, these results suggest that
33

The Susan Thompson Buffett Foundation provided funding for the CFPI from July 2008–June 2015,
with all funds expiring in the summer of 2015.
34
Other outlets covering the program included CNN, Denver Post, NPR, and Vox (Schmidt, 2014;
Popovich, 2014; Frank, 2015; Horsley, 2015).
35
In May 2015, the Colorado state senate voted to kill a bill allocating $5 million in funding for the
initiative. After a push for continued funding by the DPHE, in August 2015, state officials announced
that a group of organizations pledged $2 million to fund the program through the summer of 2016, with
no promise of renewed funding in subsequent years (Paul, 2015). Following the end of these private
funds, in 2016 the Colorado Senate voted 30-5 to pass a budget bill that included $2.5 million in Title
X funding for LARC provision. The Colorado DPHE has since stated that this pledge of new funds was
partially due to the reported benefits of LARC access and public awareness of the successes of the CFPI
(Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment, 2017).
36
Politicians and other advocates gained significant media attention by wearing IUD-shaped earrings
at the proceedings (Vagianos, 2015).
37
Unfortunately, these data are not available after 2015. They also do not include separate counts by
age group; thus, we focus on the numbers overall.

19

there was a delayed effect of the 2014 coverage and/or that the 2015 reporting was more
impactful. Indeed, the 2015 spike may have been in part (or entirely) due to increased
awareness of the possibility that clinics would have to stop providing LARCs without
additional funding.
As a third and final approach to assessing whether the effect of the CFPI was different
after extensive media coverage, we re-examine the geographic reach of the initiative with
a focus on that period of time. This analysis is similar to that discussed in Section 4.2,
where we showed that the initiative reduced births for women up to 7 miles from clinics
when evaluating all years after the CFPI was implemented; here we instead focus on the
estimated effects for 2014 and 2015, separately. In particular, we estimate Equation 1
using a dataset containing all pre-CFPI years and only the relevant post-initiative year
(i.e. 2014 or 2015) in an effort to parse out the year-by-year reach of clinics.
These results, shown in Figure 7, offer several additional insights. First, they indicate
that the geographic reach, in terms of reducing births for 15–17 year olds, was larger
in 2015 than in 2014. In 2014, the estimates are statistically significant for each 5mile treatment group that we consider until we evaluate women in zip codes 5–10 miles
from a clinic. In 2015, the estimated effects are larger in magnitude and continue to be
statistically significant until we evaluate women in zip codes 12–17 miles from a clinic.
The results shown in Figure 7 also provide stronger evidence of effects on births of 20–29
year olds in 2015 than in 2014, which mirrors our results shown in Table 2.
As a whole, these analyses provide several new pieces of evidence to suggest that
media coverage of the initiative increased women’s interest in obtaining LARCs through
Title X clinics and expanded the impact of the program to women in their 20s and also to
high-school-aged teenagers living relatively far away from clinics. Taken together with our
main results, these findings can inform policy questions on how the spread of information
can encourage highly effective contraception use and how far women are willing to travel
for low-cost contraceptives.

20

4.6

Additional Subgroup Analyses

Across all of our analyses, we find consistent evidence that the CFPI reduced births for
women under the age of 29. We have also shown that the effects are greatest for teenagers
(both high-school and post-high-school aged) and that they become significant for women
in their 20s after the initiative received widespread media attention. In this section and
the following section we further explore the degree to which there were heterogeneous
treatment effects across different subgroups of women and zip codes, whether there were
effects on abortion, and whether there were effects on infant health.
Given that the CFPI provided funding for Title X clinics, we might expect birth
rates to be more responsive in areas with a relatively large share of individuals living in
poverty. That said, given that these clinics provide services based on self-reported income
and because young women typically have low incomes, the effects might be similar across
areas with different levels of poverty. We explore this issue in Table 3 by separately
evaluating subgroups of high- and low-poverty zip codes. We define high-poverty zip codes
as those having more than the median 2010 poverty rate and define low-poverty zip codes
as having rates below this median. The estimated effects 3–7 years after implementation
are nearly all statistically significant across Columns 1–4, implying that the CFPI reduced
births to teens living in both high- and low-poverty areas. Average effects for 15–17 year
olds and 18–19 year olds are statistically similar across these subgroups, and indicate a
reduction in births of 15–21 percent. For women in their 20s, however, the effects on
births appear to be driven by low-poverty zip codes, with estimates indicating reductions
caused by the CFPI from 12–18 percent. Effects for high-poverty zip codes for these age
groups are statistically insignificant for all years, and are much smaller in magnitude (1–2
percent). We note that these findings may be explained by the composition of individuals
living in these lower income zip codes. Although high-poverty and low-poverty groups
have similar average distance and travel time to clinics, high-poverty zip codes have have
higher concentrations of Black and Hispanic women. Below, we explore to what degree
estimated effects for Black and Hispanic women drive our main findings.
In Table 4 we analyze how much the effects of the CFPI vary across race and ethnicity.
21

In Columns 1, 4, 7, and 10 we present estimates of the effects of the CFPI on births to
White mothers, in Columns 2, 5, 8, and 11, we present estimates for Black mothers,
and in the remaining columns, we show estimates for Hispanic mothers. Across all age
groups, the estimated effects for Hispanics are larger than average. Estimates for white
mothers are similar to our main results. Estimated effects for black mothers are similar to
Hispanics for those 15–17 years old but we find no evidence of effects for the 18–19 year-old
age group. And while we do find evidence of effects for the 20–24 year-old group of black
women, it is smaller than the estimated effects for white and Hispanic women. Likewise,
we find no evidence of effects for black women in the 25–29 year-old age group, although
we note that only about 7 percent of Colorado Title X clients are Black, compared to 30
percent and 45 percent for White and Hispanic clients, respectively.
Finally, since Title X clinics are most likely to locate in urban areas, we investigate
whether effects are driven by women in urban or rural zip codes. We use the United
States Department of Agriculture’s Rural-Urban Commuting Area (RUCA) codes to
classify each zip code as either urban or rural and estimate the effects separately for rural
and urban zip codes.38 The results of these analyses are presented in Table A1. Columns
1 and 2 show estimates from our preferred specification for 15–17 year olds at rural and
urban zip codes, respectively. Columns 3–8 repeat this process for 18–19 year olds, 20–24
year olds, and 25–29 year olds. While the estimates are typically imprecise for women
living in rural zip codes, as a whole these results indicate that the effects are largely
similar for women in rural and urban areas.

4.7

Estimated Effects on Abortion

Thus far we have shown that the CFPI decreased childbearing for women aged 15–29.
These findings indicate that access to highly effective contraceptives decreased unintended
pregnancies that otherwise would have resulted in births. It is important to note that
these estimated effects may understate the effects on unintended pregnancy overall, par38

Zip code-level classifications can be found at https://ruralhealth.und.edu/ruca and were created
from USDA census tract data, by the University of North Dakota’s Center for Rural Health. We classify
a zip code as ‘rural’ if its RUCA code is 4.0 or higher.

22

ticularly if the program also reduced unintended pregnancies that otherwise would have
resulted in abortions.39 This is not a trivial issue given that 29 percent of pregnancies to
teenagers—and 26 percent of pregnancies to women aged 20–24—end in abortion (Kost,
Maddow-Zimet, and Arpaia, 2017).
To investigate whether the CFPI also reduced unintended pregnancies that would
have been terminated, in this section we present difference-in-differences-type estimates
for abortion rates by age group (15–19, 20–24, 25–29).40 For this analysis we use annual
county-level abortion counts to construct an inverse hyperbolic sine measure of abortion
rates.41 Moreover, we measure a county’s exposure to the CFPI based on the percent of
its population living within 7 miles of a Title X clinic.42 Our empirical model includes
both county fixed effects and year fixed effects and clusters standard error estimates at
the county level.
Estimated effects for all years leading up to—and following—the implementation of
the CFPI are presented in Figure 8, while estimates from our preferred model (excluding
lead terms) are presented in Table 6. In general, the estimates are too imprecise to draw
any strong conclusions. As we would expect, the estimates are more precise in Table
6 where they indicate a statistically significant effect on teenagers. However, to some
degree the event-study-type estimates in Figure 8 raises the possibility that this may be
in part due to somewhat differential trends prior to the CFPI. As a whole, we interpret
the results of this analysis as providing suggestive evidence of effects on teenage abortion
rates. A more cautious interpretation is that we cannot rule out very large or very small
effects on abortion rates.43
39

We also consider the extent to which clinics that provide abortions affect our main results. Only one
Title X clinic in Colorado is affiliated with an abortion provider—Boulder Women’s Health. When dropping this clinic and the surrounding zip codes from the main births analysis, estimates are statistically
similar at the 1 percent level.
40
Separate breakdowns for younger (15–17) and older (18–19) are not available for this analysis.
41
Specifically, this measure is constructed as IHS(count) − IHS(population) as we could typically
do if evaluating the natural log of a rate variable.
42
This county-level measure of exposure is constructed as the fraction of people in a county that live
in a zip code whose population centroid is within 7 miles of a clinic.
43
We have similarly estimated analogous to the procedure described above to analyze effects on countylevel chlamydia and gonorrhea rates to evaluate whether lowering the cost of obtaining contraceptives
increases more risky sexual behavior. Estimates are too imprecise to be meaningful.

23

4.8

Estimated Effects on Infant Health

To provide an even more comprehensive picture of the health effects of the CFPI,
we extend our analysis to study whether the CFPI affected births that tend to involve
relatively high hospital costs. Specifically, we use the same empirical strategy as our
main results, but focus on births involving low birth weight (less than 2500 grams), very
low birth weight (i.e. less than 1500 grams), or low Apgar scores (less than 9).44 The
results of this analysis are shown in Table 5. Column 1 shows the estimated effects of the
CFPI on all births to women aged 15–29, while Columns 2-4 show the estimated effects
on subsets of these births involving low birthweight births, very low birthweight births,
and births in which the child scored less than a 9 out of 10 on the 5-minute Apgar test,
respectively.
Estimates in Column 1 largely reinforce our main findings—that the CFPI reduced
births to women aged 15–29 by 7.9 percent, with larger effects in later years. Estimates
in Columns 2–4 indicate that the CFPI also had effects on births that typically involve
more-than-average hospital care. In particular, the CFPI reduced the number of low
birthweight infants by 11.9 percent, and very low birthweight infants by 9.0 percent.
This corresponds to approximately 482 fewer infants that may require extra care in the
hospital per year.45 Similarly, as shown in Column 4, we find that the CFPI reduced the
number of infants with low 5-minute Apgar scores. Estimates in Column 4 indicate that
the CFPI reduced the number of infants scoring 1-8 on the test by 23.5 percent 6-7 years
after the program’s initiation, suggesting that the CFPI led to an improvement in the
overall health of infants born to women aged 15–29. As a whole, the estimates in Table
5 demonstrate that the CFPI reduced births that tend to involve relatively high hospital
costs.46
44

The Apgar is a test score scaled from 1-10 and serves as a measure of the status of the newborn
immediately after birth. Nearly 82 percent of infants in our sample score either a nine or ten. Scores between four and seven indicate that some assistance for breathing and/or resuscitation might be required.
45
This is based on the fact that approximately 6.3 births to women aged 15–29 are considered low
birthweight, while 0.9 births to women aged 15–29 are considered very low birthweight, per zip code, per
year, on average.
46
Though the point estimates typically suggest the effect is larger for these types of births than births
overall, the standard errors are too large to reject that the effects are the same at conventional levels of
statistical significance.

24

5

Validity and Robustness
In this section we present a set of sensitivity checks to provide additional support for

our main identifying assumption. We begin by addressing the possibility that differential trends in population flows and/or zip code demographics might be confounding our
estimated effects. However, before presenting results from additional analyses, we note
the evidence we provided for the common trends assumption (Figure 5) suggests that it
is unlikely that pre-existing trends in population flows and/or demographics are driving
our results. To provide further evidence along these lines, we use data from the two
most recent decennial censuses to show that treated and comparison zip codes did not
change differently between 2000 and 2010, by evaluating the difference-in-differences in
demographics across these years.47 We additionally show a measure of predicted births
based on these population estimates, as a way to gauge whether our estimates are large
in comparison to what we would expect in the absence of the intervention. We present
these estimates in Table A2.48 We find no statistically significant effects on the number
of women 15-29 years old or the share of 15-29 year old women who are white, black,
or Hispanic. We also find no statistically significant effects on the predicted number of
births based on these variables.49 That said, we recognize that a lack of power means
that we cannot rule out economically significant effects at conventional levels of statistical
significance.
Second, we test how robust our analyses are to the definition of distance. In Table A3,
we redefine treatment using additional distance measures: “as the crow flies” distance
and driving time, in minutes, according to Google map data. To do so, we first consider
our treatment group as those zip codes within 7 miles of a clinic, based on crow flies
distance, and display these difference-in-differences coefficients in Panel A of Table A3.
47

Ideally we would examine the same set of years that we examine in our main results; however, this
analysis is constrained by the availability of Census data.
48
The coefficients are transformed to represent the change expected over one year.
49
Specifically, we estimate predicted births using a two-step procedure. First, we use 2010 data
to evaluate the inverse-hyperbolic-sine of the number of births in each zip code as a function of the
aforementioned variables. Second, we estimate the predicted inverse-hyperbolic-sine of the number of
births for each zip code in 2000 and 2010 based on the coefficient estimates from step one combined with
the observed demographics.

25

Across specifications for all age groups, estimates are consistent with our baseline results
in Table 2. In Panel B, we define our treatment group to be zip codes within 10 minutes
driving time of a clinic, which most closely resembles a 7 mile travel distance range.
Estimates are similar in magnitude and direction as our main results.
Next, we show how redefining our treatment group by the number of miles affects our
estimates. Specifically, in Table A4 we show what the estimated effects are if we instead
defined the treatment group as zip codes within 0–5 miles or as zip codes 0–10 miles of a
Title X clinic. Estimates for all treatment definitions are statistically similar to our main
results, and indicate reductions in births ranging from 16–20 percent for 15–17 year olds
and 15 percent for 18–19 year olds.
Furthermore, because we measure treatment effects based on distance, any openings
or closings of Title X clinics during our sample period could bias the estimated effects.
This is especially relevant given recent literature documenting that changes in clinic access
affects birth and abortion outcomes (Lu and Slusky, Forthcoming; Packham, 2017; Lindo,
Myers, Schlosser, and Cunningham, Forthcoming; Fischer, Royer, and White, 2018).
Therefore, in Table A5 we provide estimates from models that drop zip codes which
experienced Title X clinic openings and closures during this time period. Specifically,
the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment reports 7 openings from
2009–2015, while two clinics closed.50,51 Columns 1, 4, 7, and 10 provide the baseline
estimates for comparison, using all zip codes across the state of Colorado. Columns 2, 5,
8 and 11 omit zip codes which experienced Title X clinic openings from 2009–2015, and
Columns 3, 6, 9 and 12 omit zip codes which experienced Title X closures. Estimates
are similar across groups, indicating that changes in clinic openings are not driving our
estimated effects on births.
Finally, we provide weighted least squares (WLS) estimates in Table A6 in an effort
50
Openings include the Denver Health affiliated opening in 2009, a Tri-County Health Department
opening in 2011, 3 openings across the city of Denver affiliated with the Denver health clinic in 2012,
and 2 Denver openings affiliated with the Colorado Coalition for the Homeless in 2012. Closures include
Title X clinics in Stratton and Crested Butte.
51
Given that 6 out of 7 clinic openings occur in Denver, we also consider a specification that omits
all Denver zip codes. Estimates are statistically similar across all age groups, indicating that these zip
codes are not solely responsible for the main results.

26

to get a better sense of how the CFPI differentially affected zip codes with dissimilar
population sizes. In Columns 2, 4, 6, and 8, each cell is weighted by the zip code’s
female population according to the 2010 ACS. Notably, these alternative estimates are
less precise than our main results. They are also smaller in magnitude than the OLS
estimates, which suggests that there are relatively large effects for zip codes with relatively
small populations for the reasons described in Solon, Haider, and Wooldridge (2015). We
explore this potential heterogeneity directly in Table A7 by presenting estimates for zip
codes with less than 2,000 total females.52 Importantly, restricting attention to lesspopulated zip codes limits our number of treatment zip codes to only 26, as compared to
163 in the full sample. Therefore, it may be unsurprising that estimates in some columns
of Table A7 are fairly imprecise. However, we note that these estimates do provide some
suggestive evidence that estimates are comparatively large for less-populated zip codes
for all age groups except 20–24 year olds, which sheds light on why the OLS estimates
are relatively large in magnitude as compared to the WLS estimates.

6

Conclusion
In this paper, we document the effects of expanding access to highly effective contra-

ceptives through the lens of the Colorado Family Planning Initiative, which provided free
LARCs to low-income women at Title X clinics. Using zip-code-level Natality data, we
show that the initiative reduced birth rates for women living in within 7 miles of a Title
X clinic until the initiative received extensive media coverage. Afterwards, the effects
extended to women living farther away from clinics and to non-teenagers. Despite the
fact that any Title X client was eligible to participate in the program, we see little to no
effects for women living farther than 12 miles from a clinic.
As a whole, our estimated effects correspond to nearly 6,800 fewer births to women
aged 15–29 over 7 years. Moreover, we find that the effects on births are largest for
women between ages 15–17 and 18–19. Along similar lines, we find suggestive evidence
52

We choose this cutoff for two reasons. First, the median female population is about 1,900 and
second, in Table A1 we find differential effects for rural areas, which have, on average, about 1,500
females. Effects for specifications that limit our sample to 1,500 individuals are qualitatively similar.

27

of impacts on abortion for women in these age groups, which suggests that the effects
on births likely understate the effects on unintended pregnancy. Given that we observe
significant effects on both high-school-aged and post-high-school-aged women, we believe
an important next step may be to investigate whether these effects translate into impacts
on women’s educational and economic outcomes.
Our findings highlight that the effects of funding Title X clinics can be substantial,
and that advertising may help them extend their reach, particularly when women may
not be aware of the full range of services and contraceptives that the clinics offer. As such,
our findings complement recent work documenting statistically significant but imprecise
evidence that LARC use can be increased through social media (Byker, Myers, and
Graff, 2017). Our work also complements earlier work demonstrating that expanding lowincome women’s access to family planning services can significantly reduce childbearing.
In particular, researchers have demonstrated that Medicaid waivers in the early 1990s to
mid-2000s had significant effects on teen childbearing (Kearney and Levine, 2015) and
non-teen childbearing (Kearney and Levine, 2009), and also that the county-level rollout
of Title X reduced and delayed childbearing (Bailey, 2012).53
This line of research is especially relevant in light of recent federal policy changes
which will cut family planning funding and allow more employers to deny contraception
in their health insurance plans. Our results, which demonstrate how access to highly
effective contraception affects unintended pregnancy in the modern context, suggests that
such policies are likely to increase childbearing and perhaps abortion. Given the wellestablished link between childbearing and women’s long-run outcomes, it will become
increasingly important for future research to evaluate the effects of these policies on a
wide range of outcomes.

53

Along similar lines, research investigating the effects of reduced funding to family planning clinics in
Texas, which caused many clinics to close, finds significant increases in birth rates caused by the funding
cuts (Packham, 2017; Lu and Slusky, Forthcoming).

28

References
Bailey, M. J. (2006): “More Power to the Pill: The Impact of Contraceptive Freedom on
Women’s Lifecycle Labor Supply,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Erratum, 121(1),
289–320.
(2009): “More Power to the Pill: Erratum and Addendum,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 121(1), 289–320.
(2012): “Reexamining the Impact of Family Planning Programs on US Fertility:
Evidence from the War on Poverty and the Early Years of Title X,” American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, 4(2), 62–97.
Bailey, M. J., M. Guldi, and B. J. Hershbein (2013): “Recent Evidence on the Broad
Benefits of Reproductive Health Policy,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management,
32(4), 888–896.
Bailey, M. J., and J. M. Lindo (2018): “Access and Use of Contraception and Its Effects
on Women’s Outcomes in the U.S.,” in Oxford Handbook of Women and the Economy,
ed. by S. L. Averett, L. M. Argys, and S. D. Hoffman.
Bailey, M. J., O. Malkova, and Z. McLaren (2018): “Does Parents’ Access to Family
Planning Increase Children’s Opportunities? Evidence from the War on Poverty and
the Early Years of Title X,” forthcoming, Journal of Human Resources.
Beauchamp, A., and C. Pakaluk (Forthcoming): “The Paradox of the Pill: Heterogeneous
Effects of Oral Contraceptive Access,” Economic Inquiry.
Buckles, K., M. E. Guldi, and L. Schmidt (2019): “Fertility Trends in the United States,
1980-2017: The Role of Unintended Births,” NBER Working Paper No. 25521.
Byker, T., C. Myers, and M. Graff (2017): “Can a Social Media Campaign Increase the
Use of Long-Acting Reversible Contraception? Evidence from a Randomized Control
Trial using Facebook,” Working Paper.
Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment (2017): “Taking the Unintended Out of Pregnancy: Colorado’s Success with Long-Acting Reversible Contraceptives,” Accessed 11-June-2018 at https://www.colorado.gov/pacific/sites/
default/files/PSD_TitleX3_CFPI-Report.pdf.
Dinerman, L. M., M. D. Wilson, A. K. Duggan, and A. Joffe (2012): “Determinants of
Long-Acting Reversible Contraceptive Use by Adolescent Girls and Young Women,”
The European Journal of Contraception and Reproductive Health Care, 17(4), 298–306.
Finer, L. B., and M. R. Zolna (2016): “Declines in Unintended Pregnancy in the United
States, 20082011,” New England Journal of Medicine, 374(9), 843–852.
Fischer, S., H. Royer, and C. White (2018): “The Impacts of Reduced Access to Abortion
and Family Planning Services on Abortions, Births, and Contraceptive Purchases,”
Journal of Public Economics, 167, 43–68.

29

Frank, J. (2015): “With Less Money, Colorado’s Birth Control Program Feels the
Pain,” Accessed 19-September-2018 at https://www.denverpost.com/2015/08/02/
with-less-money-colorados-birth-control-program-feels-the-pain/.
Goldin, C., and L. F. Katz (2002): “The Power of the Pill: Oral Contraceptives and
Women’s Career and Marriage Decisions,” Journal of Political Economy, 110(4), 730–
770.
Grady, W. R., M. D. Hayward, and J. Yagi (1986): “Contraceptive Failure Rates in the
United States: Estimates from the 1982 National Survey of Family Growth,” Family
Planning Perspectives, 18(5), 200–204, 207–209.
Grimes, D. A. (2007): “Intrauterine Devices (IUDs),” in Contraceptive Technology, 19th
ed., ed. by R. A. Hatcher, pp. 117–143. Ardent Media, New York.
Guldi, M. (2008): “Fertility Effects of Abortion and Birth Control Pill Access for Minors,”
Demography, 45(4), 817–827.
Guttmacher Institute (2018): “Contraceptive Use in the United States,” Fact Sheet, Accessed 24-November-2018 at https://www.guttmacher.org/sites/default/files/
factsheet/fb_contr_use_0.pdf.
Horsley,
S. (2015):
“Colorado’s Long-Lasting Birth Control Program
For Teens May Not Last Long,”
Accessed 19-September-2018 at
https://www.npr.org/sections/itsallpolitics/2015/09/03/437268213/
colorados-long-lasting-birth-control-program-for-teens-may-not-last-long.
Kearney, M. S., and P. B. Levine (2009): “Subsidized Contraception, Fertility, and Sexual
Behavior,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(1), 137–151.
Kearney, M. S., and P. B. Levine (2015): “Investigating recent trends in the U.S. teen
birth rate,” Journal of Health Economics, 41, 15 – 29.
Kost, K., I. Maddow-Zimet, and A. Arpaia (2017): “Pregnancies, Births and Abortions
Among Adolescents and Young Women in the United States, 2013: National and State
Trends by Age, Race and Ethnicity,” New York: Guttmacher Institute.
Levine, P. B. (2001): “The Sexual Activity and Birth-Control Use of American
Teenagers,” in Risky Behavior among Youths: An Economic Analysis, ed. by J. Gruber.
University of Chicago Press.
Lindo, J. M., C. Myers, A. Schlosser, and S. Cunningham (Forthcoming): “How Far Is
Too Far? New Evidence on Abortion Clinic Closures, Access, and Abortions,” Journal
of Human Resources.
Lindo, J. M., and A. Packham (2017): “How Much Can Expanding Access to Long-Acting
Reversible Contraceptives Reduce Teen Birth Rates?,” American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy, 9(3), 348–376.
Lu, Y., and D. J. Slusky (2016): “The Impact of Family Planning Funding Cuts on
Preventative Care,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 8(3), 100–124.

30

(Forthcoming): “The Impact of Women?s Health Clinic Closures on Fertility,”
American Journal of Health Economics.
Mestad, R., G. Secura, J. E. Allsworth, T. Madden, Q. Zhao, and J. F. Peipert (2011):
“Acceptance of Long-Acting Reversible Contraceptive Methods by Adolescent Participants in the Contraceptive CHOICE Project,” Contraception, 84(5), 493–498.
Muralidharan, K., and N. Prakash (2017): “Cycling to School: Increasing Secondary
School Enrollment for Girls in India,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 9(3), 321–350.
Myers, C. K. (2017): “The Power of Abortion Policy: Re-Examining the Effects of Young
Women’s Access to Reproductive Control,” Journal of Political Economy, 125(6), 2178–
2224.
National Center for Health Statistics (2014): “National Survey of Family Growth 20112013 Female Respondent Data File,” Accessed 24-March-2015 at www.cdc.gov/nchs/
nsfg/nsfg_2011_2013.puf.htm.
Packham, A. (2017): “Family Planning Funding Cuts and Teen Childbearing,” Journal
of Health Economics, 55(1), 168–185.
Paul, J. (2015): “Colorado’s Birth Control Program Kept Afloat by $2M in Temporary
Funds,” Accessed 19-September-2018 at https://www.denverpost.com/2015/08/25/
colorados-birth-control-program-kept-afloat-by-2m-in-temporary-funds/.
Picard, R. (2010): “GEONEAR: Stata Module to Find Nearest Neighbors Using Geodetic Distances,” Accessed 7-September-2018 at https://ideas.repec.org/c/boc/
bocode/s457146.html.
Planned Parenthood (2017):
“IUDs and Implants:
Its Not Too Late for
LARCs,” Accessed 24-November-2018 at http://advocatesaz.org/2017/03/06/
iuds-and-implants-its-not-too-late-for-larcs/.
Popovich, N. (2014): “Colorado Contraception Program Was a Huge Success- but the
GOP is Scrapping It,” Accessed 19-September-2018 at https://www.vox.com/2014/
7/7/5877505/colorado-contraceptives-teen-pregnancy-birth-control.
Quast, T., F. Gonzalez, and R. Ziemba (2017): “Abortion Facility Closings and Abortion
Rates in Texas,” Inquiry, 54, 1–7.
Ricketts, S., G. Klingler, and R. Schwalberg (2014): “Game Change in Colorado:
Widespread Use of Long-Acting Reversible Contraceptives and Rapid Decline in Births
Among Young, Low-Income Women,” Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health,
46(3), 125–132.
Schmidt, C. (2014): “Colorado Teen Birthrate Drops 40% with Low-Cost Birth Control,” Accessed 19-September-2018 at https://www.cnn.com/2014/07/10/health/
colorado-teen-pregnancy/.
Secura, G., J. E. Allsworth, T. Madden, J. L. Mullersman, and J. F. Peipert (2010): “The
Contraceptive CHOICE Project: Reducing Barriers to Long-Acting Reversible Contraception,” American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 203(2), 115.e1–115.e7.
31

Solon, G., S. Haider, and J. Wooldridge (2015): “What Are We Weighting For,” Journal
of Human Resources, 50(2), 301–316.
The National Campaign to Prevent Teen and Unplanned Pregnancy (2015): “Survey Says: Hide the Birth Control?,” Accessed 7-September-2015 at https://
thenationalcampaign.org/sites/default/files/resource-primary-download/
survey-says-april15-letter.pdf.
Trussell, J., A. M. Lalla, Q. V. Doan, E. Reyes, L. Pinto, and J. Gricar (2009): “Cost
Effectiveness of Contraceptives in the United States,” Contraception, 80(2), 229–230.
Vagianos, A. (2015): “Colorado Lawmakers Wear IUD Earrings to Support Bill
That Will Fund Low-Cost Contraceptives,” Accessed 19-September-2018 at https:
//www.huffingtonpost.com/2015/03/17/colorado-lawmakers-iud-earrings_n_
6887978.html.
Walker, C. F. (2015):
“Lowering the Teenage Birthrate,” Accessed 19September-2018
at
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/13/opinion/
lowering-the-teenage-birthrate.html?_r=2.
Zigler, R. E., J. F. Peipert, Q. Zhao, R. Maddipati, and C. McNicholas (2017): “LongActing Reversible Contraception Use Among Residents in Obstetrics/Gynecology
Training Programs,” Open Access Journal of Contraception, 8, 1–7.
Zolna, M. R., and J. J. Frost (2016):
“Publicly Funded Family Planning Clinics in 2015:
Patterns and Trends in Service Delivery Practices
and Protocols,” New York:
Guttmacher Institute, Accessed 26-November2018
at
https://www.guttmacher.org/sites/default/files/report_pdf/
publicly-funded-family-planning-clinic-survey-2015_1.pdf.

32

Figure 1
Number of Female Title X Clients Choosing a LARC, By Age

Notes: Authors’ calculation based on annual data on Colorado Title X contraception usage by age and
method provided by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment (DPHE). Zip-codelevel population data are from the 2010 American Community Survey. The vertical line, drawn at 2009,
represents the year Colorado’s Family Planning Initiative was implemented. The top panel displays the
number of LARCs chosen by Colorado Title X clients per capita, by age group, from 2008–2015, while
the bottom panel displays the number of LARCs chosen by Colorado Title X clients per births in 2008,
according to natality data from the Colorado DPHE.

33

Figure 2
Primary Form of Contraceptive Used By Females Aged 15–29 Visiting Title X Clinics in
Colorado

Notes: Authors’ calculation based on annual data on Colorado Title X contraception usage by age and
method provided by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. The vertical line,
drawn at 2009, represents the year Colorado’s Family Planning Initiative was implemented.

34

Figure 3
Percent Female Clients Aged 15–29 Visiting Title X Clinics Choosing a LARC, Colorado
versus United States

Notes: Numbers for Colorado are based on annual data on Colorado Title X contraception usage by
age and method provided by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. Numbers
for the United States overall are from the Department of Health and Human Services Title X Family
Planning Annual Reports, United States 2008–2015. The vertical line, drawn at 2009, represents the
year Colorado’s Family Planning Initiative was implemented.

35

Figure 4
Estimated Effects of the CFPI on Births by Rolling 5-Mile Distance Bins
Panel B. 18–19 Year Olds

Panel A. 15–17 Year Olds

Panel C. 20–24 Year Olds

Panel D. 25–29 Year Olds

Notes: Coefficients and their respective 95% confidence intervals are generated from a regression estimated using OLS-IHS transformation, as specified in Equation 1, using rolling 5-mile distance bins to
define treatment. A x-axis value of “i” where i = 0, 1, ...15 indicates an estimate from a difference-indifferences analysis comparing changes in births in zip codes within i and (i + 5) miles of a Title X clinic
to changes in zip codes between (i + 5) and 20 miles from a clinic. Zip codes greater than 20 miles from
a Colorado Title X clinic are omitted from this analysis. Standard errors are clustered at the zip-code
level.

36

Figure 5
Difference-in-Differences Estimates of the Effects of the CFPI on Births
Panel B. 18–19 Year Olds

Panel A. 15–17 Year Olds

Panel C. 20–24 Year Olds

Panel D. 25–29 Year Olds

Notes: Coefficients are generated from estimating our main difference-in-differences model, as specified
in Equation 2. The vertical line, drawn before 2009, represents the year Colorado’s Family Planning
Initiative was implemented. The treatment group includes zip codes withing 0–7 miles of a Title X
clinic. The control group includes zip codes further than 7 miles from a clinic. Estimates are relative to
2008.

37

Figure 6
LARC Insertions Per Client

Notes: Authors’ calculations based on LARC insertion data from the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. The vertical line, drawn before 2015, represents the initiation of media
coverage.

38

Figure 7
Estimated Effects of the CFPI on Births by Rolling 5-Mile Distance Bins, 2014–2015
Panel A. 15–17 Year Olds, 2014

Panel B. 15–17 Year Olds, 2015

Panel C. 18–19 Year Olds, 2014

Panel D. 18–19 Year Olds, 2015

Panel E. 20–24 Year Olds, 2014

Panel F. 20–24 Year Olds, 2015

Panel G. 25–29 Year Olds, 2014

Panel H. 25–29 Year Olds, 2015

Notes: Coefficients and their respective 95% confidence intervals are generated from a regression estimated using OLS-IHS transformation, as specified in Equation 1, using rolling 5-mile distance bins to
define treatment. A x-axis value of “i” where i = 0, 1, ...15 indicates an estimate from a difference-indifferences analysis comparing changes in births in zip codes within i and (i + 5) miles of a Title X clinic
to changes in zip codes between (i + 5) and 20 miles from a clinic. Zip codes greater than 20 miles from
a Colorado Title X clinic are omitted from this analysis. Standard errors are clustered at the zip-code
level.

39

Figure 8
Estimated Effects on Abortion Rates by the Fraction of the Population Living within 7 Miles
of a Title X Clinic
Panel A. 15–19 Year Olds

Panel B. 20–24 Year Olds

Panel C. 25–29 Year Olds

Notes: County-level abortion data are from the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment.
The outcome variable is the difference between the inverse hyperbolic sine transformations of abortions
by age group and female population for the relevant age group. Coefficients are generated from estimating
our main difference-in-differences model, as specified in Equation 2, using a continuous measure—the
fraction of population in zip codes within 7 miles of a Title X clinic—to measure exposure to the CFPI.
Controls include county-level unemployment rates, poverty rates, fractions of individuals aged 15–29
by age, ethnicity, and race, the percent of each age group who are Hispanic, and the percent of each
age group who are black. The vertical line, drawn before 2009, represents the year Colorado’s Family
Planning Initiative was implemented. Estimates are relative to 2008.

40

Table 1
Summary Statistics

Within 7 Miles

Over 7 Miles

Pre-Treatment (2003–2008)
Births to Females aged 15-17
Births to Females aged 18-19
Births to Females aged 20-24
Births to Females aged 25-29
Percent Poverty Rate
Unemployment Rate
Population (County)
Percent Hispanic (County)
Percent Black (County)
Percent White (County)
Travel Distance to Nearest Title X Clinic
Driving Time to Nearest Title X Clinic

7.74
14.37
51.61
58.72
11.56
0.05
41888
21.24
4.80
70.96
3.62
9.24

1.79
3.99
15.55
19.50
12.06
0.05
15678
18.15
2.24
77.50
34.87
53.80

Post-Treatment (2009–2015)
Births to Females aged 15-17
Births to Females aged 18-19
Births to Females aged 20-24
Births to Females aged 25-29
Percent Poverty Rate
Unemployment Rate
Population
Percent Hispanic (County)
Percent Black (County)
Percent White (County)
Travel Distance to Nearest Title X Clinic
Driving Time to Nearest Title X Clinic

3.89
9.02
39.56
55.48
13.41
0.07
53140
22.50
5.07
69.25
3.62
9.24

0.98
2.79
13.25
19.18
14.13
0.07
20531
19.63
2.65
75.52
34.87
53.80

Notes: Birth data are from the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. Unemployment rates are from
the BLS. Zip-Code-level population data are from the 2010 ACS. Column 1 shows the means for treated zip codes in our
sample, i.e., Colorado zip codes within 7 miles of a Title X clinic. Column 2 displays the means for the comparison zip
codes, i.e., zip codes in Colorado further than 7 miles from a Title X clinic.

41

Table 2
The Effect of CFPI on Births

15–17 Year Olds
Effect of Initiative in First Year
Effect of Initiative in Second Year
Effect of Initiative in Third Year
Effect of Initiative in Fourth Year
Effect of Initiative in Fifth Year
Effect of Initiative in Sixth Year
Effect of Initiative in Seventh Year
Average effect
P-value (test average effect = 0)
Average effect in years 6-7
P-value (test average effect in years 6-7 = 0)
Observations
Controls

18–19 Year Olds

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.099**
(0.044)
-0.176***
(0.047)
-0.251***
(0.049)
-0.193***
(0.052)
-0.271***
(0.061)
-0.236***
(0.060)
-0.269***
(0.058)
-0.213
0.000
-0.253
0.000
7644

-0.091**
(0.044)
-0.165***
(0.048)
-0.233***
(0.049)
-0.182***
(0.052)
-0.259***
(0.061)
-0.225***
(0.061)
-0.252***
(0.058)
-0.201
0.000
-0.238
0.000
7644

-0.069
(0.043)
-0.121***
(0.045)
-0.183***
(0.044)
-0.190***
(0.046)
-0.226***
(0.052)
-0.233***
(0.051)
-0.243***
(0.053)
-0.181
0.000
-0.238
0.000
7644

No

Yes

No

(4)

20–24 Year Olds
(5)

-0.074*
-0.037
(0.044)
(0.038)
-0.127***
-0.057
(0.045)
(0.039)
-0.183***
-0.060
(0.044)
(0.039)
-0.188***
-0.057
(0.046)
(0.045)
-0.220***
-0.059
(0.053)
(0.046)
-0.225*** -0.121***
(0.052)
(0.042)
-0.229*** -0.148***
(0.054)
(0.043)
-0.178
-0.077
0.000
0.012
-0.227
-0.134
0.000
0.000
7642
7644
Yes

No

(6)

25–29 Year Olds
(7)

-0.029
-0.056
(0.039)
(0.037)
-0.052
-0.025
(0.040)
(0.040)
-0.063
-0.031
(0.039)
(0.037)
-0.059
-0.050
(0.045)
(0.040)
-0.067
-0.059
(0.046)
(0.045)
-0.134*** -0.072
(0.043)
(0.045)
-0.159*** -0.094**
(0.044)
(0.041)
-0.080
-0.055
0.009
0.075
-0.146
-0.083
0.000
0.030
7644
7644
Yes

No

(8)
-0.052
(0.037)
-0.020
(0.040)
-0.038
(0.037)
-0.047
(0.040)
-0.058
(0.045)
-0.079*
(0.047)
-0.104**
(0.042)
-0.057
0.070
-0.091
0.021
7644
Yes

Notes: Estimates are based on restricted Natality files by zip code for the state of Colorado from 2003–2015. All specifications include year and zip code fixed effects. Controls include zip-code-level unemployment rates and poverty rates and
county-level fractions of individuals aged 15–29 by age, ethnicity, and race, the percent of each age group who are Hispanic,
and the percent of each age group who are black. Standard errors are clustered at the zip-code level.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.

42

Table 3
The Effect of CFPI on Births by Zip Code Poverty Rate

15–17 Year Olds

Effect of Initiative in First Year
Effect of Initiative in Second Year
Effect of Initiative in Third Year
Effect of Initiative in Fourth Year
Effect of Initiative in Fifth Year
Effect of Initiative in Sixth Year
Effect of Initiative in Seventh Year
Average effect
P-value (test average effect = 0)
Average effect in years 6-7
P-value (test average effect in years 6-7 = 0)
Observations

18–19 Year Olds

20–24 Year Olds

25–29 Year Olds

Low Pov.
(1)

High Pov.
(2)

Low Pov.
(3)

High Pov.
(4)

Low Pov.
(5)

High Pov.
(6)

Low Pov.
(7)

High Pov.
(8)

-0.115
(0.081)
-0.126
(0.090)
-0.184**
(0.076)
-0.134
(0.083)
-0.226**
(0.114)
-0.152
(0.106)
-0.275**
(0.110)
-0.173
0.010
-0.214
0.025
3796

-0.062
(0.056)
-0.166***
(0.055)
-0.252***
(0.067)
-0.185***
(0.067)
-0.255***
(0.073)
-0.256***
(0.078)
-0.225***
(0.069)
-0.200
0.000
-0.241
0.000
3848

-0.078
(0.080)
-0.199**
(0.088)
-0.219***
(0.079)
-0.134*
(0.074)
-0.139
(0.089)
-0.339***
(0.098)
-0.335***
(0.091)
-0.206
0.000
-0.337
0.000
3796

-0.050
(0.053)
-0.065
(0.052)
-0.149***
(0.054)
-0.230***
(0.058)
-0.261***
(0.067)
-0.155***
(0.059)
-0.159**
(0.066)
-0.153
0.000
-0.157
0.005
3846

-0.033
(0.059)
-0.135**
(0.061)
-0.131*
(0.067)
-0.188**
(0.074)
-0.195**
(0.082)
-0.270***
(0.078)
-0.280***
(0.079)
-0.176
0.001
-0.275
0.000
3796

-0.036
(0.052)
-0.004
(0.052)
-0.021
(0.046)
0.045
(0.058)
0.021
(0.057)
-0.024
(0.050)
-0.075
(0.052)
-0.013
0.701
-0.050
0.249
3848

-0.082
(0.070)
-0.145**
(0.066)
-0.033
(0.065)
-0.077
(0.072)
-0.140*
(0.084)
-0.161*
(0.087)
-0.194***
(0.069)
-0.119
0.052
-0.178
0.013
3796

-0.032
(0.041)
0.083*
(0.049)
-0.056
(0.046)
-0.040
(0.046)
-0.014
(0.052)
-0.046
(0.051)
-0.031
(0.052)
-0.019
0.528
-0.038
0.373
3848

Notes: Estimates are based on restricted Natality files by zip code for the state of Colorado from 2003–2015. All specifications include year and zip code fixed effects, and demographic and economic controls. “Low Pov.” zip codes are zip codes
with poverty rates at or below the 2010 Colorado median poverty rate. “High Pov.” zip codes are defined as zip codes with
poverty rates above the 2010 Colorado median poverty rate. Standard errors are clustered at the zip-code level.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.

43

Table 4
The Effect of CFPI on Births by Race and Ethnicity

15–17 Year Olds

Effect of Initiative in First Year
Effect of Initiative in Second Year
Effect of Initiative in Third Year
Effect of Initiative in Fourth Year
Effect of Initiative in Fifth Year
Effect of Initiative in Sixth Year
Effect of Initiative in Seventh Year
Average effect
P-value (test average effect = 0)
Average effect in years 6-7
P-value (test average effect in years 6-7 = 0)
Observations

18–19 Year Olds

White
(1)

Black
(2)

Hispanic
(3)

White
(4)

Black
(5)

-0.087**
(0.043)
-0.134***
(0.050)
-0.163***
(0.045)
-0.138***
(0.051)
-0.170***
(0.053)
-0.150***
(0.054)
-0.204***
(0.059)
-0.149
0.000
-0.177
0.000
7644

-0.091**
(0.044)
-0.165***
(0.048)
-0.233***
(0.049)
-0.182***
(0.052)
-0.259***
(0.061)
-0.225***
(0.061)
-0.252***
(0.058)
-0.201
0.000
-0.238
0.000
7644

-0.097**
(0.043)
-0.168***
(0.046)
-0.235***
(0.050)
-0.223***
(0.049)
-0.320***
(0.060)
-0.290***
(0.055)
-0.244***
(0.053)
-0.225
0.000
-0.267
0.000
7644

0.040
(0.042)
-0.127***
(0.047)
-0.184***
(0.049)
-0.188***
(0.052)
-0.177***
(0.052)
-0.216***
(0.053)
-0.268***
(0.061)
-0.160
0.000
-0.242
0.000
7642

0.006
(0.004)
-0.002
(0.007)
0.006*
(0.004)
0.006
(0.004)
0.002
(0.005)
0.006
(0.004)
0.003
(0.005)
0.004
0.369
0.004
0.348
3885

Hispanic
(6)

20–24 Year Olds
White
(7)

Black
(8)

Hispanic
(9)

25–29 Year Olds
White
(10)

Black
(11)

-0.089**
-0.008
0.034
-0.065*
-0.002
0.005
(0.042)
(0.039)
(0.039)
(0.039)
(0.036) (0.039)
-0.097**
-0.073*
-0.057
-0.046
0.010
0.023
(0.047)
(0.041)
(0.038)
(0.042)
(0.040) (0.040)
-0.146***
-0.063
-0.086**
-0.057
0.012
-0.011
(0.045)
(0.043)
(0.040)
(0.036)
(0.038) (0.045)
-0.227*** -0.078* -0.118*** -0.110**
-0.025
-0.018
(0.045)
(0.044)
(0.040)
(0.043)
(0.039) (0.043)
-0.253*** -0.131***
0.002
-0.152*** -0.038
0.014
(0.052)
(0.047)
(0.043)
(0.052)
(0.046) (0.041)
-0.234*** -0.119**
-0.072* -0.181*** -0.079*
0.033
(0.051)
(0.046)
(0.042)
(0.045)
(0.044) (0.044)
-0.241*** -0.157*** -0.085** -0.214*** -0.105** 0.082*
(0.050)
(0.046)
(0.043)
(0.045)
(0.042) (0.049)
-0.184
-0.090
-0.055
-0.118
-0.033
0.018
0.000
0.002
0.043
0.000
0.289
0.509
-0.238
-0.138
-0.079
-0.198
-0.092
0.058
0.000
0.001
0.029
0.000
0.016
0.133
7642
7644
7644
7644
7644
7644

Hispanic
(12)
-0.076**
(0.038)
-0.021
(0.037)
-0.054
(0.039)
-0.066
(0.043)
-0.050
(0.042)
-0.004
(0.042)
-0.044
(0.046)
-0.045
0.112
-0.024
0.525
7644

Notes: Estimates are based on restricted Natality files by zip code for the state of Colorado from 2003–2015. All specifications include year and zip code fixed effects, and demographic and economic controls. Standard errors are clustered at
the zip-code level.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.

44

Table 5
The Effect of CFPI on Births Typically Involving Relatively High Costs

Effect of Initiative in First Year
Effect of Initiative in Second Year
Effect of Initiative in Third Year
Effect of Initiative in Fourth Year
Effect of Initiative in Fifth Year
Effect of Initiative in Sixth Year
Effect of Initiative in Seventh Year
Average effect
P-value (test average effect = 0)
Average effect in years 6-7
P-value (test average effect in years 6-7 = 0)
Observations

All
Births

Low
Birthweight

Very Low
Birthweight

5-Min. Apgar
Score < 9

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.048
(0.035)
-0.056
(0.039)
-0.078**
(0.039)
-0.051
(0.044)
-0.073
(0.048)
-0.115**
(0.046)
-0.132***
(0.042)
-0.079
0.020
-0.124
0.002
7644

-0.058
(0.051)
-0.066
(0.058)
-0.155***
(0.050)
-0.135**
(0.057)
-0.096*
(0.052)
-0.142**
(0.060)
-0.182***
(0.051)
-0.119
0.000
-0.162
0.000
6355

-0.045
(0.064)
-0.091
(0.064)
-0.034
(0.052)
-0.104
(0.067)
-0.011
(0.061)
-0.158**
(0.064)
-0.185***
(0.058)
-0.090
0.004
-0.172
0.000
6355

0.032
(0.055)
0.086
(0.055)
-0.048
(0.063)
0.000
(0.058)
-0.054
(0.057)
-0.164***
(0.062)
-0.306***
(0.060)
-0.065
0.123
-0.235
0.000
6355

Notes: Estimates are based on restricted Natality files by zip code for the state of Colorado from 2003–2015. All specifications include year and zip code fixed effects, and demographic and economic controls. “Total Births” include all births to
women aged 15-29. “Low Birthweight” indicates the number of infants within a zip code born under 2500 grams. “Very
Low Birthweight” indicates the number of infants within a zip code born under 1500 grams. “5-Min. Apgar Score < 9”
measures the number of infants scoring less than a 9 out of 10 on the 5-Minute Apgar test.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively. Standard errors are
clustered at the zip-code level.

45

Table 6
The Effect of CFPI on Abortion Rates
County-level Analysis Based on Share of the Population Within 7 miles of a Title X Clinic

15–19 Year Olds
Effect of Initiative in First Year
Effect of Initiative in Second Year
Effect of Initiative in Third Year
Effect of Initiative in Fourth Year
Effect of Initiative in Fifth Year
Effect of Initiative in Sixth Year
Effect of Initiative in Seventh Year
Average effect
P-value (test average effect = 0)
Average effect in years 6-7
P-value (test average effect in years 6-7 = 0)
Observations
Controls

20–24 Year Olds

25–29 Year Olds

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.171
(0.125)
-0.277*
(0.161)
-0.138
(0.171)
-0.281
(0.220)
-0.523***
(0.176)
-0.202
(0.243)
-0.158
(0.227)
-0.250
0.048
-0.180
0.362
370

-0.321***
(0.117)
-0.396***
(0.140)
-0.262
(0.216)
-0.358*
(0.189)
-0.532***
(0.164)
-0.220
(0.219)
-0.227
(0.266)
-0.331
0.006
-0.223
0.301
370

-0.053
(0.174)
-0.086
(0.167)
-0.165
(0.179)
-0.263
(0.171)
-0.201
(0.168)
-0.198
(0.193)
-0.163
(0.182)
-0.161
0.187
-0.181
0.281
463

-0.095
(0.180)
-0.124
(0.169)
-0.144
(0.192)
-0.219
(0.198)
-0.134
(0.173)
-0.169
(0.202)
-0.130
(0.211)
-0.145
0.254
-0.149
0.428
463

0.108
(0.146)
-0.039
(0.167)
0.014
(0.251)
-0.039
(0.180)
-0.087
(0.218)
-0.079
(0.212)
-0.208
(0.204)
-0.047
0.769
-0.144
0.444
409

0.033
(0.198)
-0.041
(0.176)
0.038
(0.278)
-0.045
(0.179)
-0.090
(0.189)
0.004
(0.234)
-0.133
(0.222)
-0.033
0.852
-0.064
0.765
409

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Notes: Estimates are based on restricted zip-code-level abortion data from the Colorado Department of Public Health
and Environment for the state of Colorado from 2004–2015. The outcome variable is the difference between the inverse
hyperbolic sine transformations of abortions by age group and female population for the relevant age group. The fraction
treated indicates the percent of the population living in zip codes within 7 miles of a clinic. All specifications include year
and county fixed effects. Controls include county-level unemployment rates and poverty rates and county-level fractions
of individuals aged 15–29 by age, ethnicity, and race, the percent of each age group who are Hispanic, and the percent of
each age group who are black. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.

46

Appendix

47

Figure A1
Distance from Population Centroid to Nearest Title X Clinic

Notes: “Distance” indicates travel distance, in miles, according to Google map data. Authors’ calculation
of zip-code centroid distance to the nearest clinic is based on geocoded data of Title X clinics from the
Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment directory.

48

Table A1
The Effect of CFPI on Births by Urbanicity

15–17 Year Olds

Effect of Initiative in First Year
Effect of Initiative in Second Year
Effect of Initiative in Third Year
Effect of Initiative in Fourth Year
Effect of Initiative in Fifth Year
Effect of Initiative in Sixth Year
Effect of Initiative in Seventh Year
Average effect
P-value (test average effect = 0)
Average effect in years 6-7
P-value (test average effect in years 6-7 = 0)
Observations

Rural
(1)

Urban
(2)

-0.128
(0.119)
-0.234*
(0.129)
-0.277**
(0.126)
-0.073
(0.100)
-0.139
(0.117)
-0.173
(0.150)
-0.245**
(0.113)
-0.181
0.036
-0.209
0.080
3757

-0.052
(0.057)
-0.108*
(0.061)
-0.148**
(0.067)
-0.150**
(0.065)
-0.242***
(0.078)
-0.135*
(0.076)
-0.120
(0.078)
-0.136
0.006
-0.127
0.061
3887

18–19 Year Olds

20–24 Year Olds

25–29 Year Olds

Rural
(3)

Rural
(5)

Rural
(7)

Urban
(4)

Urban
(6)

0.026
-0.136**
0.030
-0.007
-0.060
(0.122)
(0.057)
(0.097)
(0.053)
(0.102)
0.006
-0.115**
0.055
-0.087
-0.119
(0.114)
(0.058)
(0.084)
(0.054)
(0.080)
-0.186* -0.131** -0.042
-0.091
-0.089
(0.097)
(0.058)
(0.087)
(0.056)
(0.091)
-0.118 -0.173*** 0.016
-0.091
-0.142
(0.107)
(0.062)
(0.099)
(0.062)
(0.087)
-0.259* -0.160** -0.078
-0.037
-0.072
(0.139)
(0.063)
(0.112)
(0.060)
(0.109)
-0.261* -0.154** -0.063 -0.167*** -0.139
(0.133)
(0.067)
(0.107)
(0.060)
(0.115)
-0.093 -0.189*** -0.024 -0.190*** -0.060
(0.126)
(0.068)
(0.112)
(0.058)
(0.096)
-0.127
-0.151
-0.015
-0.096
-0.097
0.076
0.000
0.825
0.030
0.138
-0.177
-0.172
-0.043
-0.179
-0.100
0.108
0.004
0.669
0.001
0.297
3755
3887
3757
3887
3757

Urban
(8)
-0.102*
(0.054)
-0.017
(0.058)
-0.032
(0.058)
-0.029
(0.058)
-0.050
(0.061)
-0.045
(0.065)
-0.136**
(0.061)
-0.059
0.236
-0.091
0.119
3887

Notes: Estimates are based on restricted Natality files by zip code for the state of Colorado from 2003–2015. All specifications include year and zip code fixed effects, and demographic and economic controls. Data on urbanicity is from the
University of North Dakota’s Rural Health Center. “Rural” zip codes include micropolitan areas, small towns, and rural
areas, while “Urban” zip codes include metropolitan areas. Standard errors are clustered at the zip-code level.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.

49

Table A2
Difference-in-Difference Estimates for Compositional Changes between Treated and
Comparison Zip Codes, 2000–2010

IHS(Number of Women aged 15-19)

0.000
(0.167)

Percent White (Non-Hispanic Women aged 15-29)

0.033
(0.031)

Percent Black (Non-Hispanic Women aged 15-29)

-0.004
(0.006)

Percent Hispanic (Women aged 15-29)

-0.019
(0.013)

Predicted IHS(Births to Women aged 15-19)

-0.059
(0.107)

Notes: Estimates are based on Census data for zip code demographics, showing the difference in differences between treated
and comparison zip codes from 2000 to 2010. IHS represents the inverse-hyperbolic-sine transformation. The predicted
IHS of births is calculated using estimated coefficients from a regression of IHS(birth count) on zip code demographics from
2010, then multiplying those coefficients by the observed demographics in 2000 and 2010. The regression using 2010 data
to evaluate how demographics predict births takes the form of IHS(births)zy = α + β1 ∗ IHS(N o.F emales15 − 29)zy +
β2 ∗ P ctW hitezy + β3 ∗ P ctBlackzy + β5 ∗ P ctHispaniczy , where “P ctW hite” is the percent of females aged 15-29 that are
white, etc. This yields an estimated model for P redicted IHS(births)zy = −2.02 + 0.87 ∗ IHS(N o.F emales15 − 29)zy +
0.05 ∗ P ctW hitezy + 0.21 ∗ P ctBlackzy + .27 ∗ P ctHispaniczy .
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.

50

Table A3
The Effect of CFPI on Births, Using Alternative Measures of Distance

15–17 Year Olds
(1)
Panel A. “As the Crow Flies” Distance
Effect of Initiative in First Year
Effect of Initiative in Second Year
Effect of Initiative in Third Year
Effect of Initiative in Fourth Year
Effect of Initiative in Fifth Year
Effect of Initiative in Sixth Year
Effect of Initiative in Seventh Year
Average effect
P-value (test average effect = 0)
Average effect in years 6-7
P-value (test average effect in years 6-7 = 0)
Observations
Panel B. Driving Time (In Minutes)
Effect of Initiative in First Year
Effect of Initiative in Second Year
Effect of Initiative in Third Year
Effect of Initiative in Fourth Year
Effect of Initiative in Fifth Year
Effect of Initiative in Sixth Year
Effect of Initiative in Seventh Year
Average effect
P-value (test average effect = 0)
Average effect in years 6-7
P-value (test average effect in years 6-7 = 0)
Observations
Controls

(2)

18–19 Year Olds
(3)

(4)

20–24 Year Olds
(5)

-0.076*
-0.068
-0.062
-0.066
-0.009
(0.041)
(0.041)
(0.040)
(0.041)
(0.039)
-0.183*** -0.175*** -0.113*** -0.119***
-0.021
(0.042)
(0.043)
(0.041)
(0.042)
(0.040)
-0.258*** -0.246*** -0.160*** -0.159***
-0.037
(0.046)
(0.046)
(0.042)
(0.042)
(0.041)
-0.175*** -0.167*** -0.155*** -0.152***
-0.017
(0.048)
(0.047)
(0.044)
(0.045)
(0.044)
-0.293*** -0.284*** -0.200*** -0.193***
-0.044
(0.054)
(0.054)
(0.047)
(0.048)
(0.045)
-0.259*** -0.252*** -0.203*** -0.194*** -0.110***
(0.054)
(0.055)
(0.047)
(0.048)
(0.042)
-0.305*** -0.291*** -0.195*** -0.181*** -0.115***
(0.052)
(0.053)
(0.049)
(0.049)
(0.042)
-0.221
-0.212
-0.155
-0.152
-0.050
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.094
-0.282
-0.272
-0.199
-0.188
-0.113
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.002
7644
7644
7644
7642
7644

-0.045
(0.051)
-0.153***
(0.056)
-0.219***
(0.059)
-0.161**
(0.064)
-0.241***
(0.074)
-0.204***
(0.072)
-0.252***
(0.071)
-0.182
0.000
-0.228
0.001
7644
No

-0.036
-0.115** -0.124**
(0.052)
(0.048)
(0.048)
-0.134**
-0.007
-0.010
(0.057)
(0.045)
(0.045)
-0.190*** -0.154*** -0.150***
(0.060)
(0.052)
(0.052)
-0.138** -0.162*** -0.154***
(0.063)
(0.058)
(0.058)
-0.216*** -0.226*** -0.211***
(0.075)
(0.064)
(0.064)
-0.178** -0.156** -0.137**
(0.074)
(0.063)
(0.064)
-0.226*** -0.147** -0.125**
(0.073)
(0.062)
(0.063)
-0.160
-0.138
-0.130
0.001
0.001
0.001
-0.202
-0.151
-0.131
0.003
0.007
0.020
7644
7644
7642
Yes

No

Yes

(6)

25–29 Year Olds
(7)

-0.001
-0.005
(0.040)
(0.038)
-0.015
-0.003
(0.041)
(0.040)
-0.040
-0.016
(0.041)
(0.040)
-0.016
-0.050
(0.044)
(0.042)
-0.055
-0.024
(0.044)
(0.045)
-0.121*** -0.029
(0.042)
(0.047)
-0.126*** -0.079*
(0.043)
(0.043)
-0.054
-0.030
0.074
0.348
-0.124
-0.054
0.001
0.165
7644
7644

(8)
0.000
(0.039)
0.001
(0.040)
-0.023
(0.040)
-0.047
(0.041)
-0.023
(0.045)
-0.035
(0.047)
-0.091**
(0.043)
-0.031
0.328
-0.063
0.113
7644

-0.009
(0.045)
-0.036
(0.044)
-0.036
(0.040)
-0.060
(0.051)
-0.022
(0.053)
-0.055
(0.046)
-0.098*
(0.050)
-0.045
0.195
-0.077
0.075
7644

-0.001
(0.045)
-0.029
(0.045)
-0.034
(0.040)
-0.055
(0.051)
-0.022
(0.053)
-0.063
(0.047)
-0.100*
(0.052)
-0.043
0.218
-0.081
0.069
7644

-0.042
(0.036)
-0.050
(0.042)
-0.043
(0.039)
-0.063
(0.040)
-0.059
(0.048)
-0.045
(0.049)
-0.056
(0.044)
-0.051
0.112
-0.050
0.222
7644

-0.038
(0.036)
-0.045
(0.042)
-0.044
(0.039)
-0.053
(0.040)
-0.055
(0.048)
-0.048
(0.051)
-0.061
(0.045)
-0.049
0.130
-0.055
0.197
7644

No

Yes

No

Yes

Notes: Estimates are based on restricted Natality files by zip code for the state of Colorado from 2003–2015. All specifications include year and zip code fixed effects. Controls include zip-code-level unemployment rates and poverty rates and
county-level fractions of individuals aged 15–29 by age, ethnicity, and race, the percent of each age group who are Hispanic,
and the percent of each age group who are black. Estimates in Panel A are from a model that defines treated zip codes as
those within 0–7 miles “as the crow flies” of a Title X clinic, and comparison zip codes as those further than 7 crow flies
miles from a Title X clinic. Estimates in Panel B are from a model that defines treated zip codes as those within 0–10
minutes driving time of a Title X clinic, and comparison zip codes as those further than 10 minutes from a Title X clinic.
Standard errors are clustered at the zip-code level.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.

51

52
Yes

-0.091**
(0.044)
-0.165***
(0.048)
-0.233***
(0.049)
-0.182***
(0.052)
-0.259***
(0.061)
-0.225***
(0.061)
-0.252***
(0.058)
-0.201
0.000
-0.238
0.000
7644
Yes

-0.079
(0.050)
-0.126**
(0.052)
-0.183***
(0.054)
-0.159***
(0.060)
-0.247***
(0.070)
-0.232***
(0.068)
-0.201***
(0.066)
-0.175
0.000
-0.217
0.000
7644

0–5 Miles
(2)

Yes

-0.054
(0.040)
-0.136***
(0.042)
-0.180***
(0.046)
-0.095**
(0.047)
-0.224***
(0.055)
-0.189***
(0.054)
-0.244***
(0.053)
-0.160
0.000
-0.217
0.000
7644

0–10 Miles
(3)

Yes

-0.061
(0.041)
-0.118***
(0.042)
-0.163***
(0.042)
-0.153***
(0.044)
-0.185***
(0.047)
-0.184***
(0.048)
-0.191***
(0.049)
-0.151
0.000
-0.188
0.000
7642
Yes

-0.111**
(0.045)
-0.054
(0.044)
-0.158***
(0.049)
-0.154***
(0.053)
-0.218***
(0.058)
-0.168***
(0.058)
-0.198***
(0.060)
-0.152
0.000
-0.183
0.001
7642

0–5 Miles
(5)

Yes

-0.061
(0.041)
-0.118***
(0.042)
-0.163***
(0.042)
-0.153***
(0.044)
-0.185***
(0.047)
-0.184***
(0.048)
-0.191***
(0.049)
-0.151
0.000
-0.188
0.000
7642

0–10 Miles
(6)

18–19 Year Olds
0–7 Miles
(4)

Yes

-0.010
(0.039)
-0.028
(0.041)
-0.034
(0.040)
-0.008
(0.044)
-0.037
(0.045)
-0.103**
(0.042)
-0.122***
(0.044)
-0.049
0.110
-0.112
0.003
7644
Yes

-0.024
(0.042)
-0.043
(0.042)
-0.040
(0.038)
-0.079*
(0.047)
-0.058
(0.048)
-0.095**
(0.045)
-0.154***
(0.046)
-0.070
0.029
-0.124
0.003
7644

0–5 Miles
(8)

Yes

-0.007
(0.039)
-0.028
(0.041)
-0.037
(0.040)
-0.014
(0.044)
-0.044
(0.045)
-0.111***
(0.042)
-0.131***
(0.044)
-0.053
0.080
-0.121
0.002
7644

0–10 Miles
(9)

20–24 Year Olds
0–7 Miles
(7)

Yes

0.010
(0.040)
0.020
(0.041)
-0.007
(0.040)
-0.030
(0.041)
-0.002
(0.046)
-0.026
(0.048)
-0.073*
(0.043)
-0.016
0.625
-0.050
0.208
7644
Yes

-0.033
(0.034)
-0.036
(0.040)
-0.047
(0.036)
-0.034
(0.038)
-0.070
(0.044)
-0.058
(0.047)
-0.088**
(0.041)
-0.052
0.082
-0.073
0.061
7644

0–5 Miles
(11)

Yes

0.010
(0.040)
0.020
(0.041)
-0.007
(0.040)
-0.030
(0.041)
-0.002
(0.046)
-0.026
(0.048)
-0.073*
(0.043)
-0.016
0.625
-0.050
0.208
7644

0–10 Miles
(12)

25–29 Year Olds
0–7 Miles
(10)

*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.

the percent of each age group who are black. Standard errors are clustered at the zip-code level.

zip-code-level unemployment rates and poverty rates and county-level fractions of individuals aged 15–29 by age, ethnicity, and race, the percent of each age group who are Hispanic, and

Notes: Estimates are based on restricted Natality files by zip code for the state of Colorado from 2003–2015. All specifications include year and zip code fixed effects. Controls include

Controls

Average effect
P-value (test average effect = 0)
Average effect in years 6-7
P-value (test average effect in years 6-7 = 0)
Observations

Effect of Initiative in Seventh Year

Effect of Initiative in Sixth Year

Effect of Initiative in Fifth Year

Effect of Initiative in Fourth Year

Effect of Initiative in Third Year

Effect of Initiative in Second Year

Effect of Initiative in First Year

0–7 Miles
(1)

15–17 Year Olds

Table A4
The Effect of CFPI on Births, Using Within 5 miles, 7 Miles, and 10 Miles to Define Treated Zip Codes

53
Yes

-0.091**
(0.044)
-0.165***
(0.048)
-0.233***
(0.049)
-0.182***
(0.052)
-0.259***
(0.061)
-0.225***
(0.061)
-0.252***
(0.058)
-0.201
0.000
-0.238
0.000
7644
Yes

-0.091**
(0.045)
-0.167***
(0.048)
-0.238***
(0.050)
-0.191***
(0.052)
-0.271***
(0.061)
-0.230***
(0.062)
-0.258***
(0.059)
-0.206
0.000
-0.244
0.000
7618
Yes

-0.091**
(0.044)
-0.165***
(0.048)
-0.233***
(0.049)
-0.182***
(0.052)
-0.259***
(0.061)
-0.225***
(0.061)
-0.252***
(0.058)
-0.201
0.000
-0.238
0.000
7644
Yes

-0.074*
(0.044)
-0.127***
(0.045)
-0.183***
(0.044)
-0.188***
(0.046)
-0.220***
(0.053)
-0.225***
(0.052)
-0.229***
(0.054)
-0.178
0.000
-0.227
0.000
7642
Yes

-0.069
(0.044)
-0.133***
(0.045)
-0.187***
(0.045)
-0.188***
(0.047)
-0.221***
(0.053)
-0.231***
(0.052)
-0.237***
(0.054)
-0.181
0.000
-0.234
0.000
7616

No Openings
(5)

Yes

-0.074*
(0.044)
-0.127***
(0.045)
-0.183***
(0.044)
-0.188***
(0.046)
-0.220***
(0.053)
-0.225***
(0.052)
-0.229***
(0.054)
-0.178
0.000
-0.227
0.000
7642

No Closures
(6)

18–19 Year Olds
All
(4)

No Openings
(2)

No Closures
(3)

15–17 Year Olds

Yes

-0.029
(0.039)
-0.052
(0.040)
-0.063
(0.039)
-0.059
(0.045)
-0.067
(0.046)
-0.134***
(0.043)
-0.159***
(0.044)
-0.080
0.009
-0.146
0.000
7644

All
(7)

Yes

-0.028
(0.038)
-0.057
(0.040)
-0.064*
(0.038)
-0.055
(0.045)
-0.065
(0.045)
-0.140***
(0.043)
-0.161***
(0.043)
-0.082
0.008
-0.151
0.000
7618

No Openings
(8)

Yes

-0.029
(0.039)
-0.052
(0.040)
-0.063
(0.039)
-0.059
(0.045)
-0.067
(0.046)
-0.134***
(0.043)
-0.159***
(0.044)
-0.080
0.009
-0.146
0.000
7644

No Closures
(9)

20–24 Year Olds

Yes

-0.052
(0.037)
-0.020
(0.040)
-0.038
(0.037)
-0.047
(0.040)
-0.058
(0.045)
-0.079*
(0.047)
-0.104**
(0.042)
-0.057
0.070
-0.091
0.021
7644

All
(10)

Yes

-0.052
(0.037)
-0.020
(0.040)
-0.030
(0.037)
-0.037
(0.039)
-0.060
(0.045)
-0.067
(0.045)
-0.101**
(0.041)
-0.053
0.092
-0.084
0.029
7618

Yes

-0.052
(0.037)
-0.020
(0.040)
-0.038
(0.037)
-0.047
(0.040)
-0.058
(0.045)
-0.079*
(0.047)
-0.104**
(0.042)
-0.057
0.070
-0.091
0.021
7644

No Closures
(12)

25–29 Year Olds
No Openings
(11)

*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.

zip-code level.

individuals aged 15–29 by age, ethnicity, and race, the percent of each age group who are Hispanic, and the percent of each age group who are black. Standard errors are clustered at the

experienced Title X closures. All specifications include year and zip code fixed effects. Controls include zip-code-level unemployment rates and poverty rates and county-level fractions of

zip codes across the state of Colorado. Columns 2, 5, 8 and 11 omit zip codes which experienced Title X clinic openings from 2009–2015, and Columns 3, 6, 9 and 12 omit zip codes which

Notes: Estimates are based on restricted Natality files by zip code for the state of Colorado from 2003–2015. Columns 1, 4, 7, and 10 provide the baseline estimates for comparison, using all

Controls

Average effect
P-value (test average effect = 0)
Average effect in years 6-7
P-value (test average effect in years 6-7 = 0)
Observations

Effect of Initiative in Seventh Year

Effect of Initiative in Sixth Year

Effect of Initiative in Fifth Year

Effect of Initiative in Fourth Year

Effect of Initiative in Third Year

Effect of Initiative in Second Year

Effect of Initiative in First Year

All
(1)

Table A5
The Effect of CFPI on Births, Omitting Zip Codes Affected by Colorado Title X Openings and Closures

Table A6
The Effect of CFPI on Births, OLS and WLS Estimates

15–17 Year Olds

Effect of Initiative in First Year
Effect of Initiative in Second Year
Effect of Initiative in Third Year
Effect of Initiative in Fourth Year
Effect of Initiative in Fifth Year
Effect of Initiative in Sixth Year
Effect of Initiative in Seventh Year
Average effect
P-value (test average effect = 0)
Average effect in years 6-7
P-value (test average effect in years 6-7 = 0)
Observations

OLS
(1)

WLS
(2)

-0.091**
(0.044)
-0.165***
(0.048)
-0.233***
(0.049)
-0.182***
(0.052)
-0.259***
(0.061)
-0.225***
(0.061)
-0.252***
(0.058)
-0.201
0.000
-0.238
0.000
7644

-0.019
(0.069)
-0.023
(0.070)
0.002
(0.074)
-0.018
(0.071)
-0.022
(0.086)
0.083
(0.088)
0.096
(0.090)
0.014
0.807
0.090
0.255
7644

18–19 Year Olds
OLS
(3)

WLS
(4)

20–24 Year Olds

25–29 Year Olds

OLS
(5)

OLS
(7)

-0.074*
-0.069
-0.029
(0.044)
(0.045)
(0.039)
-0.127*** -0.087*
-0.052
(0.045)
(0.049)
(0.040)
-0.183*** -0.076
-0.063
(0.044)
(0.055)
(0.039)
-0.188*** -0.046
-0.059
(0.046)
(0.057)
(0.045)
-0.220*** -0.042
-0.067
(0.053)
(0.059)
(0.046)
-0.225*** -0.071 -0.134***
(0.052)
(0.058)
(0.043)
-0.229*** -0.105 -0.159***
(0.054)
(0.069)
(0.044)
-0.178
-0.071
-0.080
0.000
0.079
0.009
-0.227
-0.088
-0.146
0.000
0.117
0.000
7642
7642
7644

WLS
(6)

WLS
(8)

-0.009
-0.052 -0.063**
(0.035)
(0.037)
(0.029)
-0.079** -0.020
-0.016
(0.037)
(0.040)
(0.032)
-0.039
-0.038
-0.046
(0.040)
(0.037)
(0.033)
-0.042
-0.047
-0.019
(0.039)
(0.040)
(0.031)
-0.044
-0.058
-0.035
(0.038)
(0.045)
(0.032)
-0.070* -0.079*
-0.047
(0.039)
(0.047)
(0.038)
-0.095** -0.104** -0.060*
(0.046)
(0.042)
(0.035)
-0.054
-0.057
-0.041
0.091
0.070
0.150
-0.082
-0.091
-0.053
0.038
0.021
0.117
7644
7644
7644

Notes: Estimates are based on restricted Natality files by zip code for the state of Colorado from 2003–2015. All specifications include year and zip code fixed effects, and demographic and economic controls. Population weights for weighted
least squares specifications in Columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 include the zip code-level female population from 2010, according to
the American Community Survey. Standard errors are clustered at the zip-code level.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.

54

Table A7
The Effect of CFPI on Births in Zip Codes with Less Than 2,000 Females

15–17 Year Olds
<2000
(1)
Effect of Initiative in First Year
Effect of Initiative in Second Year
Effect of Initiative in Third Year
Effect of Initiative in Fourth Year
Effect of Initiative in Fifth Year
Effect of Initiative in Sixth Year
Effect of Initiative in Seventh Year
Average effect
P-value (test average effect = 0)
Average effect in years 6-7
P-value (test average effect in years 6-7 = 0)
Observations

-0.175
(0.115)
-0.139
(0.093)
-0.204**
(0.093)
-0.149
(0.095)
-0.003
(0.112)
0.008
(0.126)
-0.218**
(0.092)
-0.126
0.075
-0.105
0.253
3887

≥2000
(2)

18–19 Year Olds
<2000
(3)

-0.013
0.069
(0.060) (0.155)
-0.095
-0.093
(0.069) (0.157)
-0.065 -0.225**
(0.074) (0.101)
-0.050
-0.140
(0.074) (0.126)
-0.056
-0.208
(0.084) (0.140)
0.018
-0.206*
(0.082) (0.124)
0.031
-0.055
(0.080) (0.138)
-0.033
-0.123
0.531
0.174
0.024
-0.130
0.728
0.247
3757
3885

20–24 Year Olds

25–29 Year Olds

≥2000
(4)

<2000
(5)

≥2000
(6)

<2000
(7)

≥2000
(8)

-0.072
(0.056)
-0.087
(0.054)
-0.081
(0.058)
-0.057
(0.066)
-0.060
(0.065)
-0.069
(0.070)
-0.098
(0.069)
-0.075
0.076
-0.083
0.166
3757

0.057
(0.157)
0.195
(0.156)
-0.227
(0.158)
-0.079
(0.202)
-0.058
(0.209)
-0.163
(0.176)
-0.048
(0.179)
-0.046
0.754
-0.105
0.534
3887

-0.043
(0.038)
-0.103**
(0.042)
-0.030
(0.044)
-0.053
(0.047)
-0.060
(0.046)
-0.095**
(0.047)
-0.157***
(0.049)
-0.078
0.024
-0.126
0.004
3757

-0.121
(0.183)
-0.179
(0.157)
-0.126
(0.139)
-0.258
(0.171)
-0.131
(0.207)
-0.223
(0.212)
-0.064
(0.165)
-0.157
0.287
-0.144
0.421
3887

-0.064**
(0.032)
-0.026
(0.039)
-0.019
(0.040)
0.016
(0.039)
-0.033
(0.045)
-0.057
(0.048)
-0.074*
(0.044)
-0.037
0.283
-0.066
0.125
3757

Notes: Estimates are based on restricted Natality files by zip code for the state of Colorado from 2003–2015. All specifications include year and zip code fixed effects, and demographic and economic controls. “<2000” represents a subsample of
Colorado zip codes with less than 2,000 total females, according to the 2010 American Community Survey, while “≥2000”
represents zip codes with more than 2,000 females. Standard errors are clustered at the zip-code level.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.

55

