                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           DATA DRIVEN REGULATION:
                     THEORY AND APPLICATION TO MISSING BIDS

                                        Sylvain Chassang
                                           Kei Kawai
                                        Jun Nakabayashi
                                         Juan M. Ortner

                                      Working Paper 25654
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25654


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2019




We are especially indebted to Steve Tadelis for encouragement and detailed feedback. The paper
benefited from discussions with Pierpaolo Battigali, Eric Budish, Yeon-Koo Che, Francesco
Decarolis, Emir Kamenica, Roger Myerson, Ariel Pakes, Wolfgang Pesendorfer, Andrea Prat,
Michael Riordan, Jozsef Sakovics, Larry Samuelson, Andy Skrzypacz, Paulo Somaini. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Sylvain Chassang, Kei Kawai, Jun Nakabayashi, and Juan M. Ortner. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Data Driven Regulation: Theory and Application to Missing Bids
Sylvain Chassang, Kei Kawai, Jun Nakabayashi, and Juan M. Ortner
NBER Working Paper No. 25654
March 2019
JEL No. C72,D44,H57,L51

                                           ABSTRACT

We document a novel bidding pattern observed in procurement auctions from Japan: winning
bids tend to be isolated. There is a missing mass of close losing bids. This pattern is suspicious in
the following sense: it is inconsistent with competitive behavior under arbitrary information
structures. Building on this observation, we develop a theory of data-driven regulation based on
“safe tests,” i.e. tests that are passed with probability one by competitive bidders, but need not be
passed by non-competitive ones. We provide a general class of safe tests exploiting weak
equilibrium conditions, and show that such tests reduce the set of equilibrium strategies that
cartels can use to sustain collusion. We provide an empirical exploration of various safe tests in
our data, as well as discuss collusive rationales for missing bids.


Sylvain Chassang                                  Jun Nakabayashi
Department of Economics                           Kindai University
New York University                               3-4-1 Kowakae
19 West 4th Street                                Higashiosaka City
New York, NY 10012                                Osaka 577-8502
and NBER                                          Japan
sylvain.chassang@gmail.com                        nakabayashi.1@eco.kindai.ac.jp

Kei Kawai                                         Juan M. Ortner
Department of Economics                           Boston University
University of California, Berkeley                270 Bay State Rd,
530 Evans Hall #3880                              Boston, MA 02215
Berkeley, CA 94720                                jortner@bu.edu
and NBER
kei@berkeley.edu
1     Introduction

One of the key functions of antitrust authorities is to detect and punish collusion. Although
concrete evidence is required for successful prosecution, screening devices that flag suspicious
firm conduct may help regulators identify collusion, and encourage members of existing
cartels to apply for leniency programs. Correspondingly, an active research agenda has sought
to build data-driven methods to detect cartels using naturally occurring market data (e.g.
Porter, 1983, Porter and Zona, 1993, 1999, Ellison, 1994, Bajari and Ye, 2003, Harrington,
2008). This paper seeks to make progress on several questions relevant to this literature.
How should regulators act on data-driven evidence of collusion? Wouldn’t cartel members
adapt their play to the screening tests implemented by the regulator? If so, can we build
general tests that do not target only a specific pattern of behavior? Can we ensure that
regulatory policies do not end up strengthening cartels?
    We begin by documenting a suspicious bidding pattern observed in procurement auctions
in Japan: the density of the bid distribution just above the winning bid is very low. There
is a missing mass of close losing bids. These missing bids are related to bidding patterns
of collusive firms in Hungary (Tóth et al., 2014) and Switzerland (Imhof et al., 2016). We
establish that these missing bids indicate non-competitive behavior under a general class of
asymmetric information models, and under the presence of arbitrary unobserved heterogene-
ity. Indeed, this missing mass of bids makes it a profitable stage-game deviation for bidders
to increase their bids.
    We expand on this observation and propose a theory of robust data-driven regulation
based on “safe tests,” i.e. tests that are passed with probability one by competitive bidders,
but not necessarily by non-competitive ones. We provide a general class of such tests ex-
ploiting weakened equilibrium conditions, and show that safe tests cannot help cartels: they
necessarily constrain the set of continuation values bidders can use to support collusion.
We illustrate the implications of various safe tests in our data, as well as propose several


                                               2
explanations for why missing bids may arise as a by-product of collusion.
   Our data comes from two datasets of public works procurement auctions in Japan. The
first dataset, analyzed by Kawai and Nakabayashi (2018), contains data on approximately
78,000 national-level auctions held between 2001 and 2006 by the Ministry of Land, Infras-
tructure and Transportation. The second dataset, studied by Chassang and Ortner (forth-
coming), contains information on approximately 1,500 city-level auctions held between 2007
and 2014. We are interested in the distribution of bidders’ margins of victory (or defeat).
For every (bidder, auction) pair, we compute ∆, the difference between the bidder’s own bid
and the most competitive bid among this bidder’s opponents, divided by the reserve price.
When ∆ < 0, the bidder won the auction. When ∆ > 0 the bidder lost. The finding moti-
vating this paper is summarized by Figure 1, which plots the distribution of bid-differences
∆ in the sample of national-level auctions. There is a striking missing mass around ∆ = 0.
Our first goal is to clarify the sense in which this gap — and other patterns that could be
found in the data — are suspicious. Our second goal is to formulate a theory of regulatory
response to such data.
   We analyze our data within a fairly general model of repeated play in first-price procure-
ment auctions. A group of firms repeatedly participates in first-price procurement auctions.
We allow players to observe arbitrary signals about one another, and rule out intertemporal
linkages between actions and payoffs. We allow bidders’ costs and types to be arbitrarily
correlated within and across periods. We say that behavior is competitive, if it is stage-game
optimal under the players’ information structure.
   Our first set of results establishes that the pattern of missing bids illustrated in Figure
1 is not consistent with competitive behavior under any information structure. There is no
stochastic process for costs and types (ergodic or not) that would rationalize observed bids
in equilibrium. We exploit the fact that in any competitive equilibrium, firms must not find
it profitable in expectation to increase their bids. This incentive constraint implies that with


                                               3
                                                own bid−min(other bids)
Figure 1: Distribution of bid-differences ∆ ≡           reserve
                                                                          over (bidder, auction) pairs
in national-level data.


high probability the elasticity of firms’ sample counterfactual demand (i.e., the empirical
probability of winning an auction at any given bid) must be bounded above by -1. This
condition is not satisfied in our data: because winning bids are isolated, the elasticity of
sample counterfactual demand is close to zero. In addition we are able to derive bounds on
the minimum number of histories at which non-competitive bidding must happen.
   This empirical finding begs the question: what should a regulator do about it? If the
regulator investigates industries on the basis of such empirical evidence, won’t cartels adapt?
Could the regulator make collusion worse by reducing the welfare of competitive players?
Our second set of results formulates a theory of regulation based on safe tests. Like the
elasticity test described above, safe tests can be passed with probability one provided firms
are competitive under some information structure. We show how to exploit equilibrium
conditions to derive a large class of such tests. Finally, we show that regulatory policy based
on safe tests is a robust improvement over laissez-faire. Regulation based on safe tests cannot
hurt competitive bidders, and, provided penalties against colluding firms are large enough,


                                                4
it can only reduce the set of enforceable collusive schemes available to cartels.
    Our third set of results takes safe tests to the data. We delineate how different moment
conditions (i.e. different deviations) uncover different non-competitive patterns. In addition,
we show that the outcomes of our tests are consistent with other proxy evidence for compet-
itiveness and collusion. The sample of histories such that bids are close to the reserve price
is more likely to fail our tests than histories where bids are low relative to the reserve price.
Bidding histories before an industry is investigated for collusion are more likely to fail our
tests than bidding histories after being investigated for collusion. Altogether this suggests
that, although safe tests are conservative, they still have bite in practice.
    Our paper relates primarily to the literature on cartel detection.1 Porter and Zona
(1993, 1999) show that suspected cartel members and non-cartel members bid in statistically
different ways. Bajari and Ye (2003) design a test of collusion based on excess correlation
across bids. Porter (1983) and Ellison (1994) exploit dynamic patterns of play predicted by
the theory of repeated games (Green and Porter, 1984, Rotemberg and Saloner, 1986) to
detect collusion. Conley and Decarolis (2016) propose a test of collusion in average-price
auctions exploiting cartel members’ incentives to coordinate bids. Chassang and Ortner
(forthcoming) propose a test of collusion based on changes in behavior around changes in
the auction design. Kawai and Nakabayashi (2018) analyze auctions with re-bidding, and
exploit correlation patterns in bids across stages to detect collusion.2 We propose a class of
robust, systematic tests of non-competitive behavior guaranteed to make cartel formation
less attractive in equilibrium.
    A small set of papers study the equilibrium impact of data driven regulation. Cyrenne
(1999) and Harrington (2004) study repeated oligopoly models in which colluding firms might
get investigated and fined whenever prices exhibit large and rapid fluctuations.3 A common
   1
      See Harrington (2008) for a recent survey.
   2
      Also related is Schurter (2017), who proposes a test of collusion based on exogenous shifts in the number
of bidders.
    3
      Other papers, like Besanko and Spulber (1989) and LaCasse (1995), study static models of equilibrium
regulation.

                                                      5
observation from these papers is that data driven regulation may backfire, allowing a cartel
to sustain higher equilibrium prices. We contribute to this literature by introducing the idea
of safe tests, and showing that regulation based on such tests restricts the set of equilibrium
values a cartel can sustain.
    Our emphasis on safe tests connects our work to a branch of the microeconomic literature
that seeks to identify predictions that can be made for all underlying economic environments.
The work of Bergemann and Morris (2013) is particularly relevant: for a given finite game,
they study the range of behavior that can be sustained by some incomplete information
structure.4 A similar exercise is at the heart of our analysis, though we choose to consider
optimality conditions that are weaker and more easily satisfied than equilibrium. Our work
is also related to a branch of the mechanism design literature that considers endogenous
responses to collusion (Abdulkadiroglu and Chung, 2003, Che and Kim, 2006, Che et al.,
2018).
    The tests that we propose, which seek to quantify violations of competitive behavior,
are similar in spirit to the tests used in revealed preference theory.5 Afriat (1967), Varian
(1990) and Echenique et al. (2011) propose tests to quantify the extent to which a given
consumption data set violates GARP. More closely related, Carvajal et al. (2013) propose
revealed preference tests of the Cournot model. We add to this literature by proposing tests
aimed at detecting non-competitive behavior in auctions which are robust to a wide range
of informational environments.
    Finally, our paper makes an indirect contribution to the literature on the internal organi-
zation of cartels. Asker (2010) studies stamp auctions, and analyses the effect of a particular
collusive scheme on non-cartel bidders and sellers. Pesendorfer (2000) studies the bidding

   4
       Also closely related is Bergemann et al. (2017), which characterizes bounds on equilibrium revenue in
first-price auctions under arbitrary incomplete information. Instead, we focus on implications for bidding
behavior under arbitrary incomplete information, and impose conditions that are weaker (and hence more
plausibly satisfied) than equilibrium. See also Doval and Ely (2019) for an extension allowing for arbitrary
extensive form in addition to arbitrary incomplete information.
     5
       See Chambers and Echenique (2016) for a recent review of the literature on revealed preference.

                                                     6
patterns for school milk contracts and compares the collusive schemes used by strong cartels
and weak cartels (i.e., cartels that used transfers and cartels that didn’t). Clark and Houde
(2013) document the collusive strategies used by the retail gasoline cartel in Quebec. We
add to this literature by documenting a puzzling bidding pattern that is poorly accounted for
by existing theories. We establish that this bidding pattern is non-competitive, and propose
some potential explanations.
    The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes our data and documents missing
bids. Section 3 introduces our theoretical framework. Section 4 shows that missing bids
cannot be rationalized under any competitive model. Section 5 generalizes this analysis,
and provides safe tests that systematically exploit weak optimality conditions implied by
equilibrium. Section 6 proposes normative foundations for safe tests. Section 7 delineates
the mechanics of safe tests in real data, and shows that their implications are consistent
with other indicators of collusion. Section 8 concludes with an open ended discussion of why
missing bids may arise in the context of collusion. Appendix A reports descriptive statistics
of our data, as well as additional empirical results. Appendix B clarifies the connection
between our approach and Bayes correlated equilibrium (Bergemann and Morris, 2016).
Appendix C shows how our results extend under common values. Appendix D describes our
computational strategy. Proofs are collected in Appendix E unless mentioned otherwise.



2     Motivating Facts

Our first dataset, described in Kawai and Nakabayashi (2018), consists of roughly 78,000
auctions held between 2001 and 2006 by the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure and Trans-
portation in Japan (the Ministry). The auctions are sealed-bid first-price auctions with a
secret reserve price, and re-bidding in case there is no successful winner. The auctions involve
construction projects. The median winning bid is 1 million USD, and the median number
of participants is 10. The bids of all participants are publicly revealed after each auction.


                                               7
    For any given firm i participating in auction a with reserve price r, we denote by bi,a
the bid of firm i in auction a, and by b−i,a the profile of bids by bidders other than i. We
investigate the distribution of
                                                    bi,a − ∧b−i,a
                                           ∆i,a =
                                                          r

aggregated over firms i, and auctions a, where ∧ denotes the minimum operator. The value
∆i,a represents the margin by which bidder i wins or loses auction a. If ∆i,a < 0 the bidder
won, if ∆i,a > 0 she lost.
    The left panel of Figure 2 plots the distribution of bid differences ∆ aggregating over
all firms and auctions in our sample.6 The mass of missing bids around a difference of 0 is
starkly visible. This pattern can be traced to individual firms as well. The right panel of
Figure 2 reports the distribution of bid difference for a single large firm frequently active in
our sample of auctions.




                     (a) all firms                                      (b) single large firm

         Figure 2: Distribution of normalized bid-differences ∆ – national-level data.


    Our second dataset, analyzed in Chassang and Ortner (forthcoming), consists of roughly
1,500 auctions held between 2007 and 2014 by the city of Tsuchiura in Ibaraki prefecture, also
in Japan. Projects are allocated using a sealed-bid first-price auction with a public reserve
   6
     Note that the distribution of normalized bid-differences is skewed to the right since the most competitive
alternative bid is a minimum over other bidders’ bids.

                                                      8
price. The median winning bid is 130,000 USD, and the median number of participants is
4. Figure 3 plots the distribution of ∆ for auctions held in Tsuchiura. Again, we see a
significant mass of missing bids around zero.7




                      Figure 3: Distribution of bid-difference ∆ – city data.


    One key goal of the paper is to show that the bidding patterns illustrated in Figures 2
and 3 are inconsistent with competitive behavior under any information structure. While
this is different from saying that these patterns reflect collusive behavior, missing bids are
in fact correlated with plausible indicators of collusion.
    Figure 4 breaks down the auctions in Figure 2 by bid levels: the figure plots the distri-
                     bi,a −∧b−i,a                         bi,a
bution of ∆i,a =           r
                                    for normalized bids    r
                                                                 below 0.8 and above 0.8. The mass of
missing bids in Figure 2 is considerably reduced when we look at bids that are low compared
to the reserve price.
    Figure 5 plots the distribution of ∆i,a for participants of auctions held by the Ministry
   7
     Imhof et al. (2016) document a similar bidding pattern in procurement auctions in Switzerland: bidding
patterns by several cartels uncovered by the Swiss competition authority presented large differences between
the winning bid and the second lowest bid in auctions. See also Tóth et al. (2014).

                                                     9
that were implicated by the Japanese Fair Trade Commission (JFTC). The JFTC implicated
a total of four bidding rings that were participating in the auctions in our data: (i) firms
installing traffic signs; (ii) builders of bridge upper structures; (iii) pre-stressed concrete
providers; and (iv) floodgate builders.8 The left panels in Figure 5 plot the distribution of
∆ for auctions that were run before the JFTC started its investigation, and the right panels
plot the distribution in the after period. In all cases except (iii), the pattern of missing
bids disappears after the JFTC launched its investigation. Interestingly, firms in case (iii)
initially denied the charges against them, unlike in the other three cases, and seem to have
continued colluding for some time (see Kawai and Nakabayashi (2018) for a more detailed
account of these collusion cases).




                   (a) Below 80%                                      (b) Above 80%

Figure 4: Distribution of bid-difference ∆ by bid levels – national data. The left panel plots
the distribution of ∆ for bids that were below 80% of reserve price. The right panel plots
the distribution of ∆ for bids that were above 80% of reserve price.



What does not explain this pattern. Although explaining missing bids is not the goal
of this paper, it is useful to clarify what does not explain this pattern. Specifically, we argue
   8
    See JFTC Recommendation and Ruling #5-8 (2005) for case (i); JFTC Recommendation and Ruling
#12 (2005) for case (ii); JFTC Recommendation #27-28 (2004) and Ruling #26-27 (2010) for case (iii); and
JFTC Cease and Desist Order #2-5 (2007) for case (iv).

                                                  10
Figure 5: Distribution of bid-difference ∆ – cartel cases in national data, before and after
JFTC investigation.




                                            11
that missing bids are not explained by either the granularity of bids, or ex post renegotiation.
   Figures 4 and 5 rule out granularity as an explanation for missing bids: if missing bids
were a consequence of the granularity of bids, we should see similar patterns both across all
bid levels, and before and after the JFTC investigations.9
   Renegotiation could potentially account for missing bids by making apparent incentive
compatibility issues irrelevant. Indeed, some winning firms may seemingly leave money on
the table, only to reclaim it through renegotiation ex post. Our national-level data contains
information on renegotiated prices, and allows us to rule out this explanation. First, Figure
6 shows that the missing bids pattern persists even if we focus on auctions whose prices
were not renegotiated up. Second, in the auctions we study, the contract that is signed
between the awarder and the awardee include renegotiation provisions that greatly reduce
firms’ incentives to bid aggressively with the hope of renegotiating to a higher price later on.
Specifically, the contract stipulates that renegotiated prices be anchored to the level of the
initial bid: if the project is estimated to cost $y more than initially thought, the renegotiated
                            initial bid
price is increased by      reserve price
                                           × y. This implies that excessively competitive bids that are
unprofitable are likely to remain unprofitable after renegotiation.

   Our objectives in this paper are: (i) to formalize why the missing mass of bids around zero
is suspicious; (ii) to delineate what it implies about bidding behavior and the competitiveness
of auctions in our sample; (iii) to formulate a theory of regulation based on safe tests; and
(iv) to propose possible explanations for why this behavior may arise under collusive bidding.
To do so we use a model of repeated auctions.




   9
       In addition, there is no missing bid pattern when comparing the second and third lowest bids.

                                                        12
Figure 6: Distribution of bid-difference ∆ – auctions whose price was not renegotiated up-
wards.


3         Framework

3.1         The Stage Game

We consider a dynamic setting in which, at each period t ∈ N, a buyer needs to procure a
single project. The auction format is a sealed-bid first-price auction with reserve price r,
which we normalize to r = 1.
     In each period t ∈ N, a set N
                                 bt ⊂ N of bidders is able to participate in the auction, where

N is the overall set of bidders. We think of this set of participating firms as those eligible
to produce in the current period.10 The set of eligible bidders can vary over time.
     Realized costs of production for eligible bidders i ∈ N
                                                           bt are denoted by ct = (ci,t ) b .
                                                                                         i∈Nt

Each bidder i ∈ N
                bt submits a bid bi,t . Profiles of bids are denoted by bt = (bi,t ) b . We let
                                                                                    i∈Nt

b−i,t ≡ (bj,t )j6=i denote bids from firms other than firm i, and define ∧b−i,t ≡ minj6=i bj,t to
    10
         See Chassang and Ortner (forthcoming) for a treatment of endogenous participation by cartel members.

                                                       13
be the lowest bid among i’s opponents at time t. The procurement contract is allocated to
the bidder submitting the lowest bid at a price equal to her bid. Ties are broken randomly.
    Participants discount future payoffs using common discount factor δ < 1. Bids are
publicly revealed at the end of each period.11


Costs. We allow for costs that are serially correlated over time, and that may be correlated
across firms within each auction. Denoting by h., .i the usual dot-product we assume that
costs take the form
                                           ci,t = hαi , θt i + εi,t > 0                                       (1)

where:12

    • parameters αi ∈ Rk are fixed over time.

    • θt ∈ Rk may be unknown to the bidders at the time of bidding, but is revealed to
      bidders at the end of period t. We assume that θt follows a Markov chain.13 We do
      not assume that there are finitely many states, or that the chain is irreducible.

    • εi,t is i.i.d. with mean zero conditional on θt .

    In period t, bidder i ∈ N
                            bt obtains profits


                                          πi,t = xi,t × (bi,t − ci,t ),


where xi,t ∈ [0, 1] is the probability with which i wins the auction at time t. Note that costs
include both the direct costs of production and the opportunity cost of backlog.




   11
      For the sake of concision, we do not consider the possibility of transfers at this point. It does not change
our analysis.
   12
      We stress that cost specification (1) is flexible. For instance, this formulation can accommodate environ-
ments in which costs depend on the physical distance between each firm i and the project’s location. Indeed,
this can be achieved by setting θt to be the vector of distances from each firm to the project’s location at
time t, and αi to be a vector with all zeros except a 1 in the i-th position.
   13
      I.e. given any event E anterior to time t, θt |θt−1 , E ∼ θt |θt−1 .

                                                       14
   The sets N
            bt of bidders are independent across time conditional on θt , i.e.


                                 bt |θt−1 , N
                                 N                 bt−2 . . . ∼ N
                                            bt−1 , N            bt |θt−1 .


Information. In each period t, bidder i gets a signal zi,t that is conditionally i.i.d. given
(θt , (cj,t )j∈Nbt ). This allows our model to nest many informational environments, including
asymmetric information private value auctions, common value auctions, as well as complete
information. Bids bt are observable at the end of the auction.


3.2     Solution Concepts

A public history ht in period t takes the form ht = (θs−1 , bs−1 )s≤t . We let H denote the set
of all public histories.
   Our solution concept is perfect public Bayesian equilibrium (Athey and Bagwell, 2008).
Because state θt is revealed at the end of each period, past play conveys no information about
the private types of other players. As a result we do not need to specify out-of-equilibrium
beliefs. A perfect public Bayesian equilibrium consists only of a strategy profile σ, such that
for all i ∈ N ,
                                          σi : ht 7→ bi,t (zi,t ),

where bids bi,t (zi,t ) ∈ ∆([0, r]) depend on the public history and on the information available
at the time of decision making.
   We emphasize the class of competitive equilibria, which simply corresponds to the class
of Markov perfect equilibria (Maskin and Tirole, 2001). In a competitive equilibrium, players
condition their play only on payoff relevant parameters.

Definition 1 (competitive strategy). We say that σ is competitive (or Markov perfect) if
and only if ∀i ∈ N and ∀ht ∈ H, σi (ht , zi,t ) depends only on (θt−1 , zi,t ).
   We say that a strategy profile σ is a competitive equilibrium if it is a perfect public


                                                    15
Bayesian equilibrium in competitive strategies.

   We note that in a competitive equilibrium, firms must be playing a stage-game Nash
equilibrium at every period; that is, firms must play a static best-reply to the actions of
their opponents.


Competitive histories. Competitiveness of equilibrium is a fairly coarse notion. An
equilibrium, which could involve many firms, interacting over an extensive timeframe, is
either competitive or not. More realistically, an equilibrium may include periods in which
(a subset of) firms collude and periods in which firms compete. This leads us to define
competitive histories.

Definition 2 (competitive histories). Fix a common knowledge profile of play σ and a history
hi,t = (ht , zi,t ) of player i. We say that player i is competitive at history hi,t if play at hi,t is
stage-game optimal for firm i given the behavior of other firms σ−i .
   We say that a firm is competitive if it plays competitively at all histories on the equilibrium
path.


3.3     Safe Tests

We take the perspective of a regulator using bidding data to decide whether or not to launch
an investigation. We consider a regulator that seeks to do as little harm to competitive firms
as possible, and formalize her decision to intervene as a safe test. That is, a test that is
robustly passed by competitive firms. We show in Section 6 that preventing harm against
competitive firms serves an important strategic purpose: provided the cost of regulatory
intervention is high enough (at least for collusive firms), safe tests cannot unwittingly increase
a cartel’s enforcement capability. As Harrington (2004) highlights, this need not be true for
tests that are not safe.




                                                  16
     Let H∞ denote the set of coherent full public histories (hi,t )i∈N,t≥0 .14 A test τ is a mapping
from H∞ to {0, 1}, where 1 denotes fail and 0 denotes pass.
     Let us denote by λ ≡ prob((ci,t , θt , zi,t )i∈N,t≥0 ) the underlying economic environment, and
by Λ the set of possible environments λ.

Definition 3 (safe tests). We say that τi is unilaterally safe for firm i if and only if for all
λ ∈ Λ, and all profiles σ such that firm i is competitive, probλ,σ (τi (h) = 0) = 1.
     We say that τ is jointly safe if and only if for all λ ∈ Λ, and all profiles σ such that all
players i ∈ N are competitive, probλ,σ (τ (h) = 0) = 1.

     In words, a test is jointly safe (resp. unilaterally safe) if and only if all competitive
industries (resp. firms) pass the test with probability 1.



4        Missing Bids are Inconsistent with Competition

In this section, we show how to exploit equilibrium conditions at different histories to ob-
tain bounds on the share of competitive histories. The first step is to identify moments of
counterfactual demand that can be estimated from data, even though the subjective residual
demand faced by bidders can vary with the history.


4.1      Counterfactual demand

Fix a perfect public Bayesian equilibrium σ. For all histories hi,t and all bids b0 ∈ [0, r],
player i’s counterfactual demand at hi,t is


                                 Di (b0 |hi,t ) ≡ probσ (∧b−i,t > b0 |hi,t ).



    14
      I.e. sequences of histories such that hi,t and hi,t+1 coincide on events occurring before time t, and
hi,t and hj,t+1 coincide on public events before t. For each each i ∈ N and t, history hi,t takes the form
hi,t = (ht , zi,t ).

                                                     17
For any finite set of histories H, and any scalar ρ ∈ (−1, ∞), define

                                         1 X
                            D(ρ|H) ≡             Di ((1 + ρ)bi,t |hi,t )
                                        |H| h ∈H
                                             i,t




the average counterfactual demand for histories in H, and its sample equivalent

                                        1 X
                              D(ρ|H)
                              b      ≡          1∧b−i,t >(1+ρ)bi,t .
                                       |H| h ∈H
                                               i,t




Definition 4. We say that set of histories H is adapted to the players’ information if and
only if the event hi,t ∈ H is measurable with respect to player i’s information at time t prior
to bidding.

   For instance, the set of auctions for a specific industry or location is adapted. In contrast,
the set of auctions in which the margin of victory is below a certain level is not. The ability
to legitimately vary the conditioning set H lets us explore the competitiveness of auctions
in particular settings of interest.

Lemma 1. Consider an adapted set of histories H. Under any perfect public Bayesian
equilibrium σ, for any α > 0,


                    prob(|D(ρ|H)
                          b      − D(ρ|H)| ≤ α) ≥ 1 − 2 exp(−α2 |H|/2).


In particular, with probability 1, D(ρ|H)
                                   b      − D(ρ|H) → 0 as |H| → ∞.

   In other words, in equilibrium, the sample residual demand conditional on an adapted
set of histories converges to the true subjective aggregate conditional demand. This result
is a consequence of the equilibrium assumption, but is implied by optimality conditions
weaker than equilibrium. It may fail under sufficiently non-common priors, but will hold if
participants use data-driven predictors of demand satisfying no-regret (see for instance Hart
and Mas-Colell, 2000).

                                                   18
    We highlight that Lemma 1 relies on conservative non-asymptotic concentration bounds.
In practice, one may be willing to make additional assumptions on the data generating
process leading to tighter estimates. Our approach extends to any probabilistic moment
conditions of the form

                                                                             
                             prob        D(ρ|H)
                                         b      − D(ρ|H)                 ∈S         ≥1−
                                                                   ρ∈R



where R is a finite set of deviations ρ ∈ (−1, +∞), and S is a confidence set for demand
estimation errors D(ρ|H)
                  b      − D(ρ|H) at different values of ρ ∈ R.15


4.2      A Test of Non-Competitive Behavior

The pattern of bids illustrated in Figures 1, 2 and 3 is striking. Our first main result shows
that its more extreme forms are inconsistent with competitive behavior.

Proposition 1. Let σ be a competitive equilibrium. Then,

                                            ∂ log Di (b0 |hi )
                                    ∀hi ,                                       ≤ −1,                          (2)
                                                ∂ log b0         b0 =b+
                                                                      i (hi )

                                            ∂ log D(ρ|H)
                                    ∀H,                                 ≤ −1.                                  (3)
                                                  ∂ρ             ρ=0+



    In words, under any competitive equilibrium, the elasticity of counterfactual demand
must be less than -1 at every history. The data presented in the left panel of Figure 2
contradicts the results in Proposition 1. Since the density of ∆i at 0 is essentially 0, the
elasticity of demand is approximately zero at these histories.




   15
     For instance, if one is willing to impose that (θt )t∈N is stationary and ergodic, and that σ is a competitive
equilibrium, then D(ρ|H)−D(ρ|H)
                   b                    is asymptotically Gaussian when set H grows large. One can then derive
confidence sets by estimating an asymptotic covariance matrix. Alternatively one may also derive confidence
sets using bootstrap. This is the approach we use in our empirical analysis.

                                                        19
Proof. Consider a competitive equilibrium σ. Let
                                                                                           !
                                           X
                         V (hi,t ) ≡ Eσ           δ s−t (bi,s − ci,s )1bi,s <∧b−i,s hi,t
                                            s≥t


denote player i’s discounted expected payoff at history hi,t . Let b denote the bid that bidder
i places at history hi,t . Since b is an equilibrium bid, it must be that for all bids b0 > b,

                                                           
    Eσ (b − ci,t )1∧b−i,t >b + δV (hi,t+1 ) hi,t , bi,t = b

                                            ≥ Eσ (b0 − ci,t )1∧b−i,t >b0 + δV (hi,t+1 ) hi,t , bi,t = b0
                                                                                                        



Since σ is competitive, Eσ [V (hi,t+1 )|hi,t , bi,t = b] = Eσ [V (hi,t+1 )|hi,t , bi,t = b0 ]. Hence, we must
have


               bDi (b|hi,t ) − b0 Di (b0 |hi,t ) = Eσ b1∧b−i,t >b − b0 1∧b−i,t >b0 hi,t
                                                                                       

                                                                                          
                                                 ≥ Eσ ci,t (1∧b−i,t >b − 1∧b−i,t >b0 ) hi,t ≥ 0,             (4)


where the last inequality follows since ci,t ≥ 0. Inequality (4) implies that, for all b0 > b,

                                   log Di (b0 |hi ) − log Di (b|hi )
                                                                     ≤ −1.
                                           log b0 − log b

Inequality (2) follows from taking the limit as b0 → b. Inequality (3) follows from summing
(4) over histories in H, and performing the same computations.                        


    As the proof highlights, this result exploits the fact that in procurement auctions, zero
is a natural lower bound for costs (see inequality (4)). In contrast, for auctions where
bidders have a positive value for the good, there is no corresponding natural upper bound to
valuations. One would need to impose an ad hoc upper bound on values to establish similar
results.

                                                        20
   An implication of Proposition 1 is that, in our data, bidders have a short-term incentive
to increase their bids. Because of the need to keep participants from bidding higher, for
every  > 0 small, there exists ν > 0 and a positive mass of histories hi,t = (ht , zi,t ) such
that,

                                                                                        
               δEσ V (hi,t+1 ) hi,t , bi (hi,t ) − δEσ V (hi,t+1 ) hi,t , bi (hi,t )(1 + ) > ν.           (5)


In other terms, equilibrium σ must give bidders a dynamic incentive not to overcut the
winning bid.
   Proposition 1 proposes a simple test of whether an adapted dataset H can be generated
by a competitive equilibrium or not. Note that, unlike in tests of competitive behavior that
presume a particular information structure, the test here is valid under general information
structures including private values and common values. It is also valid under any form of
unobserved heterogeneity.16 We now refine this test to obtain bounds on the minimum share
of non-competitive histories needed to rationalize the data. We begin with a simple loose
bound and then propose a more sophisticated program resulting in tighter bounds.


4.3     Estimating the share of competitive histories

It follows from Proposition 1 that missing bids cannot be explained in a model of compet-
itive bidding. We now establish that competitive behavior must fail at a large number of
histories in order to explain isolated winning bids. This implies that bidders have frequent
opportunities to learn that their bids are not optimal.
   Fix a perfect public Bayesian equilibrium σ and a finite set of histories H. Let H comp ⊂
                                                                             |H comp |
H be the set of competitive histories in H. Define scomp ≡                     |H|
                                                                                         to be the fraction of
competitive histories in H. For all histories hi,t = (ht , zi,t ) and all bids b0 ≥ 0, player i’s


  16
    Since Proposition 1 holds conditional on the information that is available to firms, it must also hold
conditional on the possibly coarser information available to the econometrician.

                                                      21
counterfactual revenue at hi,t is


                                     Ri (b0 |hi,t ) ≡ b0 Di (b0 |hi,t ).


For any finite set of histories H and scalar ρ ∈ (−1, ∞), define

                                     X         1
                       R(ρ|H) ≡                   (1 + ρ)bi,t Di ((1 + ρ)bi,t |hi,t )
                                    hi,t ∈H
                                              |H|


to be the average counterfactual revenue for histories in H. Our next result builds on
Proposition 1 to derive a bound on scomp .

Proposition 2. The share scomp of competitive histories is such that

                                                      R(ρ|H) − R(0|H)
                             scomp ≤ 1 − sup                          .
                                                ρ>0          ρ

Proof. Let H ¬comp = H\H comp be the set of non-competitive histories in H. For any ρ > 0,

            1                          1
              [R(ρ|H) − R(0|H)] = scomp R(ρ|H comp ) − R(0|H comp )
                                                                    
            ρ                          ρ
                                                1
                                  + (1 − scomp ) R(ρ|H ¬comp ) − R(0|H ¬comp )
                                                                              
                                                ρ
                                    ≤ 1 − scomp .


The last inequality follows from two observations. First, since the elasticity of counterfactual
demand is bounded above by −1 for all competitive histories (Proposition 1), it follows that
R(ρ|H comp ) − R(0|H comp ) ≤ 0. Second, since R(ρ|H ¬comp ) ≤ (1 + ρ)R(0|H ¬comp ),

                   1
                     [R(ρ|H ¬comp ) − R(0|H ¬comp )] ≤ R(0|H ¬comp ) ≤ r = 1.
                   ρ

This concludes the proof.     


                                                      22
     In words, if total revenue for histories H increases by more than κ × ρ when bids are
uniformly increased by (1 + ρ), the share of competitive histories in H is bounded above by
1 − κ.
     Proposition 2 suggests a natural estimator. For each ρ ∈ (−1, ∞), define

                                        X         1
                           R(ρ|H)
                           b      ≡                  (1 + ρ)bi,t 1∧b−i,t >(1+ρ)bi,t .
                                       hi,t ∈H
                                                 |H|


Note that R(ρ|H)
          b      is the sample analog of counterfactual revenue. A result identical to
Lemma 1 establishes that R(ρ|H)
                         b      is a consistent estimator of R(ρ|H), whenever set H is
adapted. This allows us to use Proposition 2 to empirically estimate the share of competitive
histories.
     In the extreme case where the density of competing bids is zero just above winning bids,
we have that R(ρ|H)−R(0|H) ' ρR(0|H) for ρ small. This implies that scomp ≤ 1−R(0|H).17



5        A General Class of Safe Tests

We now extend the approach of Section 4 to a derive a more general class of safe tests that
exploits the information content of both upward and downward deviations. We emphasize
that our tests allow the regulator or econometrician to include plausible constraints on costs,
incomplete information, and the extent of unobserved heterogeneity.


5.1      A General Result

Take as given an adapted set of histories H, corresponding to a set A of auctions. Take as
given scalars ρn ∈ (−1, ∞) for n ∈ M = {−n, · · · , n}, such that ρ0 = 0 and ρn < ρn0 for
    17
      Note that scomp ≤ 1 − R(0|H) ≤ 1 − D(0|H). Hence, the bound on competitive histories in Proposition
2 is, at most, equal to the probability of winning an auction. While this bound is quite weak, we note that
it is robust to private values, common values, and any form of unobserved heterogeneity.

                                                       23
all n0 > n. For each history hi,t ∈ H, let dhi,t ,n ≡ Di ((1 + ρn )bhi,t |hi,t ). That is, dhi,t ,n is
firm i’s subjective counterfactual demand at history hi,t , when applying a coefficient 1 + ρn
to its original bid. For any auction a and associated histories h ∈ a, an environment at a
is a tuple ωa = (dh,n , ch )h∈a, n∈M .18 We let ωA = (ωa )a∈A denote the profile of environments
across auctions a ∈ A.
   For each deviation n, environment ωA = (ωa )a∈A and adapted set of histories H define

                           1 X                  b n (H) ≡ 1
                                                              X
         Dn (ωA , H) ≡            dh ,n     and D                 1(1+ρn )bhi,t <∧b−i,hi,t .
                          |H| h ∈H i,t                   |H| h ∈H
                              i,t                                   i,t




We formulate the problem of inference about the environment ωA as a constrained maxi-
mization problem defined by two objects to be chosen by the econometrician:

 (i) u(ωa ) the objective function to be maximized. For instance, the number of his-
       tories h ∈ a that are rationalized as competitive under ωa .

(ii) Ω the set of plausible economic environments ωA .
                P
Let U (ωA ) =      a∈A   u(ωa ). For any tolerance function T : N → R+ , we define inference
problem (P) as


                                          U
                                          b = max U (ωA )                                           (P)
                                                ωA ∈Ω
                                          h                                     i
                 s.t. ∀n,    Dn (ωA , H) ∈ Db n (H) − T (|H|), D
                                                               b n (H) + T (|H|) .               (CR)
                                                                                                  d


Intuitively, estimator U
                       b is a robust upper-bound to the true value U (ωA ). It exploits the

assumption that ωA is within the set of plausible environments Ω, as well as the fact that the
sample counterfactual demand aggregated over any set of adapted histories must converge
to the bidders’ expected counterfactual demand. We refer to this constraint as consistency
requirement (CR).
             d The following result holds.
  18
     Note that each history h ∈ H corresponds to a bid placed by some bidder in an auction a ∈ A. Hence,
the histories h ∈ a associated with auction a correspond to all the bids that were placed in auction a.

                                                  24
Proposition 3. Suppose the true environment is ωA ∈ Ω. Then, with probability at least
1 − 2|M| exp − 21 T (|H|)2 |H| , U
                              
                                 b ≥ U (ωA ).


   As we discussed following Lemma 1, any bound of the form


                                b n |H) − D(ρn |H))n∈M ∈ S) ≥ 1 − 
                          prob((D(ρ


yields an extension of Proposition 3 where condition (CR)               b n |H) −
                                                      d is replaced by (D(ρ

D(ρn |H))n∈M ∈ S. In that case, estimated metric U
                                                 b is greater than the true metric U (ωA )

with probability 1 − .


   We now show that by applying Proposition 3 to different tuples (u, Ω), we can derive
robust bounds on different measures of non-competitive behavior. These bounds imply
natural safe tests.


5.2    Maximum Share of Competitive Histories

We first use Proposition 3 to extend Proposition 2, and provide a tighter upper bound on
the share of competitive histories in H. For expositional purposes, we assume private values
and discuss extensions to common values at the end of this section.
   Under the private values assumption, at every competitive history h ∈ H there must
exist costs ch and subjective demands dh = (dh,n )n∈M satisfying


                feasibility:   ch ∈ [0, bh ];   ∀n, dh,n ∈ [0, 1];      ∀n, n0 > n, dh,n ≥ dh,n0       (F)

  incentive compatibility:             ∀n,      [(1 + ρn )bh − ch ] dh,n ≤ [(1 + ρ0 )bh − ch ]dh,0 .   (IC)


Conditions (F), (IC) and (CR)
                          d exploit some but not all the information content of equilib-

rium under some information structure. We clarify in Appendix B that this would be the
case if we imposed demand consistency requirements conditional on different values of bids

                                                    25
and costs c (corresponding to the bidder’s private information at the time of bidding).
   The objective function u simply counts the number of histories satisfying these conditions:

                                          1 X
                              u(ωa ) ≡            1(d ,c ) satisfy (F) & (IC) .                (6)
                                         |H| h∈a∩H h h


   We allow for economic plausibility constraints on environments Ω. We focus on markup
constraints, as well as constraints on the informativeness of signals bidders get.

                    bh                                               dh,n           Dn
             ∀h,       ∈ [1 + m, 1 + M ] and ∀n,             log            − log        ≤k   (EP)
                    ch                                             1 − dh,n       1 − Dn

where m ≥ 0 and M ∈ (m, +∞] are minimum and maximum markups, and k ∈ [0, +∞)
provides an upper bound to the information contained in any signal. The focal case of i.i.d.
types corresponds to k = 0 .
   For each environment ωA , define


                   Hcomp (ωA ) ≡ {h ∈ H s.t. (dh , ch ) satisfy (F), (IC) and (EP)}


to be the set of histories in H satisfying plausibility constraints (EP) that can be rationalized
as competitive under ωA . Program (P) then becomes

                                                     |Hcomp (ωA )|
                                              max                                             (P0 )
                                             ωA ∈Ω       |H|
                                           h                                     i
                   s.t. ∀n,   Dn (ωA , H) ∈ Db n (H) − T (|H|), D
                                                                b n (H) + T (|H|) .


U
b provides an upper bound to the share of competitive histories in H, yielding the following

corollary.

Corollary 1. Suppose that the true environment ωA satisfies (EP), and that the true share
of competitive histories under environment ωA is scomp ∈ (0, 1]. Then, with probability at


                                                     26
least 1 − 2|M| exp(− 12 T (|H|)2 |H|), Û ≥ scomp .

   This robust bound lets us define safe tests. For any threshold fraction s0 ∈ (0, 1] of
competitive histories, we define our candidate safe test by τ ≡ 1Û ≥s0 .

Corollary 2. Whenever T (·) satisfies lim|H|→∞ exp(− 12 T (|H|)2 |H|) = 0, τ is a safe test.

   By varying the initial set H of adapted histories, we can make test τ safe for a given
firm, or for a given industry. Specifically, if H is the set of histories of firm i, then test τ is
unilaterally safe for firm i.
   For finite data, we can choose tolerance function T (·) to determine the significance level
of test τ . For instance, for the test to have a robust significance level of α ∈ (0, 1), we set
T (|H|) such that 2|M| exp(− 12 T (|H|)2 |H|) = α. Note again that this is a very conservative
estimate of significance. One may obtain less conservative significance estimates by using
asymptotic concentration bounds tighter than the ones used to establish Lemma 1, or by
using bootstrap methods.


Common values. In the analysis above, the private value assumption implies that each
history h is associated with a single cost ch . Under common values, costs would depend on
the deviation ρ chosen by the bidder. An environment at auction a would then take the
form ωa = (dh,n , ch,n )h∈a, n∈M . However, we show in Appendix C that, under the assumption
that a bidder’s expected costs ch,n are weakly increasing in her opponents’ bids (a variant of
affiliation), common values cannot relax incentive compatibility constraint (IC). Hence, our
results extend without modification to such common value environments.


5.3    Bounds on Other Moments

Corollary 1 uses Proposition 3 to obtain bounds on the share of competitive histories. We
now show how to use Proposition 3 to bound other quantities of interest: the share of
competitive auctions, and the expected profits left on the table by non-optimizing bidders.

                                                 27
Maximum share of competitive auctions. The bound on the share of competitive
histories provided by Corollary 1 allows some histories in the same auctions to have dif-
ferent competitive/non-competitive status. This may underestimate the prevalence of non-
competition. In particular, if one player is non-competitive, she must expect other players
to be non-competitive in the future. Otherwise, if all of her opponents played competitively,
her stage-game best reply would be a profitable dynamic deviation.
   For this reason we are interested in providing an upper bound on the share of competitive
auctions, where an auction is considered to be competitive if and only if every player is
competitive at their respective histories.
   We define the objective function to be

                                      1
                          u(ωa ) =       1∀h∈a, (dh ,ch ) satisfy (F), (IC) & (EP)
                                     |A|

For every environment ωA , let

        Acomp (ωA ) ≡ {A0 ⊂ A s.t. ∀a ∈ A0 , ∀h ∈ a, (dh , ch ) satisfy (F) (IC) & (EP)}.


be the set of competitive auctions under ωA . Program (P) then becomes


                                       b = max |Acomp (ωA )|
                                       U
                                           ωA ∈Ω     |A|
                                       h                                  i
               s.t. ∀n,   Dn (ωA , H) ∈ Dn (H) − T (|H|), Dn (H) + T (|H|) .
                                         b                b


U
b provides an upper bound to the fraction of competitive auctions.


Total deviation temptation. Regulators may want to investigate an industry only if
firms fail to optimize in a significant way. Proposition 3 can be used to derive a lower bound




                                                   28
on the bidders’ deviation temptation. Given an environment ωa , we define objective

                                                                               
                           1 X
                 u(ωa ) ≡           (bh − ch )dh,0 − max [(1 + ρn )bh − ch ]dh,n .
                          |A| h∈a                   n∈{−n,··· ,n}



     In this case, with large probability, −U
                                            b is a lower bound for the average total deviation-

temptation per auction. This lets a regulator assess the extent of firms’ failure to optimize
before launching a costly audit. In addition, since the sum of deviation temptations must be
compensated by a share of the cartel’s future excess profits (along the lines of Levin (2003)),
U
b provides an indirect measure of the excess profits generated by the cartel.



6        Normative Foundations for Safe Tests

In this section we provide normative foundations for safe tests. We show that when pun-
ishments are severe enough, safe tests can be used to place constraints on potential cartel
members without creating new collusive equilibria.


A game of regulatory oversight. We study the equilibrium impact of data driven reg-
ulation within the following framework. From t = 0 to t = ∞, firms in N play the infinitely
repeated game in Section 3. At t = ∞, after firms played the game, a regulator runs a
safe test on firms in N based on the realized history h∞ ∈ H∞ . We consider two different
settings:

 (i) The regulator runs a unilaterally safe test τi on each firm i ∈ N .
         Firm i incurs an undiscounted penalty of K ≥ 0 if and only if τi (h∞ ) = 1 (i.e., if
         and only if firm i fails the test).19

(ii) The regulator runs a jointly safe test τ on all firms in N .
         Firms in N incur a penalty of K ≥ 0 if and only if τ (h∞ ) = 1.
    19
     Our analysis extends as is if K is the expected cost experienced by colluding firms from being investi-
gated, while non-colluding firms experience a potentially lower cost.

                                                    29
   When K = 0, under either form of testing the game collapses to the model of Section
3.20


Individually safe tests. For any K ≥ 0, let Σ(K) denote the set of perfect public
                                                                                                       δ
Bayesian equilibria of the game with firm-specific testing and with penalty K. Let K ≡                1−δ
                                                                                                          .
K serves as a rough upper bound on the difference in the continuation values a player obtains
for different actions.

Proposition 4 (safe tests do not create new equilibria). Assume the regulator runs unilat-
erally safe tests. For all K > K, Σ(K) ⊂ Σ(0).

   When the penalty K is large enough (i.e., K > K), any equilibrium of the regulatory
game has the property that, at all histories (both on and off path), all firms expect to pass
the test with probability 1. Indeed, at every history, each firm can guarantee to pass the
test by playing a stage-game best reply at all future periods.
   Suppose K > K and fix σ ∈ Σ(K). Consider a public history ht , and let β = (βi )i∈N
be the bidding profile that firms use at ht under σ: for all i ∈ N , βi : zi 7→ R describes
firm i’s bid as a function of her signal. Let V = (Vi )i∈N be firms continuation payoffs
excluding penalties after history ht under σ, with Vi : b 7→ R mapping bids b = (bj )j∈N to
a continuation value for firm i. Bidding profile β must be such that, for all i ∈ N and all
possible signal realizations zi ,


                   βi (zi ) ∈ arg max Eβ [(b − ci )1b<∧b−i + δVi (b, b−i )|zi ] − Eσ [τi |ht , b]K
                                   b

              =⇒βi (zi ) ∈ arg max Eβ [(b − ci )1b<∧b−i + δVi (b, b−i )|zi ],
                                   b



where the second line follows since all firms pass the test with probability 1 after all histories.
In words, strategy profile σ is such that, at each history ht , no firm i has a profitable one


  20
       Since penalty K is undiscounted, the regulatory game is not continuous at infinity whenever K > 0.

                                                      30
shot deviation in a game without testing. The one-shot deviation principle then implies that
σ ∈ Σ(0).21
    Let ΣP (0) ⊂ Σ(0) denote the set of equilibria of the game without a regulator with the
property that, for all σ ∈ ΣP (0), all firms expect to pass the test with probability 1 at
every history. The arguments above imply that Σ(K) ⊂ ΣP (0) for all K > K. In fact, the
following stronger result holds:

Corollary 3. For all K > K, Σ(K) = ΣP (0).

    We highlight that testing at the individual firm level is crucial for Proposition 4. Indeed,
as Cyrenne (1999) and Harrington (2004) show, regulation based on industry level tests may
backfire, allowing cartels to achieve higher equilibrium payoffs. Intuitively, when testing is at
the industry level, cartel members can punish deviators by playing a continuation strategy
that fails the test. This relaxes incentive constraints along the equilibrium path, and may
lead to more collusive outcomes.
    We note that although the set inclusion of Proposition 4 is weak, there are models of
bidder-optimal collusion such that the safe tests described in Section 5 strictly reduce the
surplus attainable by collusive bidders. We provide an explicit example in Section 8.


Jointly safe tests. An analogue of Proposition 4 holds for jointly safe test, provided we
impose Weak Renegotiation Proofness (see Farrell and Maskin, 1989).
    Let Σ+
         RP (K) denote the set of Weakly Renegotiation Proof equilibria of the game with

joint testing and penalty K, such that all players get weakly positive expected discounted
payoffs in period 0. The following result holds.

Proposition 5. Assume the regulator runs a jointly safe test. For all K > K, Σ+
                                                                              RP (K) ⊂

Σ+
 RP (0).



  21
     Note that the game with K = 0 is continuous at infinity, and so the one-shot deviation principle holds
in such game.

                                                    31
Beyond safe tests. Sufficiently punitive safe tests do not make collusion more profitable,
and do not affect competitive industries. As a result, they should discourage the formation
of cartels. In contrast non-safe tests may increase cartel formation, either by reducing the
payoffs of competition, or enabling the cartel to sustain new collusive equilibria.
     Still, a regulator with a strong prior may be willing to take some risks and implement
tests that are not safe, but very likely to lead to good outcomes under her prior. In this
sense, safe tests should be viewed as a starting point for regulation. Note that in our existing
framework, regulators may express some of their views on the underlying environment when
choosing the set of plausible economic environments Ω.



7        Empirical Evaluation

In this section, we explore the implications of our safe tests in real data. We argue that
safe tests tend not to fail when applied to data from likely competitive industries, and tend
to fail when applied to data from likely non-competitive industries. Details regarding the
computation of the tests are collected in Appendix D.


7.1      A Case Study

We first illustrate the mechanics of inference using data from the city of Tsuchiura.22 Specif-
ically, we show how three different deviations ρ ∈ {−.02, −.0005, .0008} affect our estimates
of the share of competitive histories. The distribution of ∆ and the three deviations that we
consider are illustrated in Figure 7.
     Figure 8 presents our estimates of the 95% confidence bound on the share of competitive
histories as a function of the correlation parameter k in constraint (EP). For these estimates

    22
     Chassang and Ortner (forthcoming) studies the impact of a change in the auction format used by
Tsuchiura that took place on October 29th 2009. We use data from auctions that took place before that
date.

                                                 32
Figure 7: Distribution of ∆ for the city of Tsuchiura, 2007–2009. Red vertical lines indicate
deviation coefficients ρ ∈ {−.02, −.0005, .0008}.



and all the estimates that we present below, we use bootstrap to set tolerance T so that our
tests have a confidence level of 5%. We now delineate the mechanics of inference.


                                                                 Tsuchiura -- Share of Competitive Histories
                                                     1.0


                                                     0.8
                    share of competitive histories




                                                     0.6


                                                     0.4


                                                     0.2                          upward dev.
                                                                                  upward dev. and ties
                                                                                  upward, downward deviations and ties
                                                     0.0   0.6     0.8     1.0     1.2     1.4       1.6    1.8        2.0
                                                                                       k

Figure 8: Estimated share of competitive auctions, city-level data. Minimum and maximum
markups: m = 0.02, M = 0.25.




                                                                                   33
An upward deviation. We first consider a small upward deviation ρ = .0008, correspond-
ing to the analysis of Section 4. Because the mass of values of ∆ falling between 0 and .0008
is very small, this deviation hardly changes a bidder’s likelihood of winning an auction. As
a result this is a profitable deviation inconsistent with competition. Note that this upward
deviation is least profitable (and so the data is best explained) when costs are low.


Adding a small downward deviation. Consider next adding a small downward devia-
tion, ρ = −.0005. Because there is a surprisingly large mass of auctions such that the lowest
and second lowest bids are tied or extremely close, this increases a bidders likelihood of
winning by a non-vanishing amount, while reducing profits by a negligible amount, provided
margins are not zero. The corresponding histories cannot be competitive.


Adding a medium-sized downward deviation. We now show that, under certain con-
ditions, adding a medium sized downward deviation ρ = −.02 yields a tighter bound on
the share of competitive histories. Intuitively this is because the aggregate counterfactual
demand D
       b ρ (H) increases by a large amount for relatively small deviations in bids: a 2%

drop in prices leads to a 44% increase in the probability of winning the auction. If costs of
production are sufficiently below bids, this is an attractive deviation.


7.2    Consistency between safe tests and proxies for collusion

We now turn to the national data to show that our estimates on the share of competi-
tive histories are consistent with different proxies of collusive behavior. For computational
tractability, we focus on estimating the share of competitive histories only using the three
deviations described above.


High vs. low bids. Figure 4 plots the distribution of ∆ for histories with high versus low
bid-to-reserve ratios (i.e., bids above/below 80% of the reserve price). The pattern of missing


                                              34
bids is more striking when we focus on histories at which bidders place relatively high bids.
To the extent that missing bids are a marker of non-competitive behavior, Figure 4 suggests
that histories at which firms place relatively low bids are more likely to be competitive.
   Figure 9 plots our estimates of the 95% confidence bound on the share of competitive
histories for the different sets of histories in Figure 4. The fraction of competitive histories
is lower at histories at which bids are high relative to the reserve price, a finding that is
consistent with the idea that collusion is more likely for histories at which bidders place
higher bids.


                                                                        high vs low normalized bids
                                                      1.0


                                                      0.8
                     share of competitive histories




                                                      0.6


                                                      0.4


                                                      0.2
                                                                                                normalized bid above .8
                                                                                                normalized bid below .8
                                                      0.0   0.6   0.8     1.0     1.2       1.4     1.6       1.8       2.0
                                                                                        k

Figure 9: Estimated share of competitive auctions by bid level, national data. Minimum
and maximum markups: m = 0.02, M = 0.5.



Before and after prosecution. Figure 10 shows our estimates of the 95% confidence
bound on the share of competitive histories for the four groups of firms that were investigated
by the JFTC (see Section 2, and in particular Figure 5). Our estimates suggests non-
competitive behavior in the before period across the four groups of firms, and show a drop
in non-competitive behavior following investigation.


                                                                                   35
                                                                       Electric                                                                                                        Bridges
                                              1.0                                                                                                              1.0


                                              0.8                                                                                                              0.8
             share of competitive histories




                                                                                                                              share of competitive histories
                                              0.6                                                                                                              0.6


                                              0.4                                                                                                              0.4


                                              0.2                                                                                                              0.2
                                                                                        before investigation                                                                                           before investigation
                                                                                        after investigation                                                                                            after investigation
                                              0.0   0.6   0.8   1.0     1.2       1.4    1.6       1.8       2.0                                               0.0   0.6   0.8   1.0   1.2       1.4    1.6       1.8       2.0
                                                                              k                                                                                                              k


                                                                Pre-Stressed Concrete                                                                                                  Floods
                                        1.0                                                                                                              1.0


                                        0.8                                                                                                              0.8
       share of competitive histories




                                                                                                                        share of competitive histories
                                        0.6                                                                                                              0.6


                                        0.4                                                                                                              0.4


                                        0.2                                                                                                              0.2
                                                                                        before investigation                                                                                           before investigation
                                                                                        after investigation                                                                                            after investigation
                                        0.0         0.6   0.8   1.0    1.2        1.4    1.6       1.8       2.0                                         0.0         0.6   0.8   1.0   1.2       1.4    1.6       1.8       2.0
                                                                             k                                                                                                               k



Figure 10: Estimated share of competitive auctions, before and after FTC investigation,
national-level data. Minimum and maximum markups: m = 0.02, M = 0.5.



7.3                                           Zeroing-in on specific firms

Finally we highlight that our tests can be applied to individual firms. We focus on the thirty
firms that participate in the most auctions in our national level data. Table 1 shows our
estimates of the 95% confidence bound on the share of competitive histories for these thirty
firms. Column 4 in the table shows estimates obtained from Proposition 2. Column 5 shows
tighter estimates obtained from Corollary 1. We find that the bound from Proposition 2 is
less than 1 for only three of the thirty firms, while the bound from Corollary 1 is less than
1 for twenty-five firms.23
  23
     Note that the counterfactual demands of individual firms within the same industry turn out to be highly
correlated. This leads to the observed correlation in estimates reported in Table 1. Firms exhibiting similar

                                                                                                                   36
  Ranking      Participation     Share won      Share comp. (Prop. 2)   Share comp. (Coro. 1)
     1             4044             0.17                1.00                    0.60
     2             3854             0.07                1.00                    0.68
     3             3621             0.12                1.00                    0.60
     4             2998             0.15                1.00                    1.00
     5             2919             0.06                1.00                    0.68
     6             2547             0.08                1.00                    0.15
     7             2338             0.07                1.00                    0.15
     8             2333             0.07                1.00                    0.18
     9             2328             0.04                1.00                    0.68
    10             2292             0.06                1.00                    0.20
    11             2237             0.08                0.92                    0.68
    12             2211             0.03                1.00                    0.68
    13             2015             0.09                1.00                    0.28
    14             1984             0.08                1.00                    0.28
    15             1727             0.07                1.00                    1.00
    16             1674             0.05                1.00                    0.31
    17             1661             0.03                1.00                    0.68
    18             1660             0.08                1.00                    0.28
    19             1589             0.07                1.00                    0.28
    20             1427             0.10                1.00                    1.00
    21             1393             0.06                1.00                    0.31
    22             1392             0.07                1.00                    1.00
    23             1370             0.04                1.00                    0.56
    24             1368             0.14                1.00                    1.00
    25             1353             0.05                1.00                    0.16
    26             1342             0.09                1.00                    0.91
    27             1337             0.04                1.00                    0.25
    28             1326             0.08                1.00                    0.60
    29             1291             0.06                0.95                    0.31
    30             1260             0.06                0.95                    0.60

Table 1: Estimated Share of Competitive Auctions, National-Level Data. The table reports
our estimates of the share of competitive auctions for the thirty firms that participate in
the most number of auctions during the sample period. The first column corresponds to the
ranking of the firms and the second column corresponds to the number of auctions in which
each firm participates. Column 3 shows the fraction of auctions that each of these firms wins.
Columns 4 and 5 present our 95% confidence bound on the share of competitive histories for
each firm based on Proposition 2 and Corollary 1, respectively. For our estimates of column
five, we use the following parameters: m = 0.02, M = 0.5 and k = 1.5.



shares of non-competitive histories belong to the same industries.

                                                    37
8     Why Would Cartels Exhibit Missing Bids?

This paper focuses on the detection of non-competitive behavior in procurement auctions.
As we argue in Section 6 the robust detection of non-competitive behavior allows for data-
driven regulatory intervention that can only reduce the value of establishing a cartel. As
Section 7 highlights, the corresponding tests exploit the missing bid pattern, as well as other
aspects of the data: the large number of approximately tied bids, and the surprisingly large
elasticity of counterfactual demand to the left of winning bids.
    We conclude with an open ended discussion of why missing bids may be occurring in
the first place. We argue that missing bids are not easily explained by standard models of
collusion, and put forward two potential explanations. Along the way we establish that safe
tests can strictly reduce the surplus of cartels.


Standard models do not account for missing bids. In standard models of tacit col-
lusion (see for instance Rotemberg and Saloner (1986), Athey and Bagwell (2001, 2008)),
winning bids are typically common knowledge among bidders, and the cartel’s main concern
is to incentivize losers not to undercut the winning bid. In contrast, the behavior of the
designated winner is stage game optimal. This is achieved by having a losing bidder bid just
above the designated winner. As a consequence, standard models of collusion would result
in a point mass at ∆ = 0, rather than missing bids. If this were not the case, the cartel’s
pledgeable surplus would have to be spent on keeping the winner from increasing her bid
rather than keeping losing bidders from undercutting.
    One implication of this is that there exist safe tests that strictly reduce the surplus of
cartels. Given a set of auctions A, consider tests that rule out frequent approximately-tied
winning bids:

                        
                         1 if        |{a ∈ A, s.t. b(2) − b(1) < κ}|/|A| > 
             τκ, (A) ≡
                         0 otherwise


                                               38
where κ,  > 0, and b(1) , b(2) are the lowest and second lowest bids. Given  > 0, conditional
on equilibrium markups being bounded away from 0, there exists κ small enough that τκ, is
a safe test under the assumption that competitive firms are privately informed about their
costs. This test fails the optimal collusive equilibria described above. In fact, such tests
are likely very highly powered: the probability that the lowest and second-lowest bids are
tied for a significant share auctions is likely very low under reasonable priors. This explains
why regulators use tied bids as an indicator of collusion (DOJ, 2005). It also suggests an
explanation for missing bids, as we now explain.


Missing bids as a side-effect of existing regulatory oversight. It is possible that
regulatory oversight itself may be at the origin of the missing bid pattern. Because test τκ,
is well powered with relatively small data sets, it makes sense for the regulator to scruti-
nize auctions in which tied bids occur. If this is the case, then collusive bidders sharing
information about their intended bids may naturally wish to avoid this scrutiny, and ensure
that there is a minimal distance between bids. Over many auctions, this may lead to the
detectable missing bids pattern highlighted in this paper.


Missing bids as robust coordination. Another possible role for missing bids consists
in facilitating coordination on a specific designated-winner. Being able to guarantee the
identity of the winner may be important for a cartel for two reasons: (i) allocative efficiency;
(ii) reducing the costs of dynamic incentive provision when utility is not transferable.
   In this respect keeping winning bids isolated ensures that the designated winner does win
the contract, even if bidders cannot precisely agree on exact bids ex ante, or if bids can be
perturbed by small trembles (say a fat finger problem).




                                              39
Online Appendix – Not for Publication

A       Further Empirics
A.1      Sample Statistics
In this section we report descriptive statistics for our two illustrative datasets. At the auction
level, we report the mean and standard deviation of: reserve prices; the lowest bid;24 the
lowest bid as a fraction of the reserve price; the number of bidders participating in the
auction. At the bidder level, we report the mean and standard deviation of: the number of
auctions a bidder participates in; the number of auctions she wins; and her total revenue.
    We note that national-level auctions have higher reserve prices and a greater number
of participants, but the two datasets are nonetheless broadly comparable. We also note
that there is large heterogeneity in reserve prices in both cases, and in participation. Some
projects are very large, and some bidders participate very often.

                                                                        N        Mean         S.D.
         By Auctions
                           reserve price (mil. Yen)                  78,272 105.121          259.58
                           lowest first round bid (mil. Yen)         78,272 101.909          252.30
                           lowest bid / reserve                      78,272   0.970            0.10
                           #bidders                                  78,272   9.883            2.27

         By Bidders
                           participation                             29,670       26.40       94.61
                           number of times lowest bidder             29,670        2.64       10.57
                           total revenue (mil. Yen)                  29,670      264.23     1312.77


                        Table A.1: Sample Statistics – National-Level Data




  24
     This corresponds to the winning bid when the reserve price is public. If the reserve price is secret, then
the lowest bid need not be the winning bid.

                                                      40
                                                                                                                          N        Mean       S.D.
        By Auctions
                         reserve price (mil. Yen)                                                                      1,469        26.363    65.054
                         lowest first round bid (mil. Yen)                                                             1,469        24.749    61.745
                         lowest bid / reserve                                                                          1,469         0.936     0.078
                         #bidders                                                                                      1,469          4.00      1.84

        By Bidders
                         participation                                                                                    269        26.40     94.61
                         number of times lowest bidder                                                                    269        5.803     9.240
                         total revenue (mil. Yen)                                                                         269      167.342   447.014


                       Table A.2: Sample Statistics – City-Level Data



A.2     Total deviation temptation
In this section, we apply Proposition 3 to the objective function

                        1 X (bh − ch )dh,0 − maxn∈{−n,··· ,n} [(1 + ρn )bh − ch ]dh,n
            u(ωa ) ≡                                                                  .
                       |H| h∈a                 (bh − ch )dh,0

This corresponds to firms’ minimum deviation temptation as a share of expected profits.
Figure A.1 reports estimates for firms in our city-level data.

                                                                                      Tsuchiura -- Deviation Gain
                                                                      0.030
                         deviation temptation as a share of profits




                                                                      0.025

                                                                      0.020

                                                                      0.015

                                                                      0.010

                                                                      0.005
                                                                                                            before minimum price
                                                                      0.000   0.2   0.4     0.6     0.8    1.0     1.2     1.4
                                                                                                   k


Figure A.1: Estimated total deviation temptation as a fraction of profits, city-level data.
Minimum and maximum markups: m = 0.02, M = 0.5.



                                                                                                  41
B     Connection with Bayes Correlated Equilibrium
In this section we further extend the class of estimators and tests introduced Section 5 and
clarify what would need to be added so that they exploit all implications from equilibrium.
This allows us to connect with the work of Bergemann and Morris (2016).
    For simplicity we assume that player identities i, bids b and costs c take a fixed finite
number of values (i, b, c) ∈ I × B × C that does not grow with sample size. Ties between bids
are resolved with uniform probability. Deviations ρn ∈ (−1, ∞) correspond to the ratios of
different bids on finite grid B.
    We extend problem (P) as follows. As in Section 5.2, the objective function counts
whether a history is competitive or not:

                         1 X                                                      X
             u(ωa ) ≡            1(d ,c ) satisfy (F) & (IC)   and U (ωA ) =            u(ωa ).
                        |H| h∈a∩H h h                                             a∈A


For any (i, b, c) ∈ I × B × C, let us define Hi,b,c (ωA ) ≡ {h ∈ H|(ih , bh , ch ) = (i, b, c)},
histories at which bidder i experiences a cost c and bids b. Note that Hi,b,c is adapted to the
information of player i. For any tolerance function T : N → R+ such that
                                                                    
                                                            1      2
                       lim T (N ) = 0 and          lim exp − T (N ) N = 0
                      N →∞                        N →∞      2

we consider inference problem (P00 )

                                                       U
                                                       b = max U (ωA )                                (P00 )
                                                             ωA ∈Ω
                                                       h
        s.t. ∀(i, b, c), ∀n,   Dn (ωA , Hi,b,c (ωA )) ∈ Db n (Hi,b,c (ωA )) − T (|Hi,b,c (ωA )|),
                                                                                                 i
                                                           Dn (Hi,b,c (ωA )) + T (|Hi,b,c (ωA )|) .
                                                           b

Problem (P00 ) differs from (P0 ) by imposing consistency conditions for all triples (i, b, c).
Proposition 3 continues to hold with an identical proof: with probability approaching 1 as
|H| goes to ∞, estimate U  b will approach 1 whenever all firms are competitive. Imposing
consistency requirements conditional on bids and costs lets us establish a converse: if data
passes our extended safe tests, then the joint distribution of bids and costs is an -Bayes
correlated equilibrium in the sense of Hart and Mas-Colell (2000).
    Consider an environment ωA solving (P00 ). Let µ
                                                                       
                                                      b ∈ ∆ [B × C]I denote the sample
distribution over bids and costs implied by (H, ωA ).


                                                    42
Proposition B.1. For any  > 0, for |H| large enough, U
                                                      b = 1 implies that µ
                                                                         b is an -Bayes
correlated equilibrium.

Proof. Consider an environment (dn,h , ch )h∈H solving Problem (P00 ), and µ
                                                                           b the corresponding
sample distribution over profiles of bids b and costs c.
   In order to deal with ties, we denote by ∧b−i  bi the event “∧b−i > bi , or ∧b−i = bi and
the tie is broken in favor of bidder i.”
   For |H| large enough, we have that for all (i, b, c) and all n,

                             1      X
                                             dn,h − µ
                                                    b(∧b−i  (1 + ρn )bi |i, b, c) ≤ .                       (7)
                            |H|   h∈Hi,b,c



In addition, U
             b = 1 implies that (IC) holds at all histories: for all h, n,

                                    dn,h ((1 + ρn )bh − ch ) ≤ d0,h (bh − ch ).

Summing over histories h ∈ Hi,b,c yields

                            1 X
                                   dn,h ((1 + ρn )bh − ch ) − d0,h (bh − ch ) ≤ 0.
                           |H| h∈H
                                    i,b,c



Hence for N large enough, for all (bi , ci ),
         X                                                                                            
                   b(bi , ci , b−i , c−i ) 1∧b−i (1+ρn )bi ((1 + ρn )bi − ci ) − 1∧b−i bi (bi − ci ) ≤ .
                   µ
        b−i ,c−i


It follows that µ
                b is an -Bayes correlated equilibrium in the sense of Hart and Mas-Colell
(2000). 




C      Common Values
We now show how to extend the analysis in Section 5.2 to allow for common values. An
environment in auction a is now given by ωa = (dh,n , ch,n )h∈a,n∈M , where for each n ∈ M,
ch,n = E[c|h, ∧b−i,h > (1 + ρn )bh ] is the bidder’s expected cost at history h conditional on
winning at bid (1 + ρn )bh .
    We make the following assumption on costs.

                                                          43
Assumption C.1. For all histories h and all bids b, b0 , b00 with b < b0 < b00 , E[c|h, ∧b−i,h ∈
(b, b0 )] ≤ E[c|h, ∧b−i,h ∈ (b0 , b00 )].

   In words, bidders’ expected costs are increasing in opponents’ bids.25 This implies that
expected costs ch,n are weakly increasing in the deviation ρn . We now show that, under these
conditions, allowing for common values does not relax the constraints in Program (P0 ).
   Note first that, for each deviation n, expected costs (ch,n )n∈M satisfy:

                            ∀n ∈ M,       dh,n ch,n = dh,0 ch,0 + (dh,n − dh,0 )ĉh,n ,                        (8)

where ĉh,n = E[c|h, ∧b−i,h ∈ (bh , (1 + ρn )bh )].26 Our assumptions on costs imply that ĉh,n is
weakly increasing in n.
   Consider first downward deviations ρn < 0 (i.e., n < 0). Note that, for such deviations,
incentive compatibility constraint (IC) holds if and only if

                                     dh,n (1 + ρn )bh,n − dh,0 bh,0
                                                                    ≤ ĉh,n .
                                              dh,n − dh,0

   Consider upward deviations ρn > 0 (i.e., n > 0). For any such deviation, constraint (IC)
becomes
                                   dh,0 bh,0 − dh,n (1 + ρn )bh,n
                           ĉh,n ≤                                .
                                             dh,0 − dh,n
Since ĉh,n̂ is weakly increasing in n̂, ĉh,n ≥ ĉh,n0 for all n > 0 and n0 < 0. Hence there exist
costs (ch,n )n∈M satisfying (IC) if and only if

                        dh,n (1 + ρn )bh,n − dh,0 bh,0       dh,0 bh,0 − dh,n (1 + ρn )bh,n
                 min                                   ≤ max                                .
                  n<0            dh,n − dh,0             n>0           dh,0 − dh,n

Condition (C) implies that there also exists a constant profile of costs ch,n = ch (i.e. a private
value cost), that satisfies (IC).


D       Computational Strategy
In this appendix, we discuss computational implementations of the estimates of competitive-
ness derived in Sections 4 and 5.
   25
      This condition on costs would follow from affiliation if bidders’ signals are one-dimensional and bidders
use monotone bidding strategies.
   26
      We use the convention that (b, b0 ) is equal to (b0 , b) in the event that b0 < b, rather than the empty set.

                                                        44
D.1     Bounds of Section 4
Column 3 of Table 1 reports 95% confidence upper bounds on the share of competitive
histories for individual firms using Proposition 2:

                                                R(ρ|H) − R(0|H)
                             scomp ≤ 1 − sup                    .
                                          ρ>0          ρ

    We take ρ equal to {0.01%, 0.02%, · · · , 0.3%} of the reserve price and fix this set in our
asymptotics. We estimate the counterfactual revenue using a triangular kernel with band-
width equal to 0.01% of the reserve price. We use the central limit theorem for Martingale
difference sequences to obtain the 95% confidence bound, see e.g., Liu and Yang (2008).


D.2     Bounds of Section 5
Problem (P) is not naturally suited for computational implementation. A solution ωA is a
real vector of dimension |H| × (|M| + 1). In addition, objective functions U of interest are
typically non-concave, and the set of admissible possible environments Ω need not be convex.
    For this reason we study an approximate convexified problem, in the case where objective
                                                                         1
                                                                            P
function u(ωa ) is separable in histories, i.e. takes the form u(ωa ) = |H|   h∈a v(ωh ), where
ωh = (dh,n , ch )n∈M .
    In this case, the constrained sets Ω of interest take the form Ω = OH , where O ⊂ R|M|+1 .
In addition, notice that Ub (ωA ) = Eµ(ω ) [v(ωh )] where µω ∈ ∆(O) is the sample distribution
                                        A                   A

of environments ωh ∈ O induced by profile ωA = (ωa )a∈A (recall that ωa = (ωh )h∈a ).
    Hence, it follows that

                        b ≤ max Eµ v(ωh )
                        U
                             µ∈∆(O)

                               under the constraint that
                               Eµ dn,h ∈ [D
                                          b n − T (|H|), D
                                                         b n + T (|H|)].

The convexified right-hand side problem is linear, and the dimensionality of a solution is no
longer related to sample size |H|. The difficulty is that, ∆(O) is infinite dimensional. Still,
because O is compact and finite dimensional it is covered by finitely many balls of radius r




                                                45
for any r > 0. Hence for all N , there exists a finite set O0 ⊂ O such that

                          b − 1 ≤ max |H| × Eµ v(ωh )
                          U                                                                           (CVX-P)
                              N µ∈∆(O0 )
                                          under the constraint that
                                          Eµ dn,h ∈ [D
                                                     b n − T (|H|), D
                                                                    b n + T (|H|)].

The right-hand-side problem is now a well behaved finite dimensional linear problem. Prac-
tically we use the following algorithm, which starts with an empty seed O0∗ = ∅. At each
stage T ≥ 1 of the algorithm, we perform the following operations:

    1. Draw a sample ST of K points in O using a full-support distribution over O.

    2. Set OT = OT∗ −1 ∪ ST , and solve (CVX-P) for OT ; get solution µT .

    3. Set OT∗ = supp µT .

    4. Iterate until convergence.


E       Proofs
E.1      Proofs of Section 3
Proof of Lemma 1. Let H be an adapted set of histories, and fix ρ ∈ (−1, ∞). For each
history hi,t = (ht , zi,t ) ∈ H, define

                        εi,t ≡ Eσ [1∧b−i,t >bi,t (1+ρ) |hi,t ] − 1∧b−i,t >bi,t (1+ρ)
                            = probσ (∧b−i,t > bi,t (1 + ρ)|hi,t ) − 1∧b−i,t >bi,t (1+ρ) .

                                        1
                                            P
Note that D(ρ|H)
            b           − D(ρ|H) = |H|         hi,t ∈H εi,t .
   Note further that, by the law of iterated expectations, for all histories hj,t−s ∈ H with
s ≥ 0, Eσ [εi,t |hj,t−s ] = Eσ [Eσ [1∧b−i,t >bi,t (1+ρ) |ht , zi,t ] − 1∧b−i,t >bi,t (1+ρ) |ht−s , zj,t−s ] = 0.27
   Number the histories in H as 1, · · · , |H| such that, for any pair of histories k = (hs , zi,s ) ∈
H and k 0 = (hs0 , zj,s0 ) ∈ H with k 0 > k, s0 ≥ s. For each history k = (ht , zi,t ), let εk = εi,t ,


   27
     This holds since, in a perfect public Bayesian equilibrium, bidders’ strategies at any time t depend solely
on the public history and on their private information at time t.

                                                          46
so that
                                                         |H|
                                                 1 X
                              D(ρ|H)
                              b      − D(ρ|H) =         εk .
                                                |H| k=1
                                    Pk̂
Note that, for all k̂ ≤ |H|, Sk̂ ≡     k=1 εk is a Martingale, with increments εk̂ whose
absolute value is bounded above by 1. By the Azuma-Hoeffding Inequality, for every
                                                                                1
α > 0, prob(|S|H| | ≥ |H|α) ≤ 2 exp{−α2 |H|/2}. Therefore, with probability 1, |H| S|H| =
D(ρ|H)
b       − D(ρ|H) converges to zero as |H| → ∞. 



E.2       Proofs of Section 4
Proof of Proposition 3. By Lemma 1, under the true environment ωA ∈ Ω,
                                                    
               prob |D̂n (H) − Dn (ωA , H)| ≥ T (|H|) ≤ 2 exp(−T (|H|)2 |H|/2)

for each deviation n. It then follows that
                                                    
           prob ∀n, |D̂n (H) − Dn (ωA , H)| ≥ T (|H|) ≤ 2|M| exp(−T (|H|)2 |H|/2).

This implies that, with probability at least 1 − 2|M| exp(−T (|H|)2 |H|/2), the constraints in
Program (P) are satisfied when we set the environment equal to ωA . Hence, with probability
at least 1 − 2|M| exp(−T (|H|)2 |H|/2), Û ≥ U (ωA ). 

Proof of Corollary 2. Suppose the true environment ωA ∈ Ω is such that the indus-
try (or the firms who placed bids in histories H) is competitive. Then Hcomp (ωA ) = H,
and so the true share of competitive histories under ωA is scomp = 1 ≥ s0 . By Corollary
1, with probability at least 1 − 2|M| exp(−T (|H|)2 |H|/2), Û ≥ scomp = 1 ≥ s0 . Since
2|M| exp(−T (|H|)2 |H|/2) → 0 as |H| → ∞, firms in this industry pass test τ with proba-
bility approaching 1 as |H| → ∞. 



E.3       Proofs of Section 6
Proof of Proposition 4. We start by showing that, when penalty K is sufficiently large,
any σ ∈ Σ(K) has the property that all firms pass the test with probability 1, both on and


                                             47
off the path of play. To see why, note first that for every i ∈ N and every strategy profile σ−i
of i’s opponents, firm i can guarantee to pass the test by playing a stage-game best reply to
σ−i at every history. This implies that each firm’s continuation payoff cannot be lower than
0 at any history.
                δ       δ
     Let K = 1−δ  r = 1−δ  (recall that the reserve price r is normalized to 1), and suppose that
K > K. Towards a contradiction, suppose there exist σ ∈ Σ(K) and a public history ht (on
or off path) such that, at this history, firm i expects to fail the test with strictly positive
probability under σ. Then, for every  > 0 small, there must exist a public history hs with
s ≥ 0 such that, at the concatenated history ht t hs , firm i expects to fail the test with
probability at least K K
                          +  < 1. Hence, under history ht t hs , firm i’s continuation payoff
at the end of period
                      t + s (i.e., after the outcome of the auction is determined) is bounded
            δ
above by 1−δ   − K  K
                      +  K = −K < 0, a contradiction.
     For any strategy profile σ̂ and any history hi,t = (ht , zi,t ), let Vi (σ̂, hi,t ) = Eσ̂ [ s≥t δ s ui,s |hi,t ]
                                                                                                P

denote firm i’s continuation payoff excluding penalties under σ̂ at history hi,t . Firm i’s total
payoff under strategy profile σ̂ given history hi,t is Vi (σ̂, hi,t ) − Eσ̂ [τi |hi,t ]K.
     Suppose K > K and fix σ ∈ Σ(K). Since σ is an equilibrium, there cannot be profitable
deviations; in particular, there cannot be profitable one shot deviations:28 for every i ∈ N ,
every history hi,τ , and every one-shot deviation σ̃i 6= σi with σi (hi,t ) = σ̃i (hi,t ) for all hi,t 6=
hi,τ ,

                  Vi ((σ̃i , σ−i ), hi,τ ) − E(σ̃i ,σ−i ) [τi |hi,τ ]K ≤ Vi (σ, hi,τ ) − Eσ [τi |hi,τ ]K
                                      ⇐⇒ Vi ((σ̃i , σ−i ), hi,τ ) ≤ Vi (σ, hi,τ ),                             (9)

where the second line in (9) follows since, under equilibrium σ ∈ Σ(K), all firms pass the test
with probability 1 at every history. By the second line in (9), in the game with K = 0 (i.e.,
no regulator) no firm has a profitable one shot deviation under strategy profile σ. Hence, by
the one-shot deviation principle σ ∈ Σ(0).29 

   The following Lemma establishes a weaker version of the one-shot revelation principle for
the game with a regulator.

Lemma E.1. Let σ be a strategy profile with the property that all firms pass the test with
   28
       Note that we are not using the one-shot deviation principle here (which may not hold since the game
is not continuous at infinity when K > 0); we are only using the fact that, in any equilibrium, no player can
have a profitable deviation.
    29
       Note that the game with K = 0 is continuous at infinity, and so the one-shot deviation principle holds.

                                                           48
probability 1 at every history. Then, σ ∈ Σ(K) if and only if there are no profitable one-shot
deviations.

Proof. Let σ be a strategy profile with the property that all firms pass the test with prob-
ability 1 at every history. Clearly, if σ ∈ Σ(K), there are no profitable one-shot deviations.
Suppose next that there are no profitable one-shot deviations, but σ ∈  / Σ(K). Then, there
exists a player i ∈ N a history hi,t and a strategy σ̃i such that

                     Vi ((σ̃i , σ−i ), hi,t ) ≥ Vi ((σ̃i , σ−i ), hi,t ) − E(σ̃i ,σ−i ) [τi |hi,t ]K
                                             > Vi (σ, hi,t ) − Eσ [τi |hi,τ ]K = Vi (σ, hi,t ),

where the last equality follows since σ is such that all firms pass the test with probability 1
at every history.
     The proof now proceeds as in the proof of the one-shot deviation principle in games
that are continuous at infinity. Let  ≡ Vi ((σ̃i , σ−i ), hi,t ) − Vi (σ, hi,t ). Let T > 0 be such
         δT              δT
that 1−δ      × r = 1−δ       < /2. Let σ̂i be a strategy for firm i that coincides with σ̃i for all
histories of length t + T or less, and coincides with σi for all histories of length strictly
longer than t + T . Since firms’ flow payoffs are bounded above by r = 1, it must be that
Vi ((σ̂i , σ−i ), hi,t ) − Vi (σ, hi,t ) ≥ /2. Moreover, since σ is such that all firms pass the test
with probability 1 at all histories, and since σ̂i differs from σi only at finitely many periods,
all firms pass the test under (σ̂i , σ−i ) with probability 1 at every history.
     Next, look at histories of length t + T . If there exists a history hi,t+T of length t + T
that is consistent with hi,t and such that Vi ((σ̂i , σ−i ), hi,t+T ) > Vi (σ, hi,t+T ), then there exists
a profitable one shot deviation from σ (since σ̂i and σi coincide for all histories of length
t + T + 1 or longer).
     Otherwise, let σ̂i1 be a strategy that coincides with σ̃i at all histories of length t + T − 1 or
less, and that coincides with σi at all histories of length strictly longer than t + T − 1. Note
that it must be that Vi ((σ̂i1 , σ−i ), hi,t ) − Vi (σ, hi,t ) ≥ /2. We can now look at histories of
length t + T − 1 that are consistent with hi,t . If there exists such a history hi,t+T −1 such that
Vi ((σ̂i1 , σ−i ), hi,t+T −1 ) > Vi (σ, hi,t+T −1 ), then there exists a profitable one shot deviation from
σ. Otherwise, we can continue in the same way. Since Vi ((σ̂i , σ−i ), hi,t ) − Vi (σ, hi,t ) ≥ /2,
eventually we will find a profitable one shot deviation by player i, a contradiction. 

Proof of Corollary 3. Fix K > K. The proof of Proposition 4 shows that, in all equilibria
in Σ(K), all firms pass the test with probability 1 at every history. Since Σ(K) ⊂ Σ(0), it


                                                           49
follows that Σ(K) ⊂ ΣP (0).
    We now show that ΣP (0) ⊂ Σ(K). Fix σ ∈ ΣP (0). Since σ is an equilibrium of the game
without a regulator, there cannot be profitable one shot deviations: for every i ∈ N , every
history hi,τ , and every one-shot deviation σ̃i 6= σi with σi (hi,t ) = σ̃i (hi,t ) for all hi,t 6= hi,τ ,

                                              Vi ((σ̃i , σ−i ), hi,τ ) ≤ Vi (σ, hi,τ )
             ⇐⇒ Vi ((σ̃i , σ−i ), hi,τ ) − E(σ̃i ,σ−i ) [τi |hi,τ ]K ≤ Vi (σ, hi,τ ) − Eσ [τi |hi,τ ]K

where the second line follows since, under σ, all firms pass the test with probability 1 at
every history. Lemma E.1 then implies that σ ∈ Σ(K). 

Proof of Proposition 5. The proof is similar to the proof of Proposition 4. We first show
that, when penalty K is sufficiently large, any σ ∈ Σ+   RP (K) has the property that all firms
pass the test with probability 1, both on and off the path of play.
    To show this, we first note that, at any equilibrium in Σ+ RP (K) and at every history ht , at
least one firm’s continuation payoff is larger than 0. Indeed, by definition, all firms’ payoffs
at the start of the game are weakly larger than 0 at any equilibrium in Σ+     RP (K). By weak
renegotiation proofness, it must be that at every history ht at least one firm’s payoff is larger
than 0.
    Recall that K ≡ 1−δ δ
                          . Suppose K > K, and fix σ ∈ Σ+      RP (K). Towards a contradiction,
suppose that there exists a history ht (on or off path) such that, at this history, firms expect
to fail the test with strictly positive probability. Then, for every  > 0 small, there must
exist a history hs with s ≥ 0 such that, at the concatenated history ht t hs , firms expect to
fail the test with probability at least KK
                                           +  < 1. Hence, under public history ht t hs , each
firm’s continuation payoff at the end of period
                                                t+ s (i.e., after the outcome of the auction is
                                      δ
determined) is bounded above by 1−δ      − K K
                                               +  K = −K < 0, a contradiction.
     Suppose K > K and fix σ ∈ Σ+       RP (K). Since σ is an equilibrium, there cannot be
profitable deviations; in particular, there cannot be profitable one shot deviations: for every
i ∈ N , every history hi,τ , and every one-shot deviation σ̃i 6= σi with σi (hi,t ) = σ̃i (hi,t ) for all
hi,t 6= hi,τ ,

                Vi ((σ̃i , σ−i ), hi,τ ) − E(σ̃i ,σ−i ) [τi |hi,τ ]K ≤ Vi (σ, hi,τ ) − Eσ [τi |hi,τ ]K
                                    ⇐⇒ Vi ((σ̃i , σ−i ), hi,τ ) ≤ Vi (σ, hi,τ ),                         (10)

where the second line in (10) follows since, under equilibrium σ, firms pass the test with

                                                         50
probability 1 at every history. By the second line in (10), in the game with K = 0 (i.e.,
no regulator) no firm has a profitable one shot deviation under strategy profile σ. By the
one-shot deviation principle, σ ∈ Σ(0). Finally, since σ is weakly renegotiation proof under
penalty K > K, σ must also be weakly renegotiation proof under penalty K = 0. Therefore,
σ ∈ Σ+RP (0).  




References
Abdulkadiroglu, A. and K.-S. Chung (2003): “Auction design with tacit collusion,”
 Columbia and Northwestern University Working Paper.

Afriat, S. N. (1967): “The construction of utility functions from expenditure data,” In-
 ternational economic review, 8, 67–77.

Asker, J. (2010): “A study of the internal organization of a bidding cartel,” The American
 Economic Review, 724–762.

Athey, S. and K. Bagwell (2001): “Optimal collusion with private information,” RAND
 Journal of Economics, 32, 428–465.

——— (2008): “Collusion with persistent cost shocks,” Econometrica, 76, 493–540.

Bajari, P. and L. Ye (2003): “Deciding between competition and collusion,” Review of
 Economics and Statistics, 85, 971–989.

Bergemann, D., B. Brooks, and S. Morris (2017): “First-Price Auctions With Gen-
 eral Information Structures: Implications for Bidding and Revenue,” Econometrica, 85,
 107–143.

Bergemann, D. and S. Morris (2013): “Robust predictions in games with incomplete
 information,” Econometrica, 81, 1251–1308.

——— (2016): “Bayes correlated equilibrium and the comparison of information structures
 in games,” Theoretical Economics, 11, 487–522.

Besanko, D. and D. F. Spulber (1989): “Antitrust enforcement under asymmetric
 information,” The Economic Journal, 99, 408–425.


                                            51
Carvajal, A., R. Deb, J. Fenske, and J. K.-H. Quah (2013): “Revealed preference
 tests of the Cournot model,” Econometrica, 81, 2351–2379.

Chambers, C. P. and F. Echenique (2016): Revealed preference theory, vol. 56, Cam-
 bridge University Press.

Chassang, S. and J. Ortner (forthcoming): “Collusion in Auctions with Constrained
 Bids: Theory and Evidence from Public Procurement,” Journal of Political Economy.

Che, Y.-K., D. Condorelli, and J. Kim (2018): “Weak cartels and collusion-proof
 auctions,” Journal of Economic Theory, 178, 398–435.

Che, Y.-K. and J. Kim (2006): “Robustly Collusion-Proof Implementation,” Economet-
 rica, 74, 1063–1107.

Clark, R. and J.-F. Houde (2013): “Collusion with asymmetric retailers: Evidence from
 a gasoline price-fixing case,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 5, 97–123.

Conley, T. G. and F. Decarolis (2016): “Detecting bidders groups in collusive auc-
 tions,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 8, 1–38.

Cyrenne, P. (1999): “On antitrust enforcement and the deterrence of collusive behaviour,”
 Review of Industrial Organization, 14, 257–272.

DOJ, U. (2005): “Price fixing, bid rigging, and market allocation schemes: What they are
 and what to look for. An Antitrust Primer.” 2005.

Doval, L. and J. Ely (2019): “Sequential information design,” Tech. rep., Working Paper.

Echenique, F., S. Lee, and M. Shum (2011): “The money pump as a measure of revealed
 preference violations,” Journal of Political Economy, 119, 1201–1223.

Ellison, G. (1994): “Theories of cartel stability and the joint executive committee,” The
 Rand journal of economics, 37–57.

Farrell, J. and E. Maskin (1989): “Renegotiation in repeated games,” Games and
  economic behavior, 1, 327–360.

Green, E. J. and R. H. Porter (1984): “Noncooperative collusion under imperfect price
 information,” Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 87–100.


                                           52
Harrington, J. E. (2004): “Cartel pricing dynamics in the presence of an antitrust au-
 thority,” RAND Journal of Economics, 651–673.

——— (2008): “Detecting cartels,” Handbook of antitrust economics, 213, 245.

Hart, S. and A. Mas-Colell (2000): “A simple adaptive procedure leading to correlated
 equilibrium,” Econometrica, 68, 1127–1150.

Imhof, D., Y. Karagök, and S. Rutz (2016): “Screening for bid-rigging-does it work?”
  Tech. rep., Université de Fribourg.

Kawai, K. and J. Nakabayashi (2018): “Detecting Large-Scale Collusion in Procurement
 Auctions,” Available at SSRN 2467175.

LaCasse, C. (1995): “Bid rigging and the threat of government prosecution,” The RAND
 Journal of Economics, 398–417.

Levin, J. (2003): “Relational incentive contracts,” The American Economic Review, 93,
  835–857.

Liu, R. and L. Yang (2008): “Kernel estimation of multivariate cumulative distribution
  function,” Journal of Nonparametric Statistics, 20, 661–677.

Maskin, E. and J. Tirole (2001): “Markov perfect equilibrium: I. Observable actions,”
 Journal of Economic Theory, 100, 191–219.

Pesendorfer, M. (2000): “A study of collusion in first-price auctions,” The Review of
 Economic Studies, 67, 381–411.

Porter, R. H. (1983): “A study of cartel stability: the Joint Executive Committee, 1880-
 1886,” The Bell Journal of Economics, 301–314.

Porter, R. H. and J. D. Zona (1993): “Detection of Bid Rigging in Procurement
 Auctions,” Journal of Political Economy, 101, 518–38.

——— (1999): “Ohio School Milk Markets: An Analysis of Bidding,” RAND Journal of
 Economics, 30, 263–288.

Rotemberg, J. J. and G. Saloner (1986): “A supergame-theoretic model of price wars
 during booms,” The American Economic Review, 390–407.


                                          53
Schurter, K. (2017): “Identification and inference in first-price auctions with collusion,”
  Tech. rep., working Paper, University of Chicago.

Tóth, B., M. Fazekas, Á. Czibik, and I. J. Tóth (2014): “Toolkit for detecting
  collusive bidding in public procurement,” With examples from Hungary.

Varian, H. R. (1990): “Goodness-of-fit in optimizing models,” Journal of Econometrics,
 46, 125–140.




                                            54
