NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MONTHLY PAYMENT TARGETING AND THE DEMAND FOR MATURITY
Bronson Argyle
Taylor D. Nadauld
Christopher Palmer
Working Paper 25668
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25668

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2019

We thank conference, seminar, and workshop participants at the 2018 AFA meetings, Berkeley,
BYU, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, MIT,
University of Utah, and Wharton, Corina Boar, Chris Carroll, Damion English, Amy Finkelstein,
Brigham Frandsen, Peter Ganong, Simon Gervais, Itay Goldstein, Dan Greenwald, Amir
Kermani, David Laibson, Brad Larsen, Lars Lefgren, Andres Liberman, Adair Morse, Pascal
Noel, Brennan Platt, Ryan Pratt, Andrei Shleifer, Bryce Stephens, and Jialan Wang for helpful
comments. Tommy Brown, Sam Hughes, Ammon Lam, Tammy Lee, and Lei Ma provided
excellent research assistance. An anonymous information-technology firm provided the data. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25668.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Bronson Argyle, Taylor D. Nadauld, and Christopher Palmer. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Monthly Payment Targeting and the Demand for Maturity
Bronson Argyle, Taylor D. Nadauld, and Christopher Palmer
NBER Working Paper No. 25668
March 2019
JEL No. D14,D15,D18,D91,E43,E51,E71,G02,G21,G41,H31,L62,M38
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we provide evidence of the importance of monthly payments in the market for
consumer installment debt. Auto debt in particular has grown rapidly since the Great Recession
and has eclipsed credit cards in total debt outstanding. Auto-loan maturities have also increased
such that most auto-loan originations now have a term of over 72 months. We document three
phenomena we jointly refer to as monthly payment targeting. First, using data from 500,000 used
auto loans and discontinuities in contract terms offered by hundreds of lenders, we show that
demand is more sensitive to maturity than interest rate, consistent with consumers managing
payment size when making debt decisions. Second, many consumers appear to employ
segregated mental accounts, spending exogenous payment savings on larger loans. Third,
consumers bunch at round-number monthly payment amounts, consistent with the use of
budgeting heuristics. These patterns hold in subsamples of constrained and unconstrained
borrowers, challenging liquidity constraints as a complete explanation. Our estimates suggest that
borrower focus on payment size, combined with credit-supply shocks to maturity, could
significantly affect aggregate outstanding debt.
Bronson Argyle
Department of Finance
Brigham Young University
Provo, UT 84602
bsa@byu.edu
Taylor D. Nadauld
Department of Finance
Brigham Young University
Provo, Utah 84602
taylor.nadauld@byu.edu

Christopher Palmer
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-639
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
cjpalmer@mit.edu

1

Introduction

In this paper, we ask how households make decisions about optimal debt contracts in practice. We show that many consumers appear to target specific monthly payment amounts
rather than minimizing total borrowing costs or satisfying debt-service coverage constraints.
Existing theories of household debt decisions are relatively silent on the role of monthly
payment management. In a standard frictionless model of household finance, consumers
make financing decisions that minimize the marginal utility-weighted present value of total
borrowing costs, all else equal. However, focusing instead on the level of monthly payments
could be rational (or boundedly rational) if borrowers are credit constrained, if cognition
costs are large, or in the presence of commitment problems.
Our setting consists of auto loan decisions made by over two million individual borrowers
from 319 diﬀerent lending institutions covering about 5% of the total credit union market
and roughly 1.4% of the used car lending market. We employ a regression-discontinuity
(RD) design to isolate exogenous shifts in the supply of credit made available to borrowers.
Over half of the lenders in our dataset oﬀer interest rates or loan maturities that jump discontinuously at various credit-score (FICO) thresholds that diﬀer across institutions. Given
that borrowers’ observable attributes are consistently smooth across these FICO thresholds,
the thresholds represent quasi-random variation in the financing terms oﬀered to otherwise
similar borrowers and can be used to identify consumer preferences over loan characteristics.
We present three main empirical findings. First, estimated demand elasticities with
respect to loan maturities are substantially larger than elasticities with respect to interest
rates.1 As we show, such preference for maturity is inconsistent with a consumer objective
function that minimizes the present value of total borrowing costs, termed “NPV neglect”
by Shu (2013). In contrast, a taste for maturity is consistent with consumer focus on the
dollar amount of monthly payments, which are much more sensitive to maturity than rate.
1

See also evidence of this first fact in Attanasio, Goldberg, and Kyriasidou (2008) and Karlan and Zinman
(2008) on borrowers’ relative sensitivity of maturity and interest rate, as we discuss in section 2.

2

Second, we document that the majority of consumers in our sample smooth monthly
payments when they are exogenously oﬀered more favorable loan terms, adjusting their
auto-debt levels instead of reallocating across all budget categories (consistent with results
contradicting fungibility in Hastings and Shapiro, 2013 and 2017). When provided better
(worse) financing terms, borrowers increase (decrease) leverage but only up to the level that
keeps their monthly payments roughly the same as a counterfactual, untreated borrower.2
This behavior points to an optimization process where borrowers have set monthly payment
amounts in mind when making debt decisions and budget expense categories using segmented
mental accounts (Thaler, 1990).
Third, we show that borrowers’ monthly payments bunch disproportionately at salient
monthly payment amounts, especially $200, $300, and $400 per month. Given the breadth
of our data and the wide heterogeneity across borrowers (in income, assets, risk aversion,
expectations, and debt-to-income (DTI) constraints, etc.), these round-number payment
levels likely represent budgeting heuristics rather than the result of an integrated utility
maximization process or a lender underwriting process.
We summarize the phenomena we jointly observe (high maturity elasticities, monthly
payment smoothing, bunching at salient monthly payment amounts) as monthly payment
targeting. Such behavior is consistent with consumers making debt decisions via a form of
mental accounting using rules of thumb. However, we also consider alternative explanations,
the most plausible of which being that borrowers are month-to-month liquidity constrained
(as in Attanasio et al., 2008). We evaluate whether a liquidity explanation alone could be
suﬃcient to explain the characteristics of budgeting decisions we observe by segmenting our
estimation sample by credit score under the assumption that low credit-score borrowers are
more likely to be constrained in their access to credit markets. We find that each of our three
empirical findings holds within each credit-score subgroup. The low likelihood that household
budget constraints or underwriting policies would bind uniquely at salient hundred-dollar
2

Note, too, that in our data, payment-smoothing borrowers do not appear abnormally constrained by
underwriting rules around maximum loan-to-value or debt-to-income ratios.

3

payment amounts together with the other empirical patterns we document suggests that
liquidity constraints alone are not suﬃcient to explain monthly payment targeting.
Our results are also relevant to eﬀorts to understand shrouded marketing in consumer
financial markets (e.g., Gabaix and Laibson, 2006; Bertrand and Morse, 2011; Stango and
Zinman, 2011; Gurun, Matvos, and Seru, 2016; Alan, Cemalcilar, Karlan, and Zinman
(2018)). Consumers who are fixated on monthly payment levels when making debt decisions
may ignore product attributes that are nevertheless consequential for future utility. Such
myopia could lead to taking on debt contracts with higher present values and larger loan
sizes. Though under certain assumptions such behavior could be utility maximizing, these
two margins coupled with longer maturity loans could also lead to more borrowers that are
more likely to be underwater on their auto loans and repayment being more sensitive to
economic shocks, risks that are opaque to borrowers targeting monthly payment levels.
Finally, while these findings have broader implications for our understanding of household
capital budgeting, the market for auto loans is of independent interest given its ubiquity
and the important role of cars in aggregate durable consumption. Over 86% of all car
purchases are financed (Brevoort et al., 2017), and vehicles are the largest asset class on
many low-wealth household balance sheets (Campbell, 2006). Auto loans represent the
second-fastest growing segment of consumer debt over the past decade and are currently
the third-largest category of consumer debt (behind mortgages and student loans) with over
$1 trillion outstanding and $400 billion originated annually. Of particular relevance to our
work is the recent trend in auto-loan maturities. Brevoort et al. (2017) document significant
increases in the volume of auto loans originated with terms of more than six years and show
that such loans are on average larger, made to less creditworthy borrowers, and more likely
to end up in default.
Given the importance of auto debt in the household credit complex, we conclude with
the policy implications of monthly payment targeting. Maturity represents a largely ignored
dimension of the credit surface in the literature evaluating the real eﬀects of credit supply.
4

For example, our maturity-elasticity estimates indicate that policies focusing on the supply
of maturity could have a larger impact on credit demand than policies focusing on interest
rates, despite policy analysis focus on the interest-rate channel. Using aggregate data and
our elasticity estimates, we provide back-of-the-envelope estimates of the eﬀect that monthly
payment targeting could have on aggregate auto debt, demonstrating that credit supply
shocks may aﬀect consumer debt more through maturity than through rates and warranting
additional policy focus on monthly payment levels.3
The paper proceeds as follows. In section 2, we describe how our conceptual framework
fits in the context of various literatures in household finance. Section 3 introduces our
borrower-level data on loan applications, oﬀers, and originations. We detail our empirical
strategy for estimating demand elasticities in section 4 and present our core empirical results.
In section 5, we provide auxiliary evidence to help interpret our elasticity estimates. Section
6 concludes and oﬀers a set of calculations to estimate the relative importance of monthly
payment targeting on total outstanding household debt.

2

Related Literature and Theoretical Framework

Our diagnosis that consumers target monthly payment levels when making debt decisions is
informed by the joint evidence of high maturity elasticities, borrowers’ smoothing of monthly
payments, and bunching at salient payment amounts. Various aspects of these results have
been established in isolation in other contexts, each with its own candidate explanation. For
example, monthly payment-centric arguments have been central to previous estimates of ma3

We are not the first to sound an alarm about rising auto-loan maturities and their connection with
monthly payment targeting. For example, a recent government report (OCC, 2015) warned, “Too much
emphasis on monthly payment management and volatile collateral values can increase risk, and this often
occurs gradually until the loan structures become imprudent. Signs of movement in this direction are evident,
as lenders oﬀer loans with larger balances, higher advance rates, and longer repayment terms ... Extending
loan terms is one way lenders are lowering payments, and this can increase risk to banks and borrowers.
Industry data indicate that 60 percent of auto loans originated in the fourth quarter of 2014 had a term of
72 months or more ... Extended terms are becoming the norm rather than the exception and need to be
carefully managed.” See also a recent Consumer Financial Protection Bureau report (Brevoort et al., 2017)
using nationally representative data and documenting similar trends.

5

turity and interest-rate elasticities (Juster and Shay, 1964; Attanasio et al., 2008; Karlan and
Zinman, 2008) while other studies have made behavioral arguments for consumers preferring to match debt maturity with the duration of asset use (Prelec and Loewenstein, 1998).
Thaler (1990) oﬀers evidence on budgeting using mental accounts, and literature in marketing, psychology, and economics has documented left-digit eﬀects in consumer behavior.4
While our evidence on monthly payment smoothing and bunching in monthly payment levels
is reasonably novel to the literature, our primary contribution is to establish a set of empirical phenomena that, when jointly considered, are most naturally explained with a monthly
payment targeting model of household budgeting. Below, we discuss our contribution in the
context each of these results finds in the existing literature.
Relative to the literature contrasting rate and maturity elasticities, we oﬀer evidence of
a new mechanism distinct from the usual liquidity constraints definition. The earliest estimates of borrowing elasticities are Suits (1958) and Juster and Shay (1964), with more recent
rate elasticity estimates in Karlan and Zinman (forthcoming). With respect to estimates of
maturity elasticities, Karlan and Zinman (2008) report large loan-size maturity elasticities
from a randomized field experiment using micro loan advertisements in South Africa, Attanasio et al. (2008) estimate high maturity elasticities from the Consumer Expenditure
Survey, and Kuvikova (2015) estimates high maturity elasticities among low income borrowers.5 Notably, both Karlan and Zinman (2008) and Attanasio et al. (2008) interpret high
intensive-margin maturity elasticities as evidence of binding liquidity constraints. Though
liquidity constraints clearly elevate the importance of payment size and may explain why
borrowers prefer long-maturity loans, we find high maturity elasticities even for borrowers
with substantially slack liquidity constraints. Auxiliary analyses further suggest that binding
liquidity constraints are not the only explanation for large maturity elasticities. Instead, our
findings suggest that maturity elasticities are high in large part because changing loan ma4

See, for example Shindler and Kirby (1997), Thomas and Morwitz (2005), Basu (2006), Wonder, Wilhelm, and Fewings (2008), Pope and Simonsohn (2011), and Lacetera, Pope, and Syndor (2012).
5
See also contrasting evidence from Bachas (2018), who finds that private student-loan refinancers are
more sensitive to total interest payments than monthly payment levels.

6

turity most eﬀectively allows a wide variety of borrowers to target specific budgeted monthly
payment amounts. This provides a new mechanism supporting a rich recent literature establishing payment size per se to be a primary consideration in residential mortgage decisions.
See, for example, Fuster and Willen (2017), Eberly and Krishnamurthy (2014), Di Maggio
et al. (2017), Greenwald (2018), and Ganong and Noel (2018).
Maturity demand could be also driven by long-maturity loans protecting borrowers from
the rollover risk associated with needing to frequently interact with credit markets, especially
valuable when borrowers have private information about their quality (Flannery, 1986). Maturity could also protect borrowers against credit-limit volatility (Fulford, 2015). Consistent
with a maturity-as-insurance argument, Herzberg, Leberman, and Paravisini (2017) document that self-selected longer-maturity borrowers are of worse credit quality. However, such
adverse selection appears to be less important in our setting. Using various measures of
default, as well as ex-post changes in borrower FICO scores to proxy for private information
and ex-ante demand for insurance, we find little diﬀerence in loan performance outcomes
across borrowers receiving exogenously better loan terms.
Our second empirical finding is that borrowers smooth their monthly payments. On either
side of a discontinuity in oﬀered loan terms, borrowers originate loans with statistically indistinguishable monthly payment amounts despite facing significantly diﬀerent costs of credit.
This result suggests that borrowers fully adjust the amount they borrow in response to looser
loan terms, as opposed to increasing monthly payments in response to lower prices or using
any monthly savings to reoptimize across all possible expenditure categories. While potentially driven by binding liquidity constraints, monthly payment smoothing is also consistent
with Thaler’s (1985, 1990) conjecture that households organize their cash flows into a set of
segmented mental accounts, which has been supported with experimental evidence by Prelec
and Loewenstein (1998) and Ranyard et al. (2006). Using such a budget in installment-debt
decisions could help overcome the commitment problems documented by Kuchler and Pagel
(2018). Our evidence also complements the results of Hastings and Shapiro (2013, 2107),
7

who show that households do not treat gasoline savings and food-stamps benefits as fungible
across expenditure categories. Our findings on monthly payment smoothing demonstrate
the prevalence of mental accounting even in a high-stakes long-term debt setting.6
Could such smoothing behavior be a feature of an optimal liquidity management strategy?
Borrowers could optimally target low monthly payments if they expect to find investment
opportunities with rates of return in excess of borrowing costs. Alternatively, optimal debt
allocation strategies could call for the lowest possible payment on auto loans (ignoring lifetime
interest expenses) if such a strategy frees up liquidity to pay down higher rate-bearing debt
obligations. Stango and Zinman (2014) find that consumers are eﬃcient at allocating debt
to the lowest interest-rate credit card, while Gathergood et al. (2019) find evidence to the
contrary. A buﬀer-stock model could also feature consumers willing to incur higher interest
expenses over the life of a loan in return for having a larger savings balance to guard against
financial shocks in the interim (see related discussion in section 2.1). However, because
such considerations would motivate consumers to minimize their monthly payments, our
smoothing result—that consumers adjust their borrowing upward in response to cheaper
loan terms more than would be predicted by estimated demand elasticities—is not consistent
with a general liquidity management strategy.
Of course, there are other reasons borrowers would smooth their monthly payments for
motives besides monthly budgeting, motivating our final set of results. Our third finding
is that many borrowers seem to target specific, salient levels of monthly payments. As discussed above, certain forms of liquidity constraints, such as binding monthly debt-service
coverage constraints (e.g., as in Greenwald, 2018), could lead to a first-order increase in
car-related spending and a second-order increase in other spending. However, we find that
many borrowers target specific round monthly payment levels (e.g, $300, $400, etc.). Such
behavior is diﬃcult to rationalize with liquidity constraints, liquidity management, or myopia. Instead, we view these results as consistent with behavioral budgeting models wherein
6

See also Zhang (2017), who documents large durable consumption eﬀects to transitory windfall income
shocks, consistent with mental accounting.

8

consumers attempt to commit to not overspend by imprecisely forming a sense of aﬀordability based on monthly expenses. This behavioral response also has precedent in marketing
and psychology. Wonder, Wilhelm and Fewings (2008) present survey evidence in marketing that consumers focus heavily on monthly payments, including a particular focus on the
first digit of monthly payment amounts. Retailers behave accordingly, frequently advertising
prices ending with nine (Schindler and Kirby, 1997). Thomas and Morwitz (2005) also detail
domains in which ending posted prices in 99 (dollars or cents) is the optimal response by
firms to hypothesized consumer heuristics. Qualitative work in psychology finds consumers
engaging in monthly budgeting via categories (Ranyard et al., 2006). Keys and Wang (2018)
show in a large sample of US consumers that a large fraction of credit card borrowers anchor
at minimum payment amounts, complementing previous experimental evidence shown in
Navarro-Martinez et al. (2011). Again, while prior literature provides evidence with varying
degrees of external validity that borrowers fixate on certain payment amounts, a key contribution of our paper is to demonstrate that such behavior persists even when considering
substantially sized long-term debt contracts in a way that cannot be entirely explained by
binding liquidity constraints.
In summary, we make several contributions to this eclectic literature on household budgeting using evidence from millions of actual borrowers making high-stakes long-run debt and
durable consumption decisions. We estimate credit demand elasticities with respect to price
and non-price features, the segmentation with which households view budget categories,
and the heuristics they use to determine aﬀordable expenditure levels at monthly intervals. While prior estimates of large maturity elasticities in isolation could not distinguish a
monthly-payment hypothesis from a liquidity-constraints hypothesis, the combination of our
findings uniquely supports a monthly payment targeting hypothesis. Relative to the existing
mental accounting literature, our evidence of monthly payment smoothing represents new
evidence that borrowers appear to consume out of mental accounts even in large-dollar settings. Furthermore, documenting monthly budgeting behavior in installment debt decisions
9

ties together work on the importance of payment size with the mental accounting literature.
Finally, because the combination of large elasticities and monthly payment smoothing cannot
distinguish a liquidity management hypothesis from monthly payment targeting, we present
evidence that consumers more frequently choose salient round payment amounts. Taken
together, these empirical facts indicate that many households make debt decisions targeting
specific monthly payment levels.

2.1 Theoretical Framework
In this section, we demonstrate the extent to which standard consumer optimization models
can generate behavior consistent with our empirical findings. While some of the aspects of
borrower behavior we observe is consistent with previous models of credit constraints, as we
show below, other evidence points to a mental accounting optimization framework.
Consider a simple model of an infinite-horizon agent choosing optimal consumption and
asset paths {ct , At }1
t=0 in discrete time with no uncertainty. The consumer’s Lagrangian is
then
max

{ct , At }

where

X

t

[u(ct ) +

t (At 1 (1

+ r) + yt

ct

(1)

At )]

t

is the discount factor, u(·) is the separable flow utility function,

t

is the marginal

utility of wealth, and At and yt are, respectively, net asset holdings (which could be negative
in the case of debt) and after-tax income at time t. For simplicity, debt and savings earn
the same rate of return with all debt being short term and interest and principal due one
period ahead (although debt can be rolled over subject to a transversality condition). This
formulation yields a standard intertemporal Euler equation
u0 (ct )
= (1 + r).
u0 (ct+1 )

(2)

Borrowing constraints may prevent the consumer from achieving the first-best consumption level characterized by (2). If the borrower faces credit constraints, the marginal utility
of wealth will be too high this period as constrained borrowing prevents suﬃciently high ct
10

today to drive down u0 (ct ). Consider the case of an exogenously specified per-period paymentto-income limit D̄ > 0, where debt commitments as a fraction of income

A(1 + r)/y cannot

exceed D̄. In this case, the credit-constrained optimization problem could be written with a
second constraint with corresponding Lagrange multiplier µ
max

{ct , At }

X
t

t

⇥

u(ct ) +

t (At 1 (1

+ r) + yt

ct

⇤
At ) + µt (D̄ + At (1 + r)/yt ) ,

(3)

yielding credit-constrained Euler equation
u0 (ct )

µt (1 +
0
u (ct+1 )

r)/yt

= (1 + r).

(4)

When credit limits are binding (i.e., µt > 0), debt payments will be D̄yt and (4) will be
satisfied at a lower level of consumption than would satisfy (2). Such a constraint could
explain both sensitivity to payment levels and payment smoothing. Faced with shocks to
interest rates or maturity, constrained borrowers might adjust the amount of debt to leave
their payment sizes unchanged. When credit limits are never binding, µt = 0 for all t, and
the borrower will be able to attain her first-best consumption path, with debt endogenously
determined as a function of optimal consumption and income. Importantly, whether or
not credit constraints bind, monthly payments will be continuously distributed so long as
income is continuously distributed in the cross-section of borrowers (and given a continuously
diﬀerentiable utility function u(·)).7
Extending this framework to consider optimal one-time contract choice from a menu
of long-term, non-callable debt contracts, let ` index the set of available consumer loans
characterized by their interest rate r` and maturity T` .8 The household’s objective then

7

Of course, alternative forms of credit constraints are plausible, including credit limits constraining total
debt (Zeldes, 1989 and Gross and Souleles, 2002) or loan-to-value limits (common in secured credit markets).
Credit limits and asset values tend to be individualized and continuously distributed across borrowers, again
yielding the prediction that debt payments would have a smooth cross-sectional distribution.
8
See Bachas (2018) for a model of maturity demand in continuous time for a fixed loan size without
budget or liquidity constraints.

11

becomes
max

{ct ,St ,D,`}

X
t

t

⇥

u(ct ) +

`
t Bt

+ µ(D̄

m(D, r` , T` )/yt0 )

⇤

(5)

where the budget constraint Bt` depends on the chosen loan ` and is defined as
Bt` ⌘ St 1 (1 + rS ) + yt

ct

(6)

St + D · 1(t = t0 )

m(D, r` , T` ) · 1(t0  t  t0 + T` ).
To diﬀerentiate between asset savings and debt, here we denote savings St
period rate of return rS . The amount of debt D

0 with a one-

0 is originated at time t0 such that at the

origination date, the household receives D to spend or save. For all time periods t starting
with the origination month and extending until month t0 +T` when the loan characterized by
contract ` matures and is paid oﬀ, the household must make fixed, amortizing installment
payments m that depend only on the amount of debt D, the loan’s interest rate r` , and
maturity T` . In the case of the fixed-rate, self-amortizing consumer loans we study here,
m(D, r, T ) =

Dr
1 (1+r)

T

. The borrowing constraint is again a limit on the payment-to-income

ratio and is enforced at origination.
The key observation from the budget-constraint specification in (6) is that an unconstrained household’s optimal loan-contract choice `⇤ is related to the present value of perperiod (e.g., monthly) payments. Formally, the optimality condition for ` yields
`⇤ = arg min
`

tX
0 +T`

t

t m(D, r` , T` ),

(7)

t=t0

showing that an unconstrained consumer choosing to take out a fixed amount of debt D
will only consider the present value of the marginal utility lost from the required payment
stream. Here, preferences over bundles will depend on the specific menu oﬀered. Faced with
two equally sized debt contracts, a longer one with lower monthly payments but a higher
present value and a shorter contract with higher monthly payments but lower present value,
a classical consumer (with constant marginal utility of wealth

12

for the sake of argument)

would choose the loan with lower present value. This has implications for unconstrained
consumer preferences over interest rates and maturity. Given that the present value of an
amortizing contract is relatively more sensitive to interest rates and monthly payments are
more sensitive to loan maturity, consumers targeting monthly payments will be particularly
elastic to maturity.
At the intensive margin, the choice of loan size will also be a function of oﬀered terms.
For each given debt contract `, optimal debt is characterized by the first-order condition of
(5) with respect to D
⇤
t0 (D` )

µ(D`⇤ )

=

tX
0 +T`

t t0

⇤
t (D` )

t=t0

(8)

· m0 (D`⇤ , r` , T` ),

where m0 (·, ·, ·) is the derivative of monthly payments with respect to loan size, and (·)
and µ(·) are the corresponding Lagrange multipliers, evaluated at optimal choices implied
by D`⇤ . Borrowers select D`⇤ to trade oﬀ the benefit of relaxing the budget constraint at the
time of origination (including the dynamic eﬀects this has on subsequent periods’ budget
constraints) with the impact of higher loan sizes on the marginal-utility–weighted presentvalue of future debt service payments. Again, when borrowers face binding credit limits D̄,
the marginal utility of wealth

t0

will be too high relative to the unconstrained case. Given

optimal loan size D`⇤ for each contract ` and the corresponding optimal path of consumption
and savings {c⇤`t , S`t⇤ }, the household’s optimal loan-contract `⇤ is
`⇤ = arg max
`

X
t

t

⇥

u(c⇤`t ) +

` ⇤
⇤
⇤
t Bt (c`t , S`t , D` )

+ µ(D̄

m(D`⇤ , r` , T` )/yt0 )

⇤

(9)

As before, given that an increase in maturity aﬀects monthly payments more than a commensurate decrease in interest rates, demand from constrained (unconstrained) borrowers
will naturally be more (less) sensitive to maturity than rates. Despite their demand being
sensitive to both interest rates and maturity, constrained borrowers faced with shocks to
oﬀered loan characteristics will smooth their monthly payments to satisfy their payment-to-

13

income ratio constraints. Unconstrained borrowers, however, would respond to better credit
terms by increasing loan sizes and monthly payments.
In practice, several of the aspects of consumer behavior we document are inconsistent
with the predictions of the classical model with credit constraints. Consistent with monthly
payment constraints binding, we find excess demand sensitivity to maturity and evidence
of monthly payment smoothing (monthly payments are relatively constant across otherwise
similar consumers facing diﬀerent (r, T ) menus). However, in contrast to the above model,
we find monthly payment smoothing and maturity preferences even for consumers unlikely
to be credit constrained. Moreover, we observe bunching in monthly payment levels at round
numbers, especially multiples of $100. Such a distribution of monthly payments is diﬃcult
to rationalize with a simple model of liquidity constraints, and we observe a statistically
significant fraction of each borrower type bunching. Even for constrained borrowers, it is
unlikely that credit constraints would happen to bind more frequently just below a $100
threshold than just above given the continuous distribution of income, car values, loan sizes,
interest rates, and maturities.9 Instead, targeting salient, round-number amounts is consistent with households developing a monthly categorical budget prescribing the level of
spending.10 While both monthly borrowing constraints and a categorical budget would both
predict monthly payment smoothing, a human tendency to form monthly budgets with round
numbers, perhaps arising from cognitive costs of a more exact optimization process, could
rationalize the round-number monthly payment bunching we see even for unconstrained borrowers.11 In our framework, many households forming a round-number budget could take
the form of an additional constraint
m(D` , r` , T` )  M
9

(10)

Nevertheless, we verify below that the excess mass below each $100 multiple is not driven by bunching
in popular underwriting ratios.
10
The use of such a budget is widely prescribed by personal finance courses and is consistent with stated
behavior in the lab (e.g., Ranyard et al., 2006).
11
See, for example, Wonder et al. (2008) for survey evidence that borrowers place emphasis on the left
digit when considering monthly payments.

14

with M the amount budgeted monthly for car-loan payments. Such a constraint with
predetermined round number M would be consistent with excess sensitivity to maturity,
monthly payment smoothing, and payment-level bunching. In particular, we show below
that payment-level bunching is especially pronounced for borrowers taking out loans with
non-standard maturities (maturities not multiples of twelve months). This suggests a new explanation for the importance borrowers place on maturity. While longer loans allow borrowers to get beneath underwriting constraints, even unconstrained borrowers using a monthly
budget will value maturity for its ability to control payment size.

3

Data

Our unique data on the (anonymized) auto-loan decisions and loan contract features of 2.4
million borrowers and 319 lenders come from a technology firm that provides data warehousing and analytics services to retail-oriented lending institutions nationwide. The vast
majority of the loans in our sample (98.5%) are originated by credit unions, with the remainder originated by non-bank finance companies.
Loan contract features in the data include borrower FICO scores, loan-to-value (LTV)
ratios, car purchase prices, loan dates, and in some cases, back-end DTI ratios (the ratio
of current debt payments to income excluding the auto loan in question). We restrict the
data set to only those loans originated directly with a lending institution (in contrast to
so-called indirect loans, which involve loan applications processed through auto dealerships)
to avoid the possibility that dealers steer buyers to a particular lender.12 Although we have
borrowers from all 50 U.S. states, the five most-represented states in the data are Washington
(465,553 loans), California (335,584 loans), Texas (280,108 loans), Oregon (208,358 loans),
and Virginia (189,857 loans). The sample includes loans originated between 2005 and 2016,
12

We are unaware of aggregate statistics on the relative composition of direct versus indirect loans, but
roughly half of the auto loans in our data provider’s database are direct loans. Indirect borrowers are of
slightly higher credit quality (median FICO for indirect of 718 versus FICO 714 for direct) and spend more
on purchased cars (median purchase of $20k versus $16k).

15

but over 70% of the loans were originated between 2012 and 2015.
We supplement the originated loan data with the applications of 1.3 million borrowers
from 45 lending institutions (not all lenders in our data share loan application data with
our data provider). The application data include decisions on loan approvals, denials, and
funding outcomes, in addition to the credit attributes of applicants. Seeing this stage of the
loan origination process allows us to estimate demand elasticities at the extensive margin,
though a limited sample size reduces our power to detect discontinuities.
Table 1 reports basic summary statistics of the cleaned sample, after removing loan sizes
over $100,000 and interest rates over 15%. Panel A summarizes the loan-application data;
panel B summarizes the originated loans. As reported in panel B, the median loan size is
$16,034, the median FICO score is 714, and median DTI is 26%. The median interest rate
over the full sample period is 4.0% and trends down over our sample period. Median loan
maturities rise from 60 months in the early years of the sample to 66 months in 2014 and
2015.
The auto loans in our data mostly secure the purchase of used cars by prime borrowers
and are originated by a slightly older, slightly less-racially diverse, and slightly-higher average
credit quality demographic.13 Our sample draws heavily from the 2012-2015 time period, a
reflection of the growth in our data provider’s client base over this period. However, auto
loan originations also increased substantially over this period. Nationwide outstanding auto
debt increased 44.5% between 2012 and 2015, outpacing even the growth in student loans
over the same period. According to Experian (2016), credit unions originated 23% of all
2015 used car loans and 10% of new car originations. Any non-representativeness should
be less of an issue in our setting given our reliance on a regression-discontinuity design that
relies only on the local validity of our identifying assumptions.14
13

Over 41% of our borrowers are between the ages of 45-65, compared to 34% in the U.S. census. Our
sample is estimated to be 73% white, compared to 64.5% in the 2010 Census. Median FICO scores in our
sample are 714, compared to a median FICO of 695 in the NY Fed Consumer Credit Panel (CCP).
14
A related discussion regarding representativeness exists in Argyle et al. (2017), which uses the same
data.

16

4

Estimation

The basic challenge in understanding the relationship between contract terms and demand for
debt is that loan contract terms are endogenously determined. Our identification strategy
relies on quasi-random variation in the supply of interest rates and maturities oﬀered to
borrowers by exploiting observed discontinuities in oﬀered loan terms across various FICO
thresholds.15 Unlike the mortgage setting in Keys et al. (2010), there is not an industry
standard FICO score (e.g. FICO 620) in the auto market at which institutions vary their
lending standards or around which treatment of loans changes in the secondary market.
Instead, discontinuities in oﬀered interest rates and loan maturities exist at various points
across the FICO spectrum. Anecdotally, conversations with credit-union executives confirm
the existence of FICO thresholds and their (admittedly coarse) purpose of pricing risk in
loan oﬀerings. Possible explanations for the persistent use of pricing thresholds include the
continued use of rate sheets, fear of overfitting, and the slow adoption of recently developed
analytical tools that would render rate sheets obsolete. We note, however, that the precise
reason for discrete lender pricing rules is not important to our study here insofar as these
reasons are not correlated with borrower quality or demand, which we verify below.
In this section, we first discuss the process we follow to detect rate and maturity discontinuities. We then present our regression-discontinuity strategy to estimate the magnitude of
these discontinuities along with first-stage results and a series of tests of the RD identifying
assumptions. While the FICO thresholds identify quasi-random variation in the supply of
credit terms, the colocation of maturity and rate discontinuities within a lending institution
also presents a unique empirical challenge. Interest rates and maximum loan maturities
often jump discontinuously at the same FICO thresholds (though at diﬀerent thresholds
across lenders), complicating diﬀerentiating the relative contribution of interest-rate supply
15

Methodologically, other studies have used discontinuous credit policies for inference. For example,
Agarwal et al. (2017) estimate borrowing elasticities with respect to credit limits and also use a regressiondiscontinuity design based on FICO scores. In mortgage markets, Adelino et al. (2014), Best and Kleven
(2017), DeFusco and Paciorek (2017), Di Maggio et al. (2017), and Ganong and Noel (2018) each use the
nonlinear treatment of credit attributes to identify aspects of consumer debt optimization.

17

from loan-maturity supply in determining equilibrium loan amounts. Below, we develop
a two-stage least squares procedure that makes use of heterogeneity across lenders in the
magnitude of the otherwise standard first stages for rates and maturities. If all lenders
had discontinuities for rates and maturities at the same FICO thresholds, and if those discontinuities were of equal magnitude, we would not be able to separately identify demand
elasticities with respect to rate and maturity. After detailing our instrumental-variables
regression-discontinuity estimator, we report elasticity estimates at both the intensive and
extensive margins. In section 5 we employ a similar estimation framework to evaluate diﬀerences in equilibrium monthly payment amounts in response to exogenous variation in rates
and maturity.

4.1

Detecting Discontinuities

To illustrate the lending rules we seek to detect in this section, panel A of Figure 1 provides
an example of interest-rate drops around FICO thresholds for a single (anonymous) lender
in our sample. The figure plots point estimates and confidence intervals from a regression
of realized interest rates on a set of indicator variables for 5-point FICO bins. The 5-point
FICO bins begin at FICO 500, where the first bin includes FICO scores in the 500-504
range, the second bin includes 505-509 FICO scores, etc., up through FICO scores of 800.
The estimated coeﬃcients for each FICO bin represents the average interest rate on loans
contained in the bin, relative to omitted category (FICO>800). The average interest rate
movements are large, ranging from a 360 basis-point (bp) drop around FICO 600 to a 7 bp
drop around FICO 720.
Panel B of Figure 1 provides a similar estimation of a single lender’s maturity policy
that also jumps at several FICO thresholds. As in panel A, we estimate average maturities
and confidence intervals for loans within 5-point FICO buckets. For the institution plotted
in panel B, loan maturities jump an average of 2.7 months around FICO 600, an average
of 2.8 months at FICO 640, and an average of 3.3 months at FICO 680. Importantly
18

for our identification strategy, note that diﬀerent thresholds are associated with varying
magnitudes of discontinuities within an institution; the same is true across institutions.
Underlying the maturity plot in panel B is likely a lender-specific rule about maximum
allowable maturity that we do not observe and of which not all borrowers avail themselves.
This likely contributes to the pattern we see comparing panels A and B of Figure 1 where rate
discontinuities are more precisely estimated than maturity rules. Still, the discontinuities in
maturity are economically and statistically significant as discussed below.
To identify every institution in our sample with discontinuous loan pricing rules, we
first estimate interest rate-FICO bin regressions separately by lender. We define interestrate discontinuities as those FICO thresholds where 1) the interest rate diﬀerence across
consecutive bins is larger than 50 basis points, 2) the p-value for the diﬀerence between
those two coeﬃcients is less than 0.001, and 3) the diﬀerences between coeﬃcient estimates
on either side of a potential discontinuity have a p-value that is greater than 0.1.16 This
last criterion ensures smoothness to the left and right of a candidate discontinuity. We also
examine each potential threshold visually to ensure that the identified discontinuities are
well behaved around the candidate thresholds. This screening criteria selects only those
discontinuities that are economically and statistically significant and generated by stable
lending rules.17
While we observe lender-specific discontinuities in maturity rules throughout the FICO
spectrum, we restrict our attention here to jumps in allowable maturity that occur coincident
with our detected rate discontinuities. Although in principle, observing rate and maturity
discontinuities at separate FICO locations could facilitate holding one fixed to isolate con16

For example, to classify a discontinuity at FICO 600, we require that ˆ600 604 (the estimated average
interest rate of borrowers with FICO scores between 600 and 604) be 50 bp less than ˆ595 599 and that the
p-value testing that diﬀerence has to be less than 0.001. In addition, the p-values testing 600 604 = 605 609
and 590 594 = 595 599 must be greater than 0.1.
17
For example, this procedure would not classify the FICO 520 coeﬃcient for the lender in panel A of
Figure 1 as a discontinuity because of the third criterion even though the first two criteria are satisfied. Given
the relative magnitude of the confidence intervals in panel A of Figure 1 and the underlying distribution of
FICO scores in the population, it is likely that the volatile FICO bin estimates for FICO scores well below
600 are driven by very small sample sizes as opposed to a volatile underlying lending rule.

19

sumer response to the other, this would require a high degree of confidence in locating
an exhaustive set of discontinuities. As maturity and rates are almost always oﬀered as a
bundle, it is diﬃcult to isolate exogenous movements in one loan parameter that does not
impact the other, consistent with anecdotal evidence from credit-union executives that have
indicated that maturity discontinuities frequently exist at the same FICO thresholds as rate
discontinuities. FICO-based maturity discontinuity detection is further complicated by consumers not always originating loans of the max oﬀered maturity, in contrast to interest rates
where consumers almost always originate loans with the lowest oﬀered rate. We therefore
assume that maturity discontinuously changes whenever rates discontinuously change. We
believe this approach is conservative with respect to understanding diﬀerences between rate
and maturity elasticities. Falsely identifying maturity discontinuities will create downward
bias in our average maturity elasticity estimates because the estimates will include maturity
estimates of zero at the false positive discontinuities. In contrast, our rate elasticities should
be estimated with precision given the strictness of the criteria employed to identify the rate
discontinuities. Falsely assuming the existence of maturity discontinuities could lead to a
weak instrument problem, but the partial F -statistics reported in section 4.2 suggest this is
not a problem.18
Our discontinuity detection strategy results in just over two discontinuities for the average
institution in our sample. Of the 319 institutions we evaluate, 233 display discontinuities.
Appendix Figure A1 presents a histogram of the frequency of discontinuities by FICO score.
The most common discontinuities occur at FICO 600, 640, 680, and 700 and 80% of the
discontinuities are concentrated between FICO 600 and 700. To check for representativeness,
we compare statistics for the discontinuity sample (Table 2) with the full-sample summary
statistics (Table 1) and report tests of diﬀerences between the two samples in Appendix Table
A1. Diﬀerences in observable characteristics between the full sample and the discontinuity
sample (e.g. average FICO of 710 in the full sample compared to average FICO of 663
18

Requiring jumps to also exceed a maturity hurdle reduces the sample size but leads to qualitatively
similar results.

20

in the discontinuity sample) reflect the fact that the majority of loans near discontinuities
have FICO scores between 600 and 700, whereas in the full sample a larger fraction of
borrowers have FICO scores above 700. The concentration of discontinuities between FICO
600 and 700 also explains why average loan amounts and collateral values are lower in
the discontinuity sample. Higher FICO score borrowers purchase more expensive cars, on
average, and originate larger loans to finance those purchases.

4.2

Isolating Exogenous Variation in Contract Terms

In order to estimate the elasticity of loan amounts with respect to interest rates and maturities, we use our detected FICO discontinuities to isolate quasi-random variation in contract
terms. Our RD specification combines all classified discontinuities D to explain originated
interest rates r and maturities T for consumer i in commuting-zone g borrowing from lender
l in quarter t
riglt =

X
d2D

Tiglt =

X
d2D

1(il 2 Dd )
1(il 2 Dd )

⇣
⇣

r

1(F^
ICOid

0) + f (F^
ICOid ; ⇡ r ) +

1(F^
ICOid

0) + f (F^
ICOid ; ⇡ T ) +

T

r
dl

⌘

T
dl

r
r
+ ⇠gt
+ viglt

⌘

T
T
+ ⇠gt
+ viglt

(11)
(12)

where for the RD running variable, we normalize FICO scores relative to each detected discontinuity d with F^
ICOid = F ICOi

cutoﬀdl .19 The exogenous term in equations (11) and

(12) is the discontinuity indicator 1(F^
ICOid

0). Conditional on the smooth relationship

f (· ; ·) between the running variable and first-stage outcomes, the coeﬃcients

y

report how

each contract characteristic y changes discontinuously for otherwise identical borrowers when
F^
ICO = 0. The indicator 1(il 2 Dd ) equals one when the FICO score associated with loan
i is within 19 FICO points of a discontinuity detected in the policy of lender l such that
only loans within 19 points of a given discontinuity are used to estimate the magnitude of
For example, a loan with FICO score of 613 would have F^
ICO value of -7 relative to a 620 FICO
^
discontinuity and a F ICO value of -37 relative to a 650 FICO discontinuity.
19

21

that discontinuity.20 To capture the independent eﬀects of credit scores on loan-product
attributes, we model the eﬀect of the running variable as a quadratic function f (F^
ICO; ⇡)
that changes at the discontinuity
2

f (F^
ICO; ⇡) = ⇡1 F^
ICO + ⇡2 F^
ICO + 1(F^
ICO

✓

0) ⇡3 F^
ICO + ⇡4 F^
ICO

although our results are also robust to a cubic specification. The terms

y
dl

2

◆

,

(13)

y
and ⇠gt
are

lender-specific discontinuity-neighborhood fixed eﬀects and commuting zone-by-quarter fixed
eﬀects, respectively. These fixed eﬀects capture any unobserved heterogeneity in the levels
of rates and maturities driven by such things as borrower selection into lenders or time
varying-local economic conditions that could impact the supply and demand for loans. The
RD function coeﬃcients

and ⇡ capture the average relationship between normalized FICO

scores and contract terms relative to each lender’s baseline level of rates around each discontinuity. We cluster standard errors by FICO score.
Panels A and B of Figure 2 plot predicted values of interest rates and loan maturity,
respectively. For both contract features, there is a visibly apparent discontinuity as the running variable (normalized FICO score) crosses the threshold. The estimated discontinuities
contrast with the otherwise smooth relationship between FICO scores and rates and maturities estimated nonparametrically on either side of the discontinuities. Comparing panels A
and B, especially the relative magnitude of the discontinuity and confidence-interval widths,
the interest-rate first stage seems more precise and lender maturity rules more volatile. We
attribute this diﬀerence in precision across the two contract features as a result of not all
consumers taking up the maximum allowable loan length and our detection procedure conservatively including false-positive maturity discontinuities.
Table 3 reports results using the larger origination sample (panel A), and, given that
our balance tests below use data from the application sample, a sample restricted to only
20

This specification amounts to a uniform kernel and a bandwidth of 19. Our results are robust to other
choices of RD kernel and bandwidth.

22

those approved loans in the application data (panel B). The discontinuity estimates ˆr for
the change in interest rates at a detected FICO discontinuity range from -130 to -40 basis
points in panels A and B, respectively. Despite a smaller application sample, both are
estimated with reasonable precision. Loan maturities increase by an average of 0.74 to 0.33
months in panels A and B, respectively. As discussed in the context of Figure 2 above,
because observations come from loans that were originated, these eﬀects likely stem from
larger changes in maximum allowable maturity than estimated by these coeﬃcients, some
consumers not taking up the maximum oﬀered maturity, and some lenders having no change
in maturity policy at a detected FICO threshold. As apparent in Figure 2, the first-stage
estimate on interest rates has a much higher t-statistic than the discontinuity coeﬃcient
for loan maturity, although the discontinuities are statistically significant for both outcomes
even in the smaller application sample. The partial F-statistics testing the strength of the
instrument set are over 10 for the specifications reported in Table 3, with the exception of
a partial F-statistic of 7.9 for maturity in the much-reduced application sample reported in
Panel B.

4.3

Validating RD Exogeneity Assumption

For our RD estimates to isolate consumer sensitivity to loan features, we need the identifying
assumption that other demand factors do not change discontinuously at our detected FICO
thresholds. This smoothness condition allows for a counterfactual interpretation of outcomes
around thresholds by locally mimicking random assignment of borrowers to interest rate and
maturity oﬀers. Conceptually, there is no clear process by which borrowers could select into
one side of the threshold. Borrowers are unlikely to know their credit score precisely and are
even less likely to know the location of an institution’s rate cutoﬀs. Given the volatility in
FICO scores across credit bureaus and across weeks, it is also unlikely that assignment to one
side of a threshold is correlated with demand shifters. Manipulation of credit scores is also
diﬃcult to achieve in the short-run and of little expected return without exact knowledge of
23

lender pricing rules.
We also test for the smoothness of other observables (and the density of the running variable) as further evidence that only treatment is changing discontinuously at each detected
discontinuity. Appendix Figure A2 and Table 4 use loan-application data to test whether average ex-ante borrower characteristics change discontinuously around FICO discontinuities.
Panels A-E of Appendix Figure A2 show that borrowers on either side of FICO thresholds do
not appear meaningfully diﬀerent in terms of their debt capacity, willingness to borrow, or
demographics. Panel F plots a McCrary (2008) test showing that the number of applicants
is similar on either side of the threshold, suggesting that borrowers are likely unaware of
the existence or location of the FICO thresholds when they apply. Table 4 shows that the
discontinuity point estimates and McCrary test statistic corresponding to the RD plots in
Appendix Figure A2 are all statistically insignificant.
Smoothness in observables at the time of application does not rule out the possibility of
selection at the time of loan origination. If borrowers pursued an aggressive line of questions
to elicit a loan supply schedule from a lender, they might search or wait until their observables
put themselves on the cheap side of a discontinuity, leading to concerns of diﬀerences in borrower composition on either side of a threshold. To address this possibility, Appendix Table
A2 estimates RD regressions with borrower observables as the dependent variable. Again,
borrowers on opposite sides of a discontinuity are statistically indistinguishable. Consistent
with our conjecture that borrowers smooth monthly payments by increasing loan amounts,
the estimates indicate a jump in borrowed amounts (column 1 of Appendix Table A2). We
discuss this specific result in much more detail in section 5.

24

4.4

Demand Elasticity Estimation

We are interested in estimating the elasticities of demand with respect to interest rate and
maturity (i.e. term), defined as
@ log Q
@ log r
@ log Q
⌘
@ log T

⌘ rate ⌘
⌘ maturity

where Q is the quantity of debt originated and r and T are loan interest rate and maturity,
respectively.21 In a traditional simultaneous equations setup for demand and supply, we
identify the demand equation by instrumenting for price with factors that aﬀect supply but
not demand. In our setting, we have variation in r and T coming from discontinuities in
supply-side determined lending rules, which we show are uncorrelated with several correlates
of demand. To account for the simultaneous movement of interest rates and loan maturities
at the discontinuities in our elasticity estimation, we exploit cross-sectional variation in the
magnitude of the discontinuities across institutions. The magnitude of diﬀerences in the
size of discontinuities is driven by diﬀerences in the location of discontinuities on the FICO
spectrum and by institution-specific diﬀerences in loan pricing and maturity policies at a
given threshold.
We specify a two-stage least-squares (2SLS) framework for measuring rate and maturity
elasticities and estimate the equation separately at both the extensive and intensive margin.
Our second stage demand equation is given by
r

m

yiglt = ⌘ log ri + ⌘ log Ti +

X
d2D

⇣

⌘
^
1(il 2 Dd ) f (F ICOid ; ✓l ) + 'dl + ↵gt + "iglt

(14)

where yiglt is either the log loan size of loan i originated by lender l in commuting zone g at
quarter t (intensive-margin elasticity) or a dummy variable equal to one if the approved appli21

Note that our hypothesis is that consumers have preferences over the total cost of a loan and payment
size, not over rate and term per se. Still, we estimate elasticities with respect to rate and maturity since the
total cost of the loan and its payment size each depend on the endogenous choice of loan size.

25

cant i accepted an approved loan oﬀer (extensive-margin elasticity). The relevant elasticities
are given by ⌘ r and ⌘ m , corresponding to the log of the interest rate r and log loan maturity T , respectively. As in the first stage, the terms 'dl and ↵gt are discontinuity-by-lender
fixed eﬀects and commuting zone-by-quarter fixed eﬀects, respectively. The normalized and
discontinuity-specific running variable F^
ICOid enters quadratically through f (· ; ·) as defined
in (13) above to approximate the nonlinear ways through which auto-loan demand may vary
with credit scores around each discontinuity. Note, however, that in this specification, we
allow for the RD function to vary by lender, parameterizing f (·; ·) with lender-specific ✓l .
The demand specification in (14) has two right-hand-side endogenous variables that need
instrumenting for identification. The first-stage equations are log-linear versions of equations
(11) and (12) with one important distinction.
log riglt =

X
d2D

log Tiglt =

X
d2D

1(il 2 Dd )
1(il 2 Dd )

⇣
⇣

r
^
l 1(F ICO id

0) + f (F^
ICOid ; ⇡lr ) +

T
^
l 1(F ICO id

0) + f (F^
ICOid ; ⇡lT ) +

r
dl

⌘

T
dl

r
r
+ ⇠gt
+ viglt

⌘

T
T
+ ⇠gt
+ viglt

(15)
(16)

For our 2SLS estimation, the excluded instruments are a set of lender-specific indicators
interacted with the discontinuity indicator 1(F^
ICOid
eﬃcients

l

0), denoted as RD first-stage co-

varying by lender l. The 2SLS relevance condition will be satisfied so long as

rate and maturity discontinuities are jointly significant at the lender level conditional on the
other controls in the first stage, equivalent to not all lenders having the same discontinuity
magnitudes for rate and term. The standard partial F -statistic corresponding to the null
hypothesis that the coeﬃcients on the instrument set are jointly zero tests this identification
requirement.
The exclusion restriction is met under the assumption that diﬀerences in the magnitudes
of discontinuities across institutions are driven by institutional features that are exogenous
to other factors aﬀecting auto-loan demand (supply factors excluded from the demand equation). Given the results of section 4.3 that demonstrate a lack of sorting around the dis-

26

continuities on any observable dimension, it is plausible that the size of rate and maturity
discontinuities is also unrelated to unobserved demand factors. If borrowers lack the information and ability to successfully target the right side of a lender’s FICO discontinuity, it
is unlikely that they would be able to target lenders that have large or small discontinuities.
Furthermore, commuting-zone-by-quarter fixed eﬀects ⇠gt rule out selection into large or
small discontinuity sizes on characteristics that move slowly across space (income, financial
sophistication) or vary across time (aggregate economic conditions). Discontinuity-by-lender
fixed eﬀects

dl

account for borrower-segment-specific selection into lenders—for example, if

borrowers with credit scores around 600 diﬀer on unobservables across lenders.
To illustrate the intuition behind this identifying assumption, consider a stylized example
with two institutions and no other controls. Lender A features a discrete 100 basis-point
interest-rate reduction and a 12-month increase in maturity oﬀered at a FICO threshold of
600. Lender-A borrowers with a FICO score of 601 on average originate loans of $21,000,
whereas 599 FICO borrowers take out $20,000 loans on average. Lender B features a discontinuity also at FICO 600 but oﬀers a 75 basis point interest rate reduction and six-month longer
maturity at the threshold, leading 601 FICO borrowers at Lender B to borrow $800 more
than 599 borrowers. In this just-identified case with quasi-random assignment of discontinuity magnitudes, our demand estimation problem reduces to solving a system of two equations
with two unknowns. The first equation, using data from Lender A, specifies changes in loan
amounts as the dependent variable as a function of the 100 basis point rate discontinuity and
the 12-month maturity discontinuity. The second equation is specified similarly using the
data from Lender B. Quasi-random assignment of discontinuity magnitudes will hold insofar
as any systematic diﬀerences between borrowers at Lenders A and B are unrelated to the
fact that Lender A had discontinuities of 100 basis points and 12-months and Lender B has
discontinuities of 75 basis points and six months. As in this example, our identification strategy relies on variation in the magnitude of rate and maturity discontinuities across lenders
combined with this variation being unrelated to borrower demand shocks across lenders.
27

Extensive-margin results
Column 1 of Table 5 reports extensive-margin results from estimating equation (14) by
2SLS with first stages as specified in equations (15) and (16). Here, the dependent variable
is an indicator for whether an approved loan application was taken up by the borrower.
Our statistical power is limited relative to the intensive-margin estimates below because we
necessarily rely on the application data for this margin, which are only available for a fraction
of institutions in our data (see panel A of Table 2 for summary statistics on the application
data in the estimation sample).
Our key finding is that we estimate borrowers to be much more sensitive to proportionally equally sized changes in maturity than to changes in interest rates. We estimate an
extensive-margin demand elasticity with respect to interest rates of -0.10, slightly lower than
the extensive-margin elasticity of -0.3 to advertised interest rates estimated by Karlan and
Zinman (2008). We estimate a demand elasticity with respect to loan maturity of 0.83,
substantially larger than our estimated interest rate elasticity. Facing a ten-percent decrease
in interest rate increases the likelihood that a prospective borrower accepts a loan oﬀer by
one percentage point. By contrast, a ten-percent increase in oﬀered loan length increases
borrower take-up by 8.30 percentage points. A formal test rejects that the two elasticities
are equal to each other in magnitude. Column 2 substitutes zip-code ⇥ quarter fixed eﬀects.
While the interest-rate elasticity remains basically unchanged, accounting for shocks to demand at the zip-code by quarter level increases the estimated maturity elasticity such that
the maturity elasticity in column 2 is 22 times larger than the rate elasticity.
Intensive-margin results
In column 3 of Table 5, we report elasticities of loan size conditional on origination (the
intensive margin) with respect to contract terms using our substantially larger origination
sample (see panel B of Table 2 for summary statistics on the origination sample used in
estimation). Here, we estimate a demand elasticity with respect to rate of -0.18 and a
28

maturity elasticity of 0.66. Adding zip code ⇥ quarter fixed eﬀects in column 4 again
increases the estimated elasticity with respect to maturity. Both the rate and maturity
elasticities are estimated precisely with statistically significantly diﬀerent magnitudes from
one another and maturity sensitivities exceeding rate sensitivities by a factor of five in column
4.22
To illustrate the magnitude of these results, consider a $20,000 loan with a five-year
maturity and 5% interest rate. The results of Table 5, column 4 imply that a ten-percent
increase in oﬀered loan maturity (from 60 to 66 months) would result in a 8.5% increase in
the equilibrium loan amount, from $20,000 to $21,708. In comparison, a ten-percent decrease
in oﬀered loan rates, from 5% to 4.5%, would result in an increased loan amount of only
1.7%, from $20,000 to roughly $20,338.
Borrowers are more likely to originate a loan (and take out larger loans conditional on
doing so) when they are oﬀered a 10% increase in loan maturity than a 10% decrease in
interest rates. These results are consistent with both the liquidity constraints and monthly
budgeting model in section 2. What accounts for this diﬀerential sensitivity to contract
terms? As we show below, such behavior is consistent with consumers focusing on monthly
payment amounts rather than lifetime loan costs when making debt decisions.

5

Interpretation

Theoretical predictions regarding the relative magnitude of rate and maturity elasticities
depend on the extent of credit constraints in the given model, as discussed in section 2
above. To summarize, when household discount rates are lower than interest rates, borrowers
who are unconstrained in their ability to borrow across periods would optimally choose
among interest rate and maturity pairs to minimize the total present value of debt-service

22

Appendix Table A3 reports extensive and intensive margin elasticity estimates controlling for thirdorder polynomials in the running variable as well robustness to a 5-point FICO bandwidth. Results are
quantitatively similar to those reported in Table 5.

29

payments.23 However, given the relative importance of maturity in determining monthly
payments, a preference for long maturities could arise from plausible real-world frictions that
constrain monthly debt service. Borrowing constraints as in Zeldes (1989) create a wedge
in the household’s intertemporal Euler equation and, in the extreme scenario of no creditmarket access, essentially reduce the intertemporal budget constraint based on total lifetime
wealth to a per-period budget constraint where monthly payment levels are paramount.
Similarly, in a buﬀer-stock model of saving and consumption decisions (e.g., Carroll, 1997),
households may choose to attend to monthly payment levels in order to maintain a constant
wealth-to-income ratio. Other borrowing frictions such as incomplete credit markets, credit
rationing, credit limits, and late fees could lead consumers to rationally focus on monthly
payments.
Behaviorally, several forms of bounded rationality could also explain borrower emphasis
on monthly payments and thus high maturity elasticities. Failure to appreciate the power
of compound interest, termed exponential-growth bias by Stango and Zinman (2009), could
lead borrowers to ignore the negative consequences of long-maturity loans on the total cost
of the loan. Other behavioral frictions such as hyperbolic discounting (Laibson, 1997),
cognitive costs of optimization (Soll et. al., 2013), or general financial illiteracy (Gathergood,
2012) could drive households to adopt a monthly budget as a heuristic to ensure per-period
consumption is aﬀordable, committable, and sustainable, which in turn would lead to excess
sensitivity to loan maturity.
While credit constraints and behavioral frictions are not mutually exclusive, in this section, we discuss additional evidence that provides unique support for the presence of each
channel.

23

In a frictionless world, taste for maturity depends on the relative magnitude of a given contract’s interest
rate and the household’s discount rate. If borrowers discount the future at a higher rate than the loan’s
interest rate, they would prefer long-maturity loans. Of course, wealthy car buyers who discount future
(utility-weighted) cash flows less than borrowing interest rates would prefer to pay cash rather than finance
a purchase with a loan. Cash buyers are uncommon in the U.S. (Brevoort et al., 2017).

30

Monthly Payment Smoothing
As discussed in section 2, borrowers adhering to a monthly budget or facing binding credit
constraints are likely to make borrowing decisions with monthly payments as a primary
consideration. Whether borrowers are constrained by a debt limit constraint as in equation
(3) or a mental budget as in (10), consumers facing an exogenous improvement in credit terms
will increase their debt to the point where debt payment is unchanged. Note, however,
that only a mental-accounting constraint can rationalize monthly payment smoothing by
borrowers unlikely to be facing credit constraints. In a model with only credit constraints as
in Attanasio et al. (2008), unconstrained borrowers would increase their monthly payments
when oﬀered cheaper credit, consistent with their intensive-margin demand elasticities.
Using the monthly payment of each loan in our sample, we estimate diﬀerences in monthly
payments around FICO discontinuities by estimating the specification in equations (11) and
(12) with monthly payments as the single dependent variable. Column 1 of Table 6 shows
that borrowers on the right side of a credit-supply discontinuity originate loan amounts with
monthly payment sizes that are statistically indistinguishable from the monthly payment
amounts of borrowers just to the left of discontinuities (coeﬃcient of $2.48 with a standard
error of $1.89). With zip-by-quarter fixed eﬀects in panel B instead of the commutingzone-by-quarter fixed eﬀects in panel A, the point estimate is $2.20 with a standard error
of $2.17.24 We contrast these results with the prediction of our intensive-margin demand
elasticity estimates in Table 5, which indicate average loan sizes and monthly payments
should increase by $1,010 and $5.38 across the average discontinuity, respectively. Borrowers
oﬀered lower rates and longer maturities do increase their loan size in response to more
favorable loan oﬀers, but only to the point where their monthly payments are the same as
they would have been but for the cost-of-credit shock. These estimates also imply that if
borrowers faced constrained consumption in multiple categories, they could choose to respond
24

Appendix Table A4 reports monthly payment estimates controlling for third-order polynomials in the
running variable as well robustness to a 5-point FICO bandwidth, respectively. Results are quantitatively
similar to those reported in Table 6.

31

to better credit terms by leaving loan sizes unchanged and using any newfound monthly debtservice capacity ($13/month for the average loan) to increase spending in other consumption
categories. That borrowers do not decrease their monthly payments suggests further that
any operant credit constraints are likely underwriting driven and not self-imposed monthly
cash-flow constraints.
Heterogeneity by Liquidity Constraints
To distinguish likely constrained borrowers from those less likely to be constrained, we stratify
our sample based on FICO scores at the time of loan application. Though an imperfect proxy,
FICO scores are explicitly designed to correlate with ability to service debt. Borrowers with
low FICO scores (FICO < 650) are more likely to have a tougher time obtaining new credit
and may have low FICO scores precisely because of tighter liquidity constraints relative
to high FICO borrowers. We group the remaining borrowers into 650 < FICO < 700 and
FICO > 700 categories.25 Columns 2–4 of Table 6 report RD coeﬃcients for borrowers within
each of the three FICO buckets. Treated borrowers in the lowest FICO bucket demonstrate
statistically identical monthly payment amounts relative to untreated counterfactual lowFICO borrowers. When exogenously oﬀered lower rates and longer maturities, borrowers
with the lowest expected access to credit markets increase their loan amounts and ultimately
the amount they spend on a car, but only up to an amount that keeps their monthly payment
constant relative to similar borrowers not treated with easier credit. While column 2 is
consistent with a pure liquidity constraints story, the results in columns 3 and 4 are not,
indicating that even borrowers unlikely to be credit constrained smooth monthly payments.
These results are consistent with a heuristic approach to budgeting where borrowers have a
monthly payment in mind when making a loan decision.
To further test whether liquidity constraints can explain unconstrained borrowers target25

Our results are reasonably robust to the exact FICO grouping, although we do face a tradeoﬀ between
having a low enough FICO score to capture constraints and having suﬃcient sample size to reject meaningfully sized monthly payment changes. Appendix Tables A5 and A6 report summary statistics for the
application and origination samples, respectively, for each of the FICO subgroups.

32

ing monthly payments, we reestimate rate and maturity elasticities by FICO group in Table
7. The first observation is that all borrowers—not just the constrained—exhibit significantly
greater sensitivity to maturity than interest rate. In fact, panel B shows that unconstrained
borrowers (columns 5 and 6) increase their loan size the most in response to being oﬀered
longer maturity while having the weakest response to interest-rate changes. Such a pattern
across FICO groups is inconsistent with an optimization framework that attributes monthly
payment targeting to liquidity constraints but consistent with the idea that high FICO borrowers may be the most likely to adhere to a monthly budget. At the extensive margin (panel
A), the least-constrained borrowers show the greatest sensitivity to both interest rates and
maturity. This could be explained, for example, with high-FICO borrowers being more aware
of prevailing market rates and disciplined about not accepting a dominated oﬀer. We lose
power when employing more aggressive fixed eﬀects (zip-code⇥quarter) in the application
data in such tightly defined FICO subgroups, and the extensive-margin elasticity estimates
in columns 2, 4, and 6 of panel A become more noisy.
In sum, in contrast to interpretations of high maturity elasticities and monthly payment emphasis that attribute such preferences entirely to liquidity constraints, we find that
large maturity elasticities and monthly payment smoothing behavior are prevalent across
the spectrum of borrowers.
Monthly Payment Bunching
Why might borrowers target specific monthly payment amounts if not for liquidity constraints? Basic budgeting heuristics, motivated by cognitive costs or commitment problems,
could prompt loan decisions to be made based on a targeted monthly payment amount.
In this section, we explore the possibility that borrowers adhere to rough budget categoryspecific expenditure limits when making loan decisions.
Figure 3 plots the distribution of monthly payment amounts in our sample of originated
loans. Panel A is centered around monthly payments of $200. The estimated probability
33

density features a large and discontinuous break in the number of borrowers with monthly
payments in the $198-199 range compared to borrowers with monthly payments at $200 or
$201. Panels B and C repeat this exercise for monthly payments around $300 and $400,
respectively, again showing significant bunching just below the round-number threshold.
We more formally test the significance of the bunching in the figures using McCrary tests.
Such bunching is consistent with a model where households attempt to approximate lifetime
budget optimization with rough round-number category-specific monthly budget limits as in
Ranyard et al. (2006). The high cognitive accessibility of round numbers likely influences
how car dealers and lenders interact with consumers during the purchasing and borrowing
decision, similar to Schindler and Kirby (1997) who show that a fixation on 9 as the rightmost
digit in sales prices influence how retailers advertise.26
Bunching at round-number payment levels does not rule out the possibility that liquidity constraints are also an important feature of borrower decisions. However, it is hard to
rationalize bunching at multiples of $100 with liquidity constraints as the only explanation.
As discussed in section 2, whether liquidity constraints are slack or bind, heterogeneity in
household income, balance sheets, loan characteristics, and collateral values would lead to
continuously distributed monthly payments without a round-number categorical budgeting
constraint as in (10). Consistent with this reasoning, we do not see evidence of consumer
bunching at DTI or LTV thresholds (Appendix Figure A3), suggesting that underwriting
constraints cannot explain mass points in the payment distribution. To test further whether
liquidity constraints can empirically explain our observed bunching behavior, we again split
our sample into three borrower groups based on credit scores. We test whether bunching exists at salient anchor points of even hundred dollar monthly payment amounts by normalizing
payment amounts relative to the nearest hundred. Payment amounts of $200, $300, through
$700 are included in the normalization. Figure 4 plots McCrary tests (point estimates and
26

See also survey evidence in marketing that borrowers focus on the first digit of monthly payment amounts
(Wonder et al., 2008) and observational evidence in economics (Lacetera et al., 2012) that car buyers focus
on the leftmost odometer digits as a cognitive shortcut.

34

confidence intervals) of significant diﬀerences in bunching at $100 thresholds. The McCrary
tests indicate that borrowers in all three FICO sub-samples exhibit significant bunching at
salient payment amounts, with the density of monthly payments dropping approximately
16% for payments just above a $100 multiple.
The prevalence of bunching across the spectrum of borrower constraints supports an
independent role for budgeting heuristics in monthly payment targeting. Such heuristics are
also likely to explain estimated high maturity elasticities even for unconstrained borrowers
given that flexibility in loan maturities allows borrowers to adjust monthly payments to target
a specific amount. We plot evidence that maturity is the lever used by many borrowers to
target a specific payment level in Figure 5. The first plot in panel A tests for monthly
payment bunching in the sample of borrowers originating loans with standard maturity
lengths, i.e., maturities of three, four, five, six, or seven years. The McCrary test indicates
that the density of monthly payments falls by 11% across the $100 threshold. The second plot
in panel B tests for bunching in a set of contracts with non-standard maturity lengths, i.e.
49-59 months, 61-71 months, 73-83 months, 85-95 months. The non-standard maturity loans
feature substantially more pronounced bunching at even hundred-dollar payment amounts,
with a McCrary statistic detecting roughly double the amount of excess mass relative to panel
A, providing additional evidence that maturity is a contractual feature used by consumers
to obtain a desired payment size.

6

Conclusion

In this paper, we document and interpret several empirical facts about consumer installment
debt. First, using a novel auto-loan data set combined with an RD research design, we
estimate that demand for installment debt is more sensitive to loan maturity than to interest
rates. This result is not consistent with a standard frictionless model of household finance,
under which loan amounts would be more responsive to equally sized (proportional) changes

35

in rates than maturities.
Nevertheless, a reasonable set of frictions could explain high maturity elasticities, including liquidity constraints and behavioral optimization frictions. Consistent with these possible explanations, we show in a quasi-experimental setting that borrowers smooth monthly
payments across contract oﬀers, even when exogenously oﬀered more favorable loan terms.
These patterns persist across borrower types. Likely-to-be-constrained and unconstrained
borrowers alike borrow larger amounts when oﬀered better terms but only up to amounts
that result in monthly payments that are the same as untreated, counterfactual borrowers.
While monthly payment smoothing could be explained by credit constraints alone, we
provide evidence that borrowers make debt decisions using aﬀordability rules of thumb.
Borrowers disproportionately choose loan amounts and terms that result in monthly payment
amounts just below $100 multiples. Because it is unlikely that liquidity constraints bind
exactly at these salient round numbers, this behavior is consistent with many households
adhering to a monthly budget that specifies category-level expenditure limits. Notably,
monthly payment bunching is present across sub-samples of borrowers with varying degrees
of likely credit constraints such that targeting a specific monthly payment is not driven
entirely by binding liquidity constraints. Finally, we show that maturity is the mechanism
used to obtain a given salient payment amount. Borrowers with loan contracts of nonstandard length (e.g., 62 or 73 months) are more likely to originate loans just below salient
payment sizes than borrowers with standard maturities (e.g., 60 or 72 months).
To illustrate the relative importance of the maturity and interest-rate channels in the
transmission of credit supply shocks to aggregate lending, we apply our elasticity estimates
to aggregate data on auto loan activity. According to Equifax, between Q1:2009 and Q3:2018,
aggregate outstanding auto debt increased 66% from $766 billion to $1.27 trillion. Figure 6
plots Federal Reserve data showing that over the same period, the spread between 60-month
auto-loan rates and five-year Treasuries declined 57% from 5.09% to 2.19% while the average

36

maturity on used-car loans increased 13% from 54.8 to 61.9 months.27 While separating
the equilibrium increase in maturity into supply and demand shocks is beyond the scope of
this paper, our elasticity estimates are useful in understanding how supply-side increases in
maturity and interest rates could impact aggregate auto debt.
For calibration purposes, assume that half of the observed increase in equilibrium maturity (6.5% of the observed 13%) was the result of increases in the supply of maturity.28 Our
maturity elasticity estimates suggest that such a supply shift would be responsible for $76B
of the $504B increase in outstanding auto debt between Q1:2009 and Q3:2018.29 Again, if
half of the decline in interest rates resulted from an outward shift in the supply of credit,
our elasticity estimates predict a $62B increase in auto debt.30 Using elasticities conditional
on zip ⇥ quarter fixed eﬀects (columns 2 and 4 of Table 5), we estimate aggregate lending
eﬀects of $125B and $53B due to demand for maturity and interest rates, respectively. While
we caveat that we are unable to identify the changes in equilibrium maturity and rates attributable to changes in credit supply, the broader point is that even though rates declined
4.4 times more than maturities increased, credit supply likely impacted total auto debt more
through maturity than rates.
What are the implications of these findings for theory and practice? Positively, models
of household behavior could consider how policy changes move monthly payment amounts,
rather than exclusively evaluating how consumer demand is aﬀected through a pure interestrate channel. Normatively, both lending regulations and monetary policy could incorporate
27

We consider spreads because changes in risk-free rates likely aﬀect household discount rates, something
we account for with time fixed eﬀects in our log-linear demand estimation in (14).
28
While this assumption is without loss of generality for our purposes here, given that auto-loan rate
spreads declined while maturity and volumes increased over this time period (Figure 6), it is plausible that
at least half of the observed increase in maturity was the result of shifts in the aggregate supply of maturity.
In a supply-and-demand framework, if quantity is increasing but prices are falling, then at a minimum supply
accounts for the majority of the net eﬀects of supply and demand shocks.
29
From an ↵ percentage change in maturity, outstanding debt would increase by a factor of (1 +
T
T
↵⌘extensive )(1 + ↵⌘intensive
) = 1.099 for ↵ = 6.5%, where ⌘eT and ⌘iT are the extensive- and intensivemargin elasticity estimates from Table 5 (columns 1 and 3, respectively). The change in outstanding debt
associated with the demand-for-maturity channel is (1.099 1) ⇥ $766B = $76B.
30
Following the same calculation as above, if half of the 57% decline in rate spreads was from credit supply,
then ↵ = 28.5% and our estimates would predict that debt would rise by a factor of (1+↵⌘er )(1+↵⌘ir ) = 1.082
using the extensive- and intensive-margin rate elasticities in Table 5, columns 1 and 3.

37

consumer focus on the level of payments per se, similar to the conclusions of the mortgage
modification literature cited above. The eﬀectiveness of policies aimed at aﬀecting aggregate demand through credit accessibility and aﬀordability will be modulated by consumers’
obedience to self-imposed monthly payment concerns as opposed to binding external credit
constraints. Ignoring loan features besides payment levels could also make consumers susceptible to shrouded marketing that pushes costlier and larger loans than intended. The
resulting longer maturities may increase the negative-equity share of outstanding loans as
longer loans may amortize more slowly than purchased vehicles depreciate (particularly distressing for borrowers whose cars represent a substantial share of their net worth). While
monthly payment targeting may valuably address commitment problems, it has the potential to attenuate macroeconomic policy, aﬀect household balance sheets, and drive aggregate
indebtedness.

38

References
Adelino, M., A. Schoar, and F. Severino (2014). “Credit supply and house prices: evidence
from mortgage market segmentation.” NBER Working Paper # 17832.
Agarwal, S., S. Chomsisengphet, N. Mahoney, and J. Stroebel (2017). “Do Banks Pass
Through Credit Expansions to Consumers Who Want to Borrow?” Quarterly Journal
of Economics Forthcoming.
Alan, S., M. Cemalcilar, D. Karlan, and J. Zinman (2018). “Unshrouding: Evidence from
Bank Overdrafts in Turkey.” The Journal of Finance 73.2, pp. 481–522.
Argyle, B., T. Nadauld, and C. Palmer (2017). “Real Eﬀects of Search Frictions in Consumer
Credit Markets.” MIT Sloan Working Paper # 5242-17.
Attanasio, O. P., P. Koujianou Goldberg, and E. Kyriazidou (2008). “Credit constraints in
the market for consumer durables: Evidence from micro data on car loans.” International
Economic Review 49.2, pp. 401–436.
Bachas, N. (2018). “The Impact of Risk-Based Pricing and Refinancing on the Student Loan
Market.” SIEPR Working Paper.
Basu, K. (2006). “Consumer Cognition and Pricing in the Nines in Oligopolistic Markets.”
Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 15.1, pp. 125–141.
Bertrand, M. and A. Morse (2011). “Information Disclosure, Cognitive Biases, and Payday
Borrowing.” Journal of Finance 66.6, pp. 1865–1893.
Best, M. C. and H. J. Kleven (2017). “Housing Market Responses to Transaction Taxes:
Evidence From Notches and Stimulus in the U.K.” The Review of Economic Studies.
Brevoort, K. P., J. Clarkberg, M. Kambara, and R. Kelly (2017). Growth in Longer-Term
Auto Loans. Tech. rep. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.
Calonico, S., M. D. Cattaneo, and R. Titiunik (2014). “Robust Nonparametric Confidence
Intervals for Regression-Discontinuity Designs.” Econometrica 82.6, pp. 2295–2326.
Campbell, J. Y. (2006). “Household finance.” The Journal of Finance 61.4, pp. 1553–1604.
Carroll, C. D. (1997). “Buﬀer-Stock Saving and the Life Cycle/Permanent Income Hypothesis.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 112.1, pp. 1–55.
DeFusco, A. A. and A. Paciorek (2017). “The Interest Rate Elasticity of Mortgage Demand:
Evidence from Bunching at the Conforming Loan Limit.” American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy 9.1, pp. 210–40.
Di Maggio, M., A. Kermani, and C. Palmer (2017). “How quantitative easing works: Evidence
on the refinancing channel.” NBER Working Paper # 22638.

39

Eberly, J. and A. Krishnamurthy (2014). “Eﬃcient credit policies in a housing debt crisis.”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2014.2, pp. 73–136.
Experian Automotive (2016). “State of the Automotive Finance Market: A look at loans and
leases in Q2 2016.”
Flannery, M. J. (1986). “Asymmetric information and risky debt maturity choice.” The Journal of Finance 41.1, pp. 19–37.
Fulford, S. L. (2015). “How important is variability in consumer credit limits?” Journal of
Monetary Economics 72.Supplement C, pp. 42–63.
Fuster, A. and P. S. Willen (2017). “Payment size, negative equity, and mortgage default.”
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 9.4, pp. 167–191.
Gabaix, X. and D. Liabson (2006). “Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia, and Information Suppression in Competitive Markets.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121.2,
pp. 505–540.
Ganong, P. and P. Noel (2018). “Liquidity vs. Wealth in Household Debt Obligations: Evidence from Housing Policy in the Great Recession.” NBER Working Paper # 24964.
Gathergood, J. (2012). “Self-control, financial literacy and consumer over-indebtedness.”
Journal of Economic Psychology 33.3, pp. 590–602.
Gathergood, J., N. Mahoney, N. Stewart, and J. Weber (2019). “How Do Individuals Repay Their Debt? The Balance-Matching Heuristic.” American Economic Review 109.3,
pp. 844–75.
Greenwald, D. L. (2018). “The Mortgage Credit Channel of Macroeconomic Transmission.”
MIT Sloan Research Paper No. 5184-16.
Gross, D. B. and N. S. Souleles (2002). “Do Liquidity Constraints and Interest Rates Matter
for Consumer Behavior? Evidence from Credit Card Data.” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 117.1, pp. 149–185.
Gurun, U., G. Matvos, and A. Seru (2016). “Advertising Expensive Mortgages.” The Journal
of Finance 71.5, pp. 2371–2416.
Hastings, J. S. and J. M. Shapiro (2013). “Fungibility and Consumer Choice: Evidence from
Commodity Price Shocks.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128.4, pp. 1449–1498.
— (2017). “How Are SNAP Benefits Spent? Evidence from a Retail Panel.” NBER Working
Paper # 23112.
Hertzberg, A., A. Liberman, and D. Paravisini (2017). “Adverse Selection on Maturity: Evidence from Online Consumer Credit.” Working Paper.

40

Juster, F. T. and R. P. Shay (1964). Consumer Sensitivity to Finance Rates. National Bureau
of Economic Research, Inc.
Karlan, D. and J. Zinman (2008). “Credit Elasticities in Less Developed Economies: Implications for Microfinance.” American Economic Review 98.3, pp. 1040–1068.
— (forthcoming). “Long-Run Price Elasticities of Demand for Microcredit: Evidence from a
Countrywide Field Experiment in Mexico.” Review of Economic Studies.
Keys, B. J., T. Mukherjee, A. Seru, and V. Vig (2010). “Did Securitization Lead to Lax
Screening? Evidence from Subprime Loans.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 125.1,
pp. 307–362.
Keys, B. J. and J. Wang (forthcoming). “Minimum Payments and Debt Paydown in Consumer Credit Cards.” Journal of Financial Economics.
Kuchler, T. and M. Pagel (2018). “Sticking to Your Plan: The Role of Present Bias for Credit
Card Paydown.” NBER Working Paper # 24881.
Kuvikova, G. (2015). “Does Loan Maturity Matter in Risk-Based Pricing? Evidence from
Consumer Loan Data.” CERGE-EI Working Paper 538.
Lacetera, N., D. G. Pope, and J. R. Sydnor (2012). “Heuristic Thinking and Limited Attention in the Car Market.” American Economic Review 102.5, pp. 2206–2236.
Laibson, D. (1997). “Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting.” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 112.2, pp. 443–478.
McCrary, J. (2008). “Manipulation of the running variable in the regression discontinuity
design: A density test.” Journal of Econometrics 142.2, pp. 698–714.
Navarro-Martinez, D., L. C. Salisbury, K. N. Lemon, N. Steward, W. J. Matthews, and A. J.
Harris (2011). “Minimum Required Payment and Supplemental Information Disclosure
Eﬀects on Consumer Debt Repayment Decisions.” Journal of Marketing Research 48,
S60–S77.
OCC (2015). Semiannual Risk Perspective From the National Risk Committee. Tech. rep.
Oﬃce of the Comptroller of the Currency.
Pope, D. and U. Simonsohn (2011). “Round Numbers as Goals.” Psychological Science 22.1,
pp. 71–79.
Prelec, D. and G. Loewenstein (1998). “The red and the black: Mental accounting of savings
and debt.” Marketing Science 17.1, pp. 4–28.
Ranyard, R., L. Hinkley, J. Williamson, and S. McHugh (2006). “The role of mental accounting in consumer credit decision processes.” Journal of Economic Psychology 27.4,
pp. 571–588.

41

Schindler, R. and P. Kirby (1997). “Patterns of Rightmost Digits Used in Advertised Prices:
Implications for Nine-Ending Eﬀects.” Journal of Consumer Research 24.2, pp. 192–201.
Shu, S. B. (2013). “NPV Neglect in Consumer Behavior for Multi-period Borrowing Decisions.” UCLA Working Paper.
Soll, J. B., R. L. Keeney, and R. P. Larrick (2013). “Consumer Misunderstanding of Credit
Card Use, Payments, and Debt: Causes and Solutions.” Journal of Public Policy & Marketing 32.1, pp. 66–81.
Stango, V. and J. Zinman (2009). “Exponential growth bias and household finance.” The
Journal of Finance 64.6, pp. 2807–2849.
— (2011). “Fuzzy Math, Disclosure Regulation, and Market Outcomes: Evidence from Truthin-Lending Reform.” The Review of Financial Studies 24.2, pp. 506–534.
— (2014). “Borrowing High vs. Borrowing Higher: Price Dispersion, Shopping Behavior,
and Debt Allocation in the U.S. Credit Card Market.” Review of Financial Studies 29.4,
pp. 979–1006.
Suits, D. B. (1958). “The demand for new automobiles in the United States 1929-1956.” The
Review of Economics and Statistics, pp. 273–280.
Thaler, R. H. (1985). “Mental accounting and consumer choice.” Marketing science 4.3,
pp. 199–214.
— (1990). “Anomalies Saving, Fungibility, and Mental Accounts.” English. The Journal of
Economic Perspectives (1986-1998) 4.1, p. 193.
Thomas, M. and V. Morwitz (2005). “Penny wise and pound foolish: the left-digit eﬀect in
price cognition.” Journal of Consumer Research 32.1, pp. 54–64.
Wonder, N., W. Wilhelm, and D. Fewings (2008). “The Financial Rationality of Consumer
Loan Choices: Revealed Preferences Concerning Interest Rates, Down Payments, Contract Length, and Rebates.” The Journal of Consumer Aﬀairs 42.2, pp. 243–270.
Zeldes, S. P. (1989). “Consumption and liquidity constraints: an empirical investigation.”
Journal of Political Economy 97.2, pp. 305–346.
Zhang, C. Y. (2017). “Consumption Responses to Pay Frequency: Evidence from ‘Extra’
Paychecks.” Working Paper.

42

0

.02

FICO Bin Coefficient
.04 .06 .08 .1 .12

.14

.16

Figure 1: Example Estimated Lender Decision Rules
A. Example Estimated Pricing Rule for Individual Lender

500 520 540 560 580 600 620 640 660 680 700 720 740 760 780 800
FICO Score Bin

-10 -8

-6

FICO Bin Coefficient
-4 -2 0
2
4

6

8

B. Example Estimated Maturity Rule for Individual Lender

500 520 540 560 580 600 620 640 660 680 700 720 740 760 780 800
FICO Score Bin

Notes: Figures plot an estimated pricing rule for an anonymous credit union (panel A) and
an estimated maturity rule for a diﬀerent anonymous lender (panel B). Interest rates and
loan maturities, respectively, are regressed on 5-point FICO bin indicators. Coeﬃcients and
95% confidence intervals are plotted against FICO scores.

43

Figure 2: First-Stage Regressions of Interest Rates and Maturities on FICO Scores
A. Interest-Rate First Stage by Normalized FICO Score

B. Maturity First Stage by Normalized FICO Score

Notes: Figures plot average interest rates (panel A) and maturities (panel B) on the vertical
axis against borrower FICO scores normalized to each detected discontinuity for institutions
with pricing discontinuities.
44

Figure 3: Monthly Payment Distributions around Salient Cutoﬀs
A. Distribution of Monthly Payments around $200

B. Distribution of Monthly Payments around $300

C. Distribution of Monthly Payments around $400

Notes: Figures plot unconditional histograms of monthly payments in a $20 bandwidth
around $200, $300, and $400 in panels A, B, and C, respectively, along with estimated kernel
densities and 95% confidence intervals. McCrary statistics (and corresponding t-statistics in
brackets) are shown on individual panels.
45

Figure 4: Monthly Payment Bunching
A. FICO  650
B. 651  FICO  699

C. 700  FICO

D. All

Notes: Figures plot McCrary bunching tests of normalized monthly payments around hundred dollar increments from $200 to $700 by FICO score subgroup. McCrary statistics (and
corresponding t-statistics in brackets) are shown on each panel.

46

Figure 5: Monthly Payment Bunching for Typical and Atypical Maturities
A. Loans with Typical Maturities

B. Loans with Atypical Maturities

Notes: Figures plot McCrary bunching tests of normalized monthly payments around hundred dollar increments from $200 to $700 for typical maturities (36, 48, 60, 72, or 84 month
terms) and for those borrowers with atypical maturities in panels A and B, respectively. McCrary statistics (and corresponding t-statistics in brackets) are shown on individual panels.

47

Figure 6: Auto-Loan Interest Rate Spreads and Maturities

Notes: Figure plots average interest rate spreads and maturities for used auto loans in
the United States using Federal Reserve G.20 data. Rates spreads are calculated as the
diﬀerence between the quarterly average interest rate for a five-year loan on a used auto and
the constant-maturity yield on the five-year Treasury Note.

48

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Count
Loan Rate (%)
Loan Term (months)
Loan Amount ($)
FICO Score
Debt-to-Income (%)
Age (years)
Minority Indicator
Male Indicator
Approved
Take-up

Loan Rate (%)
Loan Term (months)
Loan Amount ($)
FICO Score
Debt-to-Income (%)
Collateral Value ($)
Monthly Payment ($)

1,131,240
1,119,153
1,320,109
898,339
833,854
763,331
1,344,407
1,333,514
1,320,109
588,231

Mean

Std. Dev.

25th

A. Loan Applications
0.05
0.05
0.02
67.3
24.4
60
21,927.3 11,660.7
13,296
647.9
118.2
605
0.26
0.30
0.13
39.3
136.0
30
0.50
0.50
0
0.60
0.49
0
0.45
0.50
0
0.65
0.48
0

2,434,049
0.05
2,434,049
62.7
2,434,049 18,136.5
2,165,173
710.6
1,276,585
0.25
2,434,049 19,895.1
2,434,049
324.4

B. Originated Loans
0.03
0.03
22.1
48
10,809
10,094
74.9
661
0.32
0.05
10,929.1 12,046.9
159.2
210.9

Percentile
50th

75th

0.04
72
20,000
661
0.27
40
1
1
0
1

0.06
72
28,932.1
720
0.39
52
1
1
1
1

0.04
0.06
60
72
16,034 23,892
714
770
0.26
0.37
17,850 25,562.3
297.0
405.6

Notes: Table reports summary statistics for loan applications and originated loans in panels
A and B, respectively. Loan Rate is the annual interest rate of the loan. Loan Term is
the maturity (in months) of the loan. FICO Score is the credit score used in underwriting
and pricing the loan. Debt-to-Income is the ratio of all debt service payments (excluding
the auto loan in question) to income. Collateral Value is the value of the car at origination.
Minority Indicator is a dummy for whether the lender reported for fair lending purposes that
the borrower was predicted to be in a minority group. Approved is an indicator for whether
the loan application was approved. Take-up is conditional on approval and indicates whether
an approved application was originated.

49

Table 2: Discontinuity Sample Summary Statistics
Count
Loan Rate (%)
Loan Term (months)
Loan Amount ($)
FICO Score
Debt-to-Income (%)
Age (years)
Minority Indicator
Male Indicator
Take-up

Loan Rate (%)
Loan Term (months)
Loan Amount ($)
FICO Score
Debt-to-Income (%)
Collateral Value ($)
Monthly Payment ($)

31,618
31,618
31,618
31,618
28,513
24,909
31,618
31,618
31,618

Mean

Std. Dev.

25th

Percentile
50th

75th

A. Approved Loan Applications
0.051
0.017
0.037
0.048
63.3
11.9
60
60
20,226.7
8,458.1
13,736.7 19,467.5
674.1
27.1
654
676
0.28
0.2
0.2
0.3
40.6
13.6
29
39
0.43
0.50
0
0
0.34
0.48
0
0
0.55
0.50
0
1

0.061
72
26,025.6
695
0.4
50
1
1
1

B. Originated Loans
0.03
0.037
20.1
48
8,823.7
10,000
40
638
0.16
0.10
8,521.3
11,500
135.5
210.7

0.075
72
20,679
691
0.38
21,566.1
374.8

533,798
0.06
533,798
61.4
533,798 16,242.2
533,798
663.5
248,895
0.24
533,798 17,435.8
533,798
305.9

0.053
60
14,739
666
0.27
15,800
284.4

Notes: Table reports summary statistics for approved loan applications and originated loans
for the discontinuity sample, in panels A and B, respectively. See notes to Table 1.

50

Table 3: First-Stage Regression Discontinuity Results for Interest Rates and Maturities
(1)
Loan Interest Rate
Discontinuity Coeﬃcient
RD Controls
Commuting Zone ⇥ Quarter FEs
Partial F -statistic
R-squared
Number of Observations

Discontinuity Coeﬃcient
RD Controls
Commuting Zone ⇥ Quarter FEs
Partial F -statistic
R-squared
Observations

(2)
Loan Maturity (months)

A. All Originated Loans
-0.013***
0.738***
(0.004)
(0.171)
X
X
X
X
424.19
49.19
0.22
0.13
533,798
533,798
B. Loans in Application Sample
-0.004***
0.332***
(0.000)
(0.120)
X
X
X
X
1,742.55
7.93
0.28
0.11
31,618
31,618

Notes: Table reports average regression-discontinuity estimates of equations (11) and (12)
corresponding to Figure 2 by normalizing FICO scores around each threshold. Panel A sample includes all loans in the origination sample. Panel B loans are restricted to only approved
loans in the application sample. RD controls include second-order polynomials of the running variable on either side of each discontinuity. All specifications include commuting zone
by quarter-of-origination fixed eﬀects. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered
by FICO score. *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.

51

Table 4: Loan Application Covariate Balance Regressions
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Debt-toAge
Minority
Male
Application Loan
Income
Race
Count
Amount
Discontinuity
-0.001
0.24
-0.02
0.005
1.30
339.8
Coeﬃcient
(0.008)
(0.47)
(0.02)
(0.014)
(1.74)
(353.3)
RD Controls
CZ ⇥ Quarter FEs
Dep. Var. Mean
R-squared
Observations

X
X
0.276
0.312
28,513

X
X
40.59
0.02
24,909

X
X
0.43
0.138
31,618

X
X
0.34
0.323
31,618

X
X
11.98
0.778
2,567

X
X
20,226.7
0.094
31,619

Notes: Table reports reduced-form RD results for the subset of institutions for which we
have detailed loan application data. See notes to Table 3 for more details. Each observation
in the data used for column 6 represents a normalized FICO score for a each discontinuity
⇥ commuting zone ⇥ quarter cell. RD controls include second-order polynomials of the
running variable on either side of each discontinuity. Robust standard errors in parentheses
are clustered by FICO score. *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.

52

log(interest rate)
log(maturity)

Table 5: Demand Elasticity Estimates
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A. Extensive-margin Elasticities B. Intensive-margin Elasticities
-0.10***
-0.07***
-0.18***
-0.17***
-(0.02)
(0.03)
(0.01)
(0.02)
0.83***
1.56***
0.66***
0.85***
(0.25)
(0.41)
(0.13)
(0.14)

RD Controls
X
X
X
X
CZ ⇥ Quarter FEs
X
X
Zip ⇥ Quarter FEs
X
X
Equality F -statistic
8.26
12.62
12.07
20.83
R-squared
0.08
0.19
0.41
0.62
Observations
31,618
31,618
533,798
533,798
Notes: Table reports 2SLS regressions of an indicator for whether an approved loan oﬀer
was accepted by the borrower (extensive-margin) and loan amounts (intensive-margin) on log
interest rate and log maturity. All regressions include commuting zone ⇥ quarter fixed eﬀects.
The instrument set is a series of lender indicator variables interacted with the discontinuity
indicator. RD controls include second order polynomials of the running variable on either
side of each discontinuity. F -statistics test the hypothesis that the magnitudes of the rate
and maturity elasticities are equal. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered by
FICO score. *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.

53

Table 6: Eﬀects of Lending Discontinuities on Monthly Payments
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Sample
All
FICO650
651FICO699 FICO 700
A. Commuting-zone ⇥ Quarter Fixed Eﬀects
Discontinuity
2.48
0.57
2.01
2.48
Coeﬃcient
(1.89)
(3.67)
(1.82)
(3.46)
CZ ⇥ Quarter FEs
X
X
X
X
R-squared
0.10
0.15
0.12
0.13
Observations
533,798
191,140
248,404
94,254
Discontinuity
Coeﬃcient
Zip ⇥ Quarter FEs
R-squared
Observations

2.21
(2.17)
X
0.38
533,798

B. Zip-code ⇥ Quarter Fixed Eﬀects
0.73
3.63
(3.96)
(2.80)
X
X
0.54
0.50
191,140
248,404

0.54
(5.30)
X
0.57
94,254

Notes: Table reports RD estimates of changes in monthly payment sizes at FICO thresholds.
All specifications include RD controls consisting of second order polynomials of the running
variable on either side of each discontinuity. The samples across columns 2-4 are loans for
applicants with FICO scores below 650, between 650-700, and above 700, respectively. The
first column is the entire sample. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered by
FICO score. *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.

54

Table 7: Demand Elasticity Estimates by FICO Subgroup
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Sample
FICO650
651FICO699
FICO
A. Extensive-margin Elasticities
log(interest rate)
-0.36*** -0.490*** -0.18*** -0.22*** -0.80**
(0.07)
(0.12)
(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.35)
log(maturity)
0.75***
-0.493
1.69***
0.67
2.12***
(0.25)
(0.49)
(0.61)
(0.62)
(0.60)
CZ ⇥ Quarter FEs
X
X
X
Zip ⇥ Quarter FEs
X
X
Equality F -statistic
2.15
0.01
6.14
0.51
5.05
R-squared
0.14
0.65
0.28
0.54
0.40
Observations
6,763
6,763
18,784
18,784
6,071

(6)
700
-1.14*
(0.65)
2.26***
(0.67)
X
1.44
0.51
6,071

B. Intensive-margin Elasticities
-0.21*** -0.10*** -0.12***
-0.09
-0.07
(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.03)
-0.06
(0.07)
log(maturity)
0.86***
0.59*** 0.85*** 1.27*** 1.30***
(0.14)
(0.14)
(0.15)
(0.19)
(0.20)
CZ ⇥ Quarter FEs
X
X
Zip ⇥ Month FEs
X
X
X
Equality F -statistic
9.92
16.99
13.12
23.69
30.55
30.06
R-squared
0.44
0.71
0.39
0.68
0.48
0.74
Observations
191,140
191,140
248,404 248,404 94,254 94,254
Notes: Table reports 2SLS regressions of acceptance of an oﬀered loan (extensive-margin)
and log loan size (intensive-margin) on log interest rate and log maturity. All regressions
include commuting zone ⇥ quarter fixed eﬀects. The instrument set is a series of lender
indicator variables interacted with the discontinuity indicator. Columns 1-2, 3-4, and 5-6
are originated loans for borrowers with FICO scores below 650, between 650-700, and above
700, respectively. RD controls include second order polynomials of the running variable on
either side of each discontinuity. F -statistics test the hypothesis that the magnitudes of the
rate and maturity elasticities are equal. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered
by FICO score. *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.
log(interest rate)

-0.22***
(0.02)
0.61***
(0.11)
X

55

A

Appendix
Figure A1: Distribution of FICO Discontinuities

Notes: Figure plots the histogram of identified discontinuities for the discontinuity sample
of the data.

56

Figure A2: Balance of Borrower Characteristics Across FICO Thresholds
A. Application Debt-to-Income Ratio (%)
B. Application Loan Amount ($)

C. Applicant Age (years)

D. Male Indicator

E. Minority Indicator

F. Number of Loan Applications

Notes: Figures plot average values of ex-ante borrower characteristics around FICO thresholds for institutions with detected discontinuities and 95% confidence intervals.

57

Figure A3: Distribution of Application Underwriting Ratios
A. Distribution of Application Debt-to-Income Ratios

0

.5

1

Density
1.5

2

2.5

B. Distribution of Application Loan-to-Value Ratios

0

.2

.4

.6

.8
1
Loan−to−Value

1.2

1.4

1.6

Notes: Figures plot kernel densities for application back-end debt-to-income ratios (panel A)
and application loan-to-value ratios (panel B) using Epanechnikov kernels with minimumMSE bandwidths of 0.0117 and 0.0234 in panels A and B, respectively.
58

Table A1: Mean Diﬀerences between Estimation Sample and Full Sample
(1)
(2)
Mean Diﬀerence Standard Error
A. Approved Discontinuity Applications vs. Full Application
Loan Rate (%)
0.001
(0.001)
Loan Term (months)
-3.91***
(0.02)
Loan Amount ($)
-1,700.6***
(0.53)
FICO Score
26.1***
(0.03)
Debt-to-Income (%)
0.016***
(0.002)
Age (years)
1.3***
(0.03)
Minority Indicator
-0.069***
(0.004)
Male Indicator
-0.25***
(0.004)
Take-up
0.10***
(0.004)
Approved (%)
0.35***
(0.001)
B. Discontinuity Origination vs. Full Origination
Loan Rate (%)
0.01***
(0.0003)
Loan Term (months)
-1.38***
(0.007)
Loan Amount ($)
-1,894.3***
(0.14)
FICO Score
-47.1***
(0.01)
Debt-to-Income (%)
-0.006***
(0.0009)
Collateral Value ($)
-2,459.3***
(0.14)
Monthly Payment ($)
-18.53***
(0.02)
Notes: Table reports diﬀerence of means (column 1) and their standard errors (column 2)
between the discontinuity samples used in estimation and the full sample. Negative numbers
indicate that the mean of a given variable was smaller in the discontinuity sample than the
full sample. Panel A includes all approved applications. Panel B includes all originated
loans. See notes to Tables 1 and 2 for further details. *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.

59

Table A2: Loan Origination Covariate Balance Regressions
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Loan
Debt-toMinority
Amount
Income
Age
Race
Male
Discontinuity
755.50*** -0.0009
-0.40
0.003
-0.002
Coeﬃcient
(259.8)
(0.001)
(0.45)
(0.006)
(0.005)
RD Controls
CZ ⇥ Quarter FEs
R-squared
Observations

X
X
0.11
533,798

X
X
0.13
248,895

X
X
0.02
323,998

X
X
0.19
501,118

X
X
0.04
492,219

Notes: Table reports reduced-form RD results for the sample of originated loans. RD controls
include second order polynomials of the running variable on either side of each discontinuity.
All regressions include commuting zone ⇥ quarter fixed eﬀects. Robust standard errors in
parentheses are clustered by FICO score. *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.

60

Table A3: Robustness of Demand Elasticity Estimates to Alternative RD Specifications
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A. Extensive-margin Elasticities B. Intensive-margin Elasticities
log(interest rate)
-0.10***
-0.12***
-0.18***
-0.18***
(0.02)
(0.03)
(0.00)
(0.01)
log(maturity)
0.81***
1.25***
0.66***
0.74***
(0.25)
(0.38)
(0.03)
(0.14)
RD Controls
Cubic
Quadratic
Cubic
Quadratic
RD Bandwidth
19
5
19
5
CZ ⇥ Quarter FEs
X
X
X
X
Observations
31,618
10,308
533,798
166,865
Notes: Table reports 2SLS regressions of acceptance of an oﬀered loan (extensive-margin)
and log loan size (intensive-margin) on log interest rate and log maturity. All regressions
include Commuting Zone ⇥ quarter fixed eﬀects. The instrument set is a series of lender
indicator variables interacted with the discontinuity indicator. RD controls include thirdorder polynomials of the running variable on either side of each discontinuity for columns 1
and 3 and second-order polynomials for columns 2 and 4. Bandwidths are 19 for columns
1 and 3; bandwidths are 5 for columns 2 and 4. Robust standard errors in parentheses are
clustered by FICO score. *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.

61

Table A4: Robustness of Monthly Payments Eﬀects to Alternative RD Specifications
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Sample
All
FICO650
651FICO699 FICO 700
A. 3rd Order Polynomial Control
Discontinuity
1.95
-3.15
2.63
2.15
Coeﬃcient
(3.01)
(4.63)
(3.43)
(4.02)
RD Controls
CZ ⇥ Quarter FEs
R-squared
Observations
Discontinuity
Coeﬃcient
RD Controls
CZ ⇥ Quarter FEs
R-squared
Observations

Yes
Yes
0.10
533,798
0.78
(4.22)
X
X
0.13
166,865

Yes
Yes
0.15
191,140

Yes
Yes
0.12
248,404

Yes
Yes
0.13
94,254

B. 5-point Bandwidth
-6.39
5.13
(7.87)
(4.59)

3.32
(5.69)

X
X
0.20
66,468

X
X
0.22
26,622

X
X
0.17
73,775

Notes: Table reports RD estimates of changes in monthly payment sizes at FICO thresholds.
In panel A, RD controls include third-order polynomials of the running variable on either
side of each discontinuity with a 19-point bandwidth. In panel B, the RD controls are secondorder polynomials with a bandwidth of 5 FICO points. All regressions include Commuting
Zone ⇥ quarter fixed eﬀects. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered by FICO
score. *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.

62

Table A5: Summary Statistics of Approved Loans by FICO Subgroup
Percentile
Count
Mean
Std. Dev.
25th
50th
75th
A. FICO650
Loan Rate (%)
6,763
0.067
0.014
0.057
0.070
0.078
Loan Term (months) 6,763
61.9
12
60
60
72
Loan Amount ($)
6,763 19,001.9
8,050
12,930.4 18,000 24,729
FICO Score
6,763
635.4
11.3
628
638
644
Debt-to-Income (%)
6,432
0.27
0.15
0.14
0.28
0.4
Age (years)
6,065
39.5
13.0
29
37
49
Minority Indicator
6,763
0.43
0.50
0
0
1
Male Indicator
6,763
0.24
0.43
0
0
0
Take-up
6,763
0.60
0.49
0
1
1
Approved
6,763
1
0
1
1
1
Loan Rate (%)
18,784
0.049
Loan Term (months) 18,784
63.3
Loan Amount ($)
18,784 20,380.3
FICO Score
18,784
676.2
Debt-to-Income (%) 16,737
0.3
Age (years)
15,097
40.8
Minority Indicator
18,784
0.4
Male Indicator
18,784
0.3
Take-up Indicator
18,784
0.5
Approved (%)
18,784
1

B. 651FICO699
0.014
0.040
12
60
8,520
13,861
13.9
665
0.2
0.2
13.6
30
0.5
0
0.5
0
0.5
0
0
1

0.047
60
19,740
677
0.3
39
0
0
1
1

0.057
72
26,324
688
0.4
50
1
1
1
1

C. FICO 700
Loan Rate (%)
6,071
0.036
0.009
0.030
0.035
0.040
Loan Term (months) 6,071
65.2
11.2
60
66
72
Loan Amount ($)
6,071 21,116.6
8,560.2
14,509 20,082.6 27,328
FICO Score
6,071
710.5
8.2
704
709
715
Debt-to-Income (%)
5,343
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.3
0.4
Age (years)
3,744
41.7
14.2
29
41
52
Minority Indicator
6,071
0.4
0.5
0
0
1
Male Indicator
6,071
0.6
0.5
0
1
1
Take-up Indicator
6,071
0.5
0.5
0
1
1
Approved (%)
6,071
1
0
1
1
1
Notes: Table reports summary statistics of the approved application discontinuity sample
by FICO subsample. See notes to Table 2 for further details.

63

Table A6: Summary Statistics of Originated Loans by FICO Subgroup
Percentile
Count
Mean
Std. Dev. 25th
50th
75th
A. FICO650
Loan Rate (%)
191,140
0.083
0.031
0.060
0.008
0.103
Loan Term (months) 191,140
61.8
23.1
48
60
72
Loan Amount ($)
191,140 15,044.5
8,063.1
9,270 13,780.5 19,120
FICO Score
191,140
620.7
24.1
607
626
640
Debt-to-Income (%)
92,278
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.3
0.4
Collateral Value ($)
191,140 16,192.8
7,792.4
10,750 14,775 19,925
Monthly Payment ($) 191,140
301.4
131.7
208.8
282.6
368.8
B. 651FICO699
Loan Rate (%)
248,404
0.051
0.021
0.035
Loan Term (months) 248,404
61.3
18.8
48
Loan Amount ($)
248,404 16,655.2
9,047.5
10,069
FICO Score
248,404
675.2
14.1
663
Debt-to-Income (%)
110,942
0.2
0.2
0.1
Collateral Value ($)
248,404 17,744.6
8,659.1
11,731
Monthly Payment ($) 248,404
306
136
209.9

0.047
60
15,000
676
0.3
16,090
283.7

0.060
72
21,282
687
0.4
21,979
375.6

C. FICO 700
Loan Rate (%)
94,254
0.037
0.015
0.027
0.033
0.043
Loan Term (months)
94,254
60.6
16.4
49
60
72
Loan Amount ($)
94,254 17,582.7
9,391.9
10,785 15,884 22,458
FICO Score
94,254
719.3
13.4
708
717
730
Debt-to-Income (%)
45,675
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.3
0.4
Collateral Value ($)
94,254
19,143
9,175.2
12,725 17,355 23,800
Monthly Payment ($) 94,254
314.5
140.3
216
290
385.5
Notes: Table reports summary statistics for the discontinuity sample of originated loans used
in estimation by FICO subsample. See notes to Table 2 for further details.

64

