                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  TRADING COSTS AND INFORMATIONAL EFFICIENCY

                                         Eduardo Dávila
                                         Cecilia Parlatore

                                       Working Paper 25662
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25662


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2019




We would like to thank comments from Fernando Álvarez, Snehal Banerjee, Gadi Barlevy,
Bruno Biais, Philip Bond, Markus Brunnermeier, Eric Budish, James Dow, Emmanuel Farhi,
Simon Gervais, Piero Gottardi, Joel Hasbrouck, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Stephen Morris, Thomas
Philippon, Adriano Rampini, Tom Sargent, Alp Simsek, Laura Veldkamp, Venky
Venkateswaran, Xavier Vives, Brian Weller, Wei Xiong, and Jeff Zwiebel, as well as our
discussants Kerry Back, Bradyn Breon-Drish, Liyan Yang, and Haoxiang Zhu. We would also
like to thank seminar participants at NYU, 2016 London FTG Summer Conference, SED, MIT,
UCSB LAEF Conference, 2017 AFA, Duke, ASU-Sonoran Winter Conference, Princeton,
Stanford, Macro-Finance Society, and FIRS. Yangjue Han, Luke Min, Josh Mohanty, and
Ryungha Oh provided excellent research assistance. Financial support from the CGEB at NYU
Stern is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Eduardo Dávila and Cecilia Parlatore. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Trading Costs and Informational Efficiency
Eduardo Dávila and Cecilia Parlatore
NBER Working Paper No. 25662
March 2019
JEL No. D82,D83,G14

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the effect of trading costs on information aggregation and acquisition in financial
markets. For a given precision of investors' private information, an irrelevance result emerges
when investors are ex-ante identical: price informativeness is independent of the level of trading
costs. When investors are ex-ante heterogeneous, anything goes, and a change in trading costs can
increase or decrease price informativeness, depending on the source of heterogeneity. Our results
are valid under quadratic, linear, and fixed costs. Through a reduction in information acquisition,
trading costs reduce price informativeness. We discuss how our results inform the policy debate
on financial transaction taxes/Tobin taxes.


Eduardo Dávila
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
edavila@stern.nyu.edu

Cecilia Parlatore
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY, 10012
cparlato@stern.nyu.edu
1        Introduction
There are costs associated with trading in financial markets, and the magnitude of these costs varies
over time and across space. For instance, technological advances have dramatically reduced the cost of
trading in many financial markets over the last decades. On the flip side, taxes on financial transactions
that would increase the cost of trading at the margin along the lines of Tobin’s proposal (Tobin,
1978) are periodically the subject of heated debates and sometimes implemented in practice.1 Given
that financial markets play an essential role in generating and aggregating dispersed information, it is
natural to study whether changes in the level of trading costs make financial markets better or worse
at aggregating information. It is also important to explore whether the ability to trade more or less
cheaply encourages or discourages information acquisition in financial markets. In this paper, we seek
to provide a systematic answer to these questions by formally studying the implications of trading costs
for information aggregation and information acquisition in financial markets.
        In our model, investors trade for two reasons. First, investors trade on private information, after
receiving a private signal about asset payoffs. These trades contribute to making prices informative about
asset payoffs. Second, investors also trade on the realization of a privately known prior, which is random
across the population of investors and uncertain in the aggregate. The combination of trading based on
private information with a non-payoff related source of aggregate uncertainty makes prices only partially
informative about asset payoffs. The fact that prices are partially informative about asset payoffs forces
anyone interested in recovering the information aggregated by asset prices to solve a filtering problem.2
A key determinant of this filtering problem is price informativeness, formally defined as the precision of
the unbiased signal about asset payoffs revealed by asset prices. In this paper, we formally characterize
how price informativeness, which captures how good asset prices are at aggregating information, varies
with the level of trading costs.
        Two main results emerge from our initial analysis when investors’ precision choices are predetermined
and trading costs are quadratic. Our first main result is an irrelevance theorem that applies when
investors are ex-ante homogeneous. We show that, for a given precision of investors’ private signals,
price informativeness is independent of the level of trading costs. The logic behind our main result is
elementary and intuitive. The effect of trading costs on how prices aggregate information is a function
of how the relevant signal-to-noise ratio contained in asset prices is affected. For example, an increase in
trading costs necessarily reduces the amount of information based trading, reducing the informational
content of prices. However, this increase in trading costs also reduces the amount of non-payoff relevant
trading (due to investors’ priors in our case), reducing the noise component of asset prices. When
investors are ex-ante identical, the ratio of these two trading motives remains constant as trading costs
change, leaving the aggregate signal-to-noise ratio unchanged, yielding the irrelevance result.3
    1
        See Colliard and Hoffmann (2017) and Jinghan Cai, Jibao He, Wenxi Jiang and Wei Xiong (2017), who provide evidence
on the consequences of introducing transaction taxes during the recent experiences of France and China, respectively.
   2
     The exact nature of the non-payoff related source of aggregate uncertainty (“noise”) is not essential for our results. In
the Online Appendix, we derive our main results in a model in which we substitute investors’ priors for hedging needs that
are uncertain in the aggregate as the second source of trading. For multiple reasons that we highlight throughout the text,
our leading formulation is the most workable.
   3
     Like other irrelevance results, e.g., Modigliani and Miller (1958), our irrelevance result is pedagogical in nature. Part


                                                              2
    Our second main result is a characterization of how trading costs affect price informativeness when
investors are ex-ante heterogeneous. We show that anything-goes outside of the homogeneity benchmark,
since the sign of the relation between changing trading costs and price informativeness is ambiguous. We
identify the cross-sectional covariance of relative demand sensitivities to information and noise with the
overall demand sensitivity to trading costs as the key endogenous object that determines how trading
costs affect price informativeness. An increase in trading costs decreases (increases) price informativeness
when the investors who trade relatively more (less) aggressively on their private information also have
an overall demand that is more sensitive to trading costs.
    While our characterization in term of endogenous objects is valid in general, we explicitly study
how price informativeness reacts to changes in trading costs when investors differ along a single
dimension. First, we show that when investors differ in the precision of the private signals about the
fundamental, price informativeness decreases with trading costs. Intuitively, better informed investors
are disproportionately more responsive to private information but also more responsive overall to trading
costs, due to their overall lower perceived risk. Therefore, an increase in trading costs disproportionately
reduces the informed trades, reducing price informativeness. Second, we show that when investors differ
in the precision of their prior, price informativeness increases with trading costs. Intuitively, investors
with tighter priors are more responsive to the realization of the non-payoff relevant component of prices
and also more responsive overall to trading costs, due to their overall lower perceived risk. Therefore,
an increase in trading costs disproportionately reduces the non-payoff relevant trades, increasing price
informativeness. Finally, we show that trading costs do not modify price informativeness when investors
are heterogeneous in their risk aversion. Intuitively, in our framework, the cross-sectional distribution of
relative demand sensitivities to information and noise is not affected by investors’ risk aversion, leaving
price informativeness unchanged.
    Folk wisdom often associates high trading costs with low price informativeness. Our two main results
overturn this logic in two different ways. First, we show that under ex-ante homogeneity, changes in
trading costs will not affect the ability of financial markets to aggregate information at all. Our result
emphasizes that not only informed trades will be reduced when trading costs are higher, but that also
trades that contribute to making the price noisy will be reduced too. Second, we show that heterogeneity
among investors is necessary to make trading costs affect price informativeness. In particular, we show
that it is possible to generate an ambiguous relation between the level of trading costs and price
informativeness merely by considering one-dimensional heterogeneity. Our results highlight that the
form in which investors are heterogeneous is also essential to understand the relation between trading
costs and price informativeness.
    Next, we illustrate how trading costs affect price informativeness in the context of four different
applications. These results play a dual role. First, the specific applications allow us to model several
scenarios of practical relevance. We consider environments meant to capture institutional and retail
investors, informed and uninformed investors, elastic noise traders, and classic noise traders. Second,
we use the applications to illustrate how the relation between trading costs and informativeness is
of our contribution lies on identifying the set of assumptions (investor homogeneity and exogenous information precision)
that must be violated for trading costs to affect price informativeness.



                                                              3
determined when there are multiple dimensions of heterogeneity. For instance, although Theorem 2
shows that heterogeneity in risk aversion in isolation implies that trading costs do not affect price
informativeness, when combined with other sources of heterogeneity, variation in risk aversion makes
price informativeness respond to changes in trading costs.
       Our applications with noise traders allow us to highlight the importance of how economic “noise”
is modeled when studying information aggregation. Classic noise trading, as in Grossman and Stiglitz
(1980), is often modeled as an exogenous stochastic demand or supply shock and it is often justified as
standing in for hedging needs of unmodeled traders. We show that this formulation is a special case of
ours when a group of investors is fully inelastic to prices and trading costs. Although a classic noise
trading formulation may be a useful shortcut at times, it is not satisfactory when we seek to understand
the effects of trading costs on price informativeness: it is silent on how noise traders react to changes in
the level of trading costs, a form of Lucas (1976) Critique. Our results suggest that one must be cautious
drawing conclusion from models with classic noise traders.
       Subsequently, we allow investors to choose the precision of their private signal about the fundamental
in the environment with ex-ante homogeneous investors, in which we know that trading costs do not
modify price informativeness for a given set of precisions of private information. In that scenario, we show
that an increase in trading costs endogenously reduces the precision of the signal about the fundamental
chosen by investors, and consequently price informativeness. Intuitively, high trading costs make it harder
for a given investor to profit from acquiring private information. Since investors anticipate that they
will be able to profit less from having better information, they choose less precise signals, which reduces
equilibrium price informativeness.4 We can draw two conclusions from this exercise. First, trading costs
have sharply different implications for information aggregation and information acquisition. Second,
trading costs tend to reduce the endogenous precision of signals about the fundamental, decreasing
equilibrium price informativeness.
       At last, we show that our main results extend to environments with linear and fixed trading costs.
For both types of trading costs, we derive an irrelevance result under ex-ante homogeneity and directional
results under one-dimensional heterogeneity, which again take the anything-goes form. The challenge
with linear and fixed costs is that some investors will find it optimal not to trade at all, generating inaction
regions. Formally, to solve for a linear equilibrium, we need to expand the information set of investors
so that they can observe the measures of buyers and sellers and augment the sources of aggregate noise
accordingly to avoid the perfect revelation of information. This is a significant technical contribution
by itself. To our knowledge, this is the first paper to solve for a Rational Expectations Equilibrium
(REE) model with rich heterogeneity with linear and fixed costs, which endogenously generate inaction
regions.5 Conceptually, the irrelevance and directional results with linear and fixed costs are a logical
   4
       In an earlier version of this paper, we allowed investors to choose the precision of a private signal about the aggregate
non-payoff relevant component (noise). In that case, investors also choose less precise signals about the noise when they
face higher trading costs, which also reduce the equilibrium level of price informativeness.
   5
     Formally, the closest results are those of Yuan (2005, 2006), and Bond and Garcıa (2018), who solve for a REE with
kinked asset demands for two groups of agents. See also the discussion in Vayanos and Wang (2012). Even though the
equilibrium of the models with linear and fixed costs that we study can be fully solved and characterized generally, we
resort to a small tax/small heterogeneity limit to provide analytical characterizations of comparative statics.



                                                                4
extension of those with quadratic costs, after accounting for the fact that changes in linear and fixed
trading costs exclusively change the information and noise aggregated into the price at the extensive
margin by varying the set of active investors.
       Before concluding, we briefly discuss several practical implications of our results, with the goal to
focus policy discussions and to facilitate future empirical work in the area. In particular, we discuss
several testable predictions of our theory and we elaborate on how our results contribute to the policy
debate on transaction taxes that follows Tobin (1978).
       This paper lies at the intersection of two major strands of literature. On the one hand, we share the
emphasis of the work that studies the role played by financial markets in aggregating and originating
information, following Grossman (1976), Grossman and Stiglitz (1980), Hellwig (1980) and Diamond
and Verrecchia (1981). From a modeling perspective, our benchmark formulation with a continuum of
investors is closest to the large economy model in Admati (1985).6 Our results on endogenous information
acquisition are related to the large literature that follows Verrecchia (1982) and Kyle (1989), with recent
contributions by Hellwig and Veldkamp (2009) and Van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp (2010). Biais,
Glosten and Spatt (2005), Vives (2008), and Veldkamp (2009) provide thorough reviews of this line of
work. These papers abstract from explicitly modeling trading costs, which is the focus of our paper.
       Our results also relate to the body of literature that studies the effects of transaction costs/taxes
on financial markets, following Constantinides (1986) and Amihud and Mendelson (1986). More recent
contributions include Vayanos (1998); Vayanos and Vila (1999), Gârleanu and Pedersen (2013), and
Abel, Eberly and Panageas (2013), among others. These papers focus on the implications of trading
costs for volume or prices, while we focus on the effects on information aggregation and information
acquisition. We refer the reader to Vayanos and Wang (2012) for a recent survey of this vast literature.7
       Only a handful of papers feature both technological trading costs and learning, like ours. Vives
(2016) shows in a linear-quadratic market game that introducing a quadratic trading cost can be welfare
improving by reducing the degree of private information acquisition. Subrahmanyam (1998) and Dow
and Rahi (2000) discuss the effect of quadratic trading costs in models of trading with strategic agents.
The inherent asymmetry among investors embedded in these papers explains their findings regarding
the effects of trading costs. Budish, Cramton and Shim (2015) show that a tax on trading is a coarse
instrument to reduce high-frequency trading in a model with learning. In the context of a model of
bilateral trading with information acquisition but without information aggregation, Dang and Morath
(2015) compare profit and transaction taxes.
       Investors in our model trade on private information and on a non-payoff relevant component which
is random in the aggregate. Our formulation is similar to the one studied by Ganguli and Yang (2009)
and by Manzano and Vives (2011), who use hedging needs as the additional source of trading need and
emphasize the emergence of multiple equilibria. We explain how our results related to theirs in detail
   6
       We exclusively consider a CARA-Gaussian setup, so our results should be interpreted as a first-order approximation
to more general environments (Ingersoll (1987), Huang and Litzenberger (1988)). There is scope to understand how
nonlinearities, like those studied by Barlevy and Veronesi (2000), Albagli, Tsyvinski and Hellwig (2012), Breon-Drish
(2015), Chabakauri, Yuan and Zachariadis (2015), or Pálvölgyi and Venter (2017), interact with our findings.
   7
     A small number of papers address normative issues regarding financial transaction taxes. See Scheinkman and Xiong
(2003) and Davila (2014) for two examples of environments in which investors do not learn from prices.



                                                             5
when describing a version of our model with hedging needs in the Online Appendix. Goldstein, Li and
Yang (2014) find that multiple equilibria may arise when market segmentation leads to heterogeneous
hedging needs.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the baseline environment and
Section 3 characterizes the equilibrium of the model, introducing our main results. Section 4 studies
four distinct applications and Section 5 allows for endogenous information acquisition. Sections 6 and 7
respectively extend the results to environments with linear and fixed trading costs. Section 8 discusses
practical implications of our results and Section 9 concludes. The Appendix contains derivations and
proofs. The Online Appendix contains additional derivations and results.


2    Baseline environment
We initially study a competitive model of financial market trading with investors whose trades are
motivated by private information about asset payoffs and by heterogeneous priors.              Within this
framework, we systematically study how trading costs affect price informativeness.

Preferences      There are two dates t = 1, 2 and a unit measure of investors, indexed by i. Investors
choose their portfolio allocation at date 1 and consume at date 2. Investors maximize constant absolute
risk aversion (CARA) expected utility. Therefore, the expected utility of investor i is given by

                                 E [Ui (w2i )]       with Ui (w2i ) = −e−γi w2i ,                          (1)
                                                                                                    U 00
where Eq. (1) imposes that investors consume all their terminal wealth w2i . The parameter γi ≡ − Ui0 > 0
                                                                                                      i
represents the coefficient of absolute risk aversion.

Investment opportunities There are two assets in the economy, a riskless asset and a risky asset.
The riskless asset is in elastic supply and pays a gross interest rate R, normalized to 1. The risky asset
is in exogenously fixed supply Q, has a random payoff θ, and is traded in a competitive market at date
1 at price p. This price is quoted in terms of an underlying consumption good (dollar), which acts as
                                                                                         ´
numeraire. Each investor i is endowed with q0i units of the risky asset at date 1, where q0i di = Q,
since investors must hold as a whole the total supply of the asset Q. Similarly, market clearing at date 1
             ´
implies that ∆q1i di = 0, where ∆q1i denotes investor i’s change in holdings of the risky asset. Investors
face no constraints when choosing portfolios: they can borrow and short sell freely.

Random heterogeneous priors           From the perspective of investor i, the per unit asset payoff at date
2, denoted by θ, is normally distributed as follows
                                                                       
                                                              −1
                                                 θ ∼ N θ̂i , τθi ,

where θ̂i denotes the prior expected value for investor i, which is cross-sectionally distributed as follows

                                                     θ̂i = θ + εθ̂i ,

where
                                                                                   
                                           −1
                             εθ̂i ∼ N 0, τθ̂i             and           θ ∼ N µθ , τθ−1 ,                  (2)

                                                            6
and the realizations of εθ̂i are independent across investors. This formulation implies that the realized
average prior mean is unknown, introducing a second source of aggregate uncertainty in addition to the
uncertainty about the payoff of the risky asset. At times, we refer to θ as the fundamental and to θ as
the aggregate sentiment in the economy.
       There are different ways to justify heterogeneity in priors: they may capture intrinsic differences
in beliefs (optimistic versus pessimistic investors), they may be the result of having observed different
private signals in the past, or they could also be interpreted as reflecting heterogeneous private valuations
for the risky asset. For our purposes, modeling random heterogeneous priors that vary in the aggregate
simply introduces an additional trading motive that prevents prices from being fully revealing.8

Information structure            Investors do not observe the actual realization of the risky asset payoff, θ.
However, every investor receives a private signal si about the asset payoff θ, with the following structure

                                                      si = θ + εsi ,

where
                                                                      
                                                               −1
                                                   εsi ∼ N 0, τsi ,

and the realizations of εsi are independent across investors. We allow for the precision of the private
signal to be different for each investor. For now, we take the precisions of investors’ private signals, τsi ,
as a primitive.
       Investors do not observe the aggregate sentiment θ in the economy either. Investors only know their
own prior, θ̂i , which is private information of investor i. Importantly, we assume that investors take
their priors as given and do not use them to learn about the priors of other investors.

Trading costs         We initially consider the case in which investors face quadratic trading costs. In this
case, a change in the asset holdings of the risky asset ∆q1i ≡ q1i − q0i incurs a trading cost, in terms of
the numeraire, due at the same time the transaction occurs, for both the buyer and the seller of
                                                        c
                                                          (∆q1i )2 .
                                                        2
Modeling trading costs as quadratic in the size of the trade preserves tractability. Whether c corresponds
to the use of economic resources (a trading cost) or whether it corresponds to a transfer (a transaction
tax) does not affect the relation between trading costs and price informativeness.
       The consumption/wealth of a given investor i at t = 2 is given by the random payoff of the risky asset
holdings q1i θ in addition to the investment return on the riskless asset. This includes the net purchase
or sale of the risky asset (q0i − q1i ) p and the total trading cost − 2c (∆q1i )2 . Formally, the final wealth
of investor i is
                                                                           c
                                        w2i = q1i θ + q0i p − q1i p −        (∆q1i )2 .                                 (3)
                                                                           2
   8
       In previous versions of this paper, we modeled investors’ additional trading motives as arising from a random
hedging need, instead of using heterogeneous priors. Both formulations yield similar insights. The current formulation
is substantially more tractable, since it guarantees equilibrium existence, features a unique equilibrium when investors are
ex-ante homogeneous, and allows us to clearly show that trading costs can increase or decrease price informativeness, even
with one-dimensional heterogeneity. We re-derive our main results in the context of a fully microfounded model in which
hedging needs provide the additional trading motive in the Online Appendix.


                                                             7
       We restrict our attention to rational expectations equilibria in which net asset demands are linear in
an investor’s private signal, his prior, and the price.

Definition. (Equilibrium) A rational expectations equilibrium in linear strategies with quadratic
trading costs consists of a linear net portfolio demand ∆q1i for every investor i and a price function
p such that: a) each investor i chooses ∆q1i to maximize his expected utility subject to his wealth
accumulation constraint in Eq. (3) and given his information set and b) the price function p is such that
                                              ´
the market for the risky asset clears, that is ∆q1i di = 0.9

       We would like to conclude the description of the environment with three remarks.
Remark 1. There are four relevant dimensions of ex-ante heterogeneity among investors.
       Ex-ante, investors can have different precisions of their private signals τsi , different precisions of their
priors τθ̂i , different risk aversion γi , and different initial holdings of the risky asset q0i . Ex-post, once
the aggregate sentiment and the fundamental are realized, investors also differ in their priors about the
fundamental θ̂i and in the realizations of their signal si .
Remark 2. Uncertainty about the level of aggregate sentiment in the economy makes the filtering problem
non-trivial, given that there are no exogenous noise traders in the model.
       The filtering problem faced by investors is non-trivial because the aggregate sentiment is unobservable
and random in the aggregate. In particular, if τθ → ∞, the aggregate sentiment becomes deterministic,
making the equilibrium price fully revealing. In order to have a meaningful filtering problem, many
papers studying learning introduce an unmodeled stochastic demand shock or, equivalently, a shock to
the number of shares available: this modeling approach is often referred to as having “noise traders”.
Allowing for noise traders in its standard form – as in Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) – is not appropriate
to study the effects of trading costs. In particular, in those models it is hard to understand how the
behavior of noise traders varies with the level of trading costs, which is a form of Lucas (1976) Critique.
We explicitly compare the predictions of our formulation with those of classic noise trading in the
applications studied in Section 4.
Remark 3. Interpretation of trading costs. Trading costs in our model can be directly mapped to trading
fees charged by exchanges. These fees capture the technological costs of trading and participating in
an exchange. For instance, linear costs can be mapped to the marginal cost charged by a competitive
constant returns to scale sector that enables trading among investors. Relatedly, fixed costs can be
interpreted as participation costs.10 Trading costs, in particular of the linear form, also map directly
to financial transaction taxes. Importantly, trading costs in our model do not correspond to measures
of price impact, which are endogenous costs of trading and depend on the trading costs studied in this
paper.11
   9
       Because we adopt a formulation with a continuum of investors, as Admati (1985), our investors do not suffer from the
schizophrenia critique of Hellwig (1980).
  10
     See Vayanos and Wang (2012) for additional discussions on how to interpret and map trading costs of the form studied
here.
  11
     In an earlier version of the paper, we studied a version of our model with a finite number of strategic investors, in which
changes in trading costs endogenously induce changes in price impact.


                                                               8
3        Price informativeness and trading costs
To characterize the equilibrium, we first study the portfolio problem of an individual investor i.
Subsequently, we exploit market clearing to characterize the equilibrium of the model and define price
informativeness, which is our main object of interest. We then introduce our main results: an irrelevance
theorem for the case of ex-ante homogeneous investors and a characterization of how trading costs affect
price informativeness when investors are ex-ante heterogeneous.

Investors’ portfolio choice             Because of the CARA-Gaussian structure of preferences and returns, the
demand for the risky asset of every investor i is given by the solution to a mean-variance problem in q1i .
Note that an investor i knows the actual realization of his prior when trading, although that realization
is not known to other investors. In particular, investor i chooses q1i to solve
                                   h         i             γi     h              i     c
                         max Ei θ|θ̂i , si , p − p q1i −                             2
                                                                Vari θ|θ̂i , si , p q1i − (∆q1i )2 .             (4)
                          q1i                                2                           2
        The first term in the objective function of investor i represents the expected payoff of holding q1i units
of the risky asset. This expected payoff increases with the investor’s expected value of the fundamental,
    h            i
E θ| θ̂i , si , p , which is itself increasing in the realizations of the private signal si and prior θ̂i , and
decreases with the price he has to pay for the risky asset, p. The second term captures the utility loss
suffered by a risk-averse investor who faces uncertainty about the asset payoff. The last term represents
the trading cost that the investor must pay to adjust his asset holdings from q0i to q1i .
        The optimal risky asset demand for investor i is therefore given by
                                                        h          i
                                                    Ei θ| θ̂i , si , p − p + cq0i
                                            q1i =            h            i         .                            (5)
                                                     γi Vari θ| θ̂i , si , p + c
                                                                                                        h          i
Intuitively, investor i demands more shares of the risky asset when the expected asset payoff E θ| θ̂i , si , p
                                                                                                        h          i
is high, when the price of the risky asset is low, and when the perceived risk of the asset Vari θ| θ̂i , si , p
is low. More risk averse investors demand fewer shares of the risky asset.
        In an equilibrium in linear strategies, we guess (and subsequently verify) that investor i’s optimal
net portfolio demand takes the form

                                           ∆q1i = αsi si + αθi θ̂i − αpi p + ψi ,

where αsi , αθi , and αpi are non-negative scalars, while ψi can take positive or negative values. The
coefficients αsi , αθi , and αpi respectively represent the demand sensitivities of investor i to his private
signal, his prior about the fundamental, and the price.                   All of these sensitivities account for the
informational content of the relevant variable. In particular, the price sensitivity αpi accounts for the
pecuniary cost of acquiring the asset and for the informational content of prices.
        Market clearing in the asset market implies that the equilibrium price takes the form
                                           αs     αθ    ψ
                                              θ+  p= θ+    ,                                 (6)
                                           αp     αp    αp
             ´              ´                    ´
where αs = αsi di, αθ = αθi di, and αp = αpi di are aggregate demand sensitivities to the
                                                                                ´
fundamental, to the aggregate sentiment, and to the price, respectively, and ψ = ψi di. A higher

                                                              9
fundamental value of the asset θ and a higher aggregate sentiment θ are associated with a higher asset
price in equilibrium. The last term in Eq. (6) embeds both the unconditional expected payoff of the
risky asset and a risk premium.
       The price p contains information about the fundamental value of the asset and about the aggregate
                                                                                        
                                            αp
sentiment in the economy. Let p̂ =                 αθ
                                            αs p − αs µθ   − αψs = θ + ααθs θ − µθ be the unbiased signal about the
fundamental θ contained in the price p for an external observer. Therefore, the distribution of p̂ as a
function of θ corresponds to
                                                                                
                                                      p̂| θ ∼ N θ, τp̂−1 ,

where                                                                    2
                                                   αs
                                                                 
                                            τp̂ =                             τθ .                                       (7)
                                                   αθ
We formally define price informativeness as follows.

Definition. (Price Informativeness) We define price informativeness as the precision of the unbiased
signal of the payoff θ contained in the asset price from the perspective of an external observer. Formally,
price informativeness corresponds to τp̂ , as defined in Eq. (7).
       Price informativeness is the key object of study of the paper. Price informativeness provides a
direct measure of the ability of financial markets to aggregate dispersed information, along the lines of
Hayek (1945). Aggregating dispersed information is one of the major roles played by financial markets.
Consequently, any decision-maker who uses the information about the fundamental contained in the price
would be able to make more accurate decisions when price informativeness is high, and vice versa.12
       After solving the filtering problem, investor i’s conditional expectation and conditional variance of
the fundamental value of the asset take the form
                                               h             i  τθi θ̂i + τsi si + τp̂ p̂
                                            Ei θ| θ̂i , si , p =                          ,                              (8)
                                                                   τθi + τsi + τp̂
                                             h               i           1
                                         Vari θ| θ̂i , si , p =                   .                                      (9)
                                                                τθi + τsi + τp̂

The expectation in Eq. (8) is a weighted average of investor i’s prior about the fundamental, θ̂i , the
private signal, si , and the signal contained in prices, p̂. When prices are completely uninformative
(τp̂ → 0), observing the asset price does not reveal any information about the asset payoff θ. Alternatively,
when τp̂ → ∞, asset prices are arbitrarily precise and observing the asset price perfectly reveals the
realization of θ. Without aggregate risk regarding the average sentiment, that is, τθ → ∞, it follows
directly from Eq. (7) that the equilibrium price is fully revealing and that the Grossman (1976) paradox
applies. The variance in Eq. (9) is higher when the prior precision, the precision of the private signal,
and the level of price informativeness are low.
  12
       There exists a large literature following Blackwell’s informativeness criterion (Blackwell, 1953) that seeks to define
when a given signal is more informative than other in the sense of being more valuable to a given decision-maker. In
the environment that we consider, our definition of price informativeness induces a complete order of price signals for a
decision-maker with a quadratic objective function around the fundamental.




                                                                 10
Equilibrium The equilibrium of the model is fully characterized by combining investors’ portfolio
decisions, given by Eq. (5), with the market clearing condition for the risky asset, accounting for the
filtering problem solved by the investors. When forming their expectations about the fundamental,
investors use all the information available to them. Therefore, each investor i effectively observes two
signals about the fundamental θ: the private signal si and the public signal revealed by the price p.
       The conjectured coefficients of investors’ net demands satisfy the following conditions in equilibrium
                                                                                !
              1       τsi                      1               τp̂       αp
        αsi =                    ,       αpi =        1−                            ,                                           (10)
              κi τθi + τsi + τp̂               κi        τθi + τsi + τp̂ αs
                                                                                          !                               !
              1       τθi                        1            τp̂            αθ      ψ                     h          i
        αθi =                    ,        ψi = −                                µθ +          + γi Vari θ| θ̂i , si , p q0i ,
              κi τθi + τsi + τp̂                 κi     τθi + τsi + τp̂      αs      αs
                                     h           i
where we define κi ≡ γi Vari θ| θ̂i , si , p + c.
       The coefficient αsi , which determines the sensitivity of the demand for the risky asset with respect
to an investor i’s private signal, is increasing in the precision of this investor’s signal τsi .13 When the
signal is more informative, investors put more weight on their signals since a higher realization of the
signal increases the expected payoff of the asset. The coefficient αθi determines the sensitivity of the
demand for the risky asset with respect to his prior. For a given τp̂ , when the prior is more precise,
investors put more weight on their prior belief. The coefficient αpi , which determines the sensitivity
of the demand for the risky asset with respect to the asset price, features a substitution effect and an
                                                                                                1
information effect. When τp̂ → 0, there is no information effect and αpi →                      κi .   In this case, the elasticity
                                                                      1
of investor i’s portfolio demand to the price is given by             κi ,   as in the model without learning: this is the
standard substitution effect caused by price changes. When prices convey some information (τp̂ > 0), an
information effect arises. Investors are less sensitive to price changes since high prices induce investors to
infer that the expected asset payoff is high and vice versa. The precision of the information contained in
asset prices τp̂ relative to the information in private signals τsi determines the relative sensitivity of the
investor’s demand to the asset price αpi . Finally, the coefficient ψi determines the autonomous demand
for the risky asset, which does not depend on private signals, prices or hedging needs. This term is
driven by the unconditional expected value of the asset and the asset risk premium.
       We conclude our formal characterization of the equilibrium establishing its existence and uniqueness
properties.

Lemma 1. (Existence/Uniqueness) An equilibrium always exists.                                   When investors are ex-ante
identical, the equilibrium is unique.

       The upshot of introducing noise in the form of random heterogeneous priors is that we can guarantee
equilibrium existence for any set of primitives, and uniqueness under ex-ante homogeneity and some
forms of heterogeneity, as illustrated by our applications. As it is standard in this type of environments,
multiple equilibria may exist when investors are ex-ante heterogeneous. Therefore, in general, every
result derived when investors are heterogeneous should be interpreted as local for a given equilibrium.
To ease the exposition, from now on, we leave out any reference to multiplicity and proceed as if there
is a single equilibrium.
  13
       Note that this argument relies on having a continuum of investors, which allows us to keep τp̂ fixed as τsi varies.


                                                               11
Irrelevance theorem and directional results Importantly, the equilibrium values of αsi , αθi , and
αpi are directly modulated by κi , which is a measure of investors’ tolerance to risk and trading costs.
                                                                                                                      αsi
The fact that κi enters multiplicatively in all three coefficients implies that the ratio                             αθi   does not
depend directly on the level of trading costs. In turn, this implies that the relative contribution of an
individual’s trade to price informativeness is not directly affected by trading costs. This observation is
useful to establish our first result.

Theorem 1. (Irrelevance result with ex-ante identical investors) When investors are ex-ante
identical, price informativeness is independent of the level of trading costs. Formally, the precision of
the unbiased signal about the fundamental revealed by the asset price τp̂ is independent of c, that is,
                                                               dτp̂
                                                                    = 0,     ∀c.
                                                               dc
       Theorem 1 establishes the first main irrelevance result of the paper. Theorem 1 shows that price
informativeness is independent of the level of trading costs when investors are ex-ante homogeneous. That
is, two identical economies with different levels of trading costs c will have equally informative prices.
Although this result may come as a surprise, its logic is elementary: High trading costs make investors
less willing to trade on both their private information and their prior beliefs, leaving unchanged the
total relative demand sensitivities to fundamental information and noise and, consequently, the signal-
to-noise ratio in asset prices.14 Therefore, price informativeness is not affected by changes in the level of
trading costs. Theorem 1 provides a natural benchmark to understand the role of trading costs on the
informational efficiency of the economy: only departures from ex-ante homogeneity across investors can
generate an effect of trading costs on information aggregation.
       On the one hand, this irrelevance result overturns the conventional wisdom that high trading costs
reduce price informativeness. For instance, Vives (2016) uses this conventional view to argue in favor
of a transaction tax to reduce price informativeness in a model with classic noise traders. It is also
often argued that hard-to-short securities are likely to have less informative prices (e.g., Lin, Liu and
Sun (2015)). Our irrelevance result shows that the conditions under which the conventional wisdom
apply are not obvious and must implicitly rely on some form of heterogeneity. On the other hand, this
irrelevance result is no more than a knife-edge case, so we move on to study how changes in trading
costs affect price informativeness when investors are heterogeneous. Our results when investors are
heterogeneous exploit the following Lemma.

Lemma 2. (Directional characterization) When the difference in relative-to-the-average sensitivities
                                                                       αsi       αθi
between information and private trading motives,                       αs    −   αθ ,   is positively (negatively) correlated in the
cross-section of investors with the magnitude of investors’ individual demand semi-elasticity to trading
         1
costs    κi ,   an increase in trading costs c decreases (increases) price informativeness in a given equilibrium.
                             dτp̂
Formally, the sign of         dc    is determined by
                                                 dτp̂                            αsi αθi 1
                                                                                             
                                       sgn                  = − sgn Covx            −   ,             ,                         (11)
                                                 dc                              αs   αθ κi
  14
       The linear structure of asset demands guarantees that a change in the level of trading costs has an identical impact on
the demand sensitivities to private information and prior beliefs. This property is not obviously true a priori, even though
it does hold in CARA-Normal economies with quadratic transactions costs.


                                                                     12
where sgn (·) denotes the sign function and Covx [·, ·] denotes a cross-sectional covariance.

       In Lemma 2, independently of the primitives of the economy, the equilibrium objects αsi , αθi , and κi
are sufficient statistics to determine how changes in the level of trading costs affect price informativeness.
Although every right hand side element in Eq. (11) is endogenous, this characterization illustrates the
economic mechanisms at play. Note that, because there is a continuum of investors, the cross-sectional
covariance Covx [·, ·] in Eq. (11) corresponds to a scalar, due to a Law of Large Numbers.
       In general, when investors are heterogeneous, an increase in trading costs can increase or decrease
                                                                               h                       i
                                                                                   αsi       αθi 1
price informativeness, depending on the sign of −Covx                              αs    −   αθ , κi       . This is the negative of the
cross-sectional covariance of two terms. The first term corresponds to the difference between relative
sensitivities to private signals (information) about the fundamental and relative sensitivities to priors
(noise). The second term corresponds to the semi-elasticity of investor i’s net demand with respect to
the trading cost, since
                                                              ∂∆q1i/∂c       1
                                                          −              =      .
                                                               ∆q1i          κi
           1
When       κi   is high, investors trade aggressively and their overall demand is highly sensitive to trading
costs. Therefore, when the investors whose demands are relatively more responsive to information than
                                                                         αsi         αθi
to private trading motives, that is, those with a high                   αs     −    αθ ,     are also more sensitive to changes in
                                                   1
trading costs, that is, those for which            κi   is high, Lemma 2 implies that high trading costs reduce price
informativeness. In this case, an increase in trading costs disproportionately reduces the fraction of
trades due to information, which reduces price informativeness. Alternatively, when the investors whose
demands are relatively more responsive to private trading motives than to information, that is, those
                  αsi       αθi                                                                                                            1
with a low        αs    −   αθ ,   are also more sensitive to changes in trading costs, that is, those for which                           κi   is
high, Lemma 2 implies that high trading costs increase price informativeness. In this case, an increase in
trading costs disproportionately reduces the fraction of non-payoff relevant trades, which increases price
informativeness.
       While Lemma 2 applies generally, it does not provide a formal result relating assumption on primitives
to the impact of trading costs on price informativeness. Theorem 2 formally characterizes how changes
in trading costs affect price informativeness when investors are heterogeneous across a single dimension.

Theorem 2. (Anything-goes: directional results under one-dimensional heterogeneity) Let
investors differ only in one of the three following dimensions: precision of their private signal about the
fundamental, precision of their prior, or risk aversion. If investors differ in:
       a) the precision of their private signal, τsi , price informativeness decreases with trading costs,
dτp̂
 dc    < 0, ∀c;
                                                                                                                              dτp̂
       b) the precision of their prior, τθi , price informativeness increases with trading costs,                              dc    > 0, ∀c;
                                                                                                            dτp̂
       c) risk aversion, price informativeness is unaffected by trading costs,                               dc    = 0, ∀c.

       Theorem 2 presents the second main result of the paper. It shows that heterogeneity among investors,
even along a single dimension, is sufficient to break down the irrelevance result in either direction.15 The
  15
       One-dimensional heterogeneity across initial asset holdings also implies that price informativeness is unaffected by
trading costs. This is a consequence of the fact that asset demands are independent of initial asset holdings in CARA-
Gaussian setups.


                                                                   13
intuition behind the results can be traced back to Lemma 2.16
         First, when some investors have access to relatively more precise information, those better informed
are relatively more responsive to their private information (have a relatively high αsi ) that others. At
the same time, these better informed investors are overall more responsive to trading costs, since their
                                             h         i
conditional variance Vari θ| θ̂i , si , p , which measures their perceived riskiness of the asset, is relatively
                                                                                                   h                 i
lower, due to their more precise information. This makes κi = γi Vari θ| θ̂i , si , p + c lower, and their
                                                           1
demand sensitivity to trading costs                        κi ,   higher. Therefore, exploiting the logic developed in Lemma
2, heterogeneity in the precision of signals endogenously generates a positive cross-sectional covariance
                                                                  αsi                                                1
between the sensitivity to private signals,                       αs ,   and the sensitivity to trading costs,       κi ,   which implies that
high trading costs are associated with low price informativeness.
         Second, when investors differ on their perceived prior precision, those with tighter/more precise priors
are relatively more responsive to the realization of their prior (have a relatively high αθi ) than others.
At the same time, these investors with more precise priors are overall more responsive to trading costs,
                                                                                                                h                i
since their perceived riskiness of the asset, given by the conditional variance Vari θ| θ̂i , si , p , is relatively
lower, due to their perception of having more precise information about the fundamental. This makes
                         h               i
                                                                                                                     1
κi = γi Vari θ| θ̂i , si , p + c lower, and their demand sensitivity to trading costs                                κi ,   higher. Therefore,
exploiting the logic developed in Lemma 2, heterogeneity in the precision of priors endogenously generates
                                                                                                                    αθi
a positive cross-sectional covariance between the sensitivity to investors’ priors,                                 αθ ,    and the sensitivity
                              1
to trading costs,             κi ,     which implies that high trading costs are associated with high price informativeness.
         Finally, note that not every form of heterogeneity breaks down the irrelevance result. In particular,
heterogeneity in investors’ risk aversion leaves price informativeness unaffected by changes in the level of
                                                                                                   αsi       αθi
trading costs. In that case, it immediately follows from Eq. (10) that                             αs    =   αθ ,   which guarantees that
           h                       i
               αsi       αθi 1
Covx           αs    −   αθ , κi       = 0. Intuitively, even though more (less) risk tolerant investors become more (less)
sensitive to trading costs, there is no systematic pattern among investors relating the sensitivity to trading
costs and the informational content of their trades. That is, the relative amount of information and noise
that each investor contributes to the price is uncorrelated in the cross-section with the heterogeneity in
the sensitivity of investors demands to changes in trading costs. Next, we provide further intuition for
our results in the context of four applications.


4         Applications
We now present multiple applications of our baseline environment. This section has a dual goal. First, the
specific applications allow us to model several scenarios of practical relevance. In particular, we consider
environments meant to capture institutional and retail investors, informed and uninformed investors,
elastic noise traders, and classic noise traders. Second, we can illustrate the relation between trading
costs and informativeness when there are multiple dimensions of heterogeneity. For instance, although
    16
         In previous versions of this paper, under a specific form of hedging needs, we showed that one-dimensional heterogeneity
induced a negative association between trading costs and price informativeness. Theorem 2 clearly shows that the relation
between trading costs and price informativeness is in general ambiguous and that it depends on the specifics of the model
considered.



                                                                             14
Theorem 2 shows that heterogeneity in risk aversion in isolation does not affect price informativeness,
when combined with other sources of heterogeneity, variation in risk aversion becomes relevant to
determine how price informativeness reacts to changes in trading costs. These applications further
highlight the ambiguous relationship between trading costs and price informativeness, consistent with
our results for one-dimensional heterogeneity in Theorem 2.
                                  1.5




                                    1




                                  0.5
                                        1       1.1        1.2         1.3        1.4         1.5


Note: Figure 1 shows how price informativeness varies with the level of trading costs (c) for the four different applications
considered in Section 4 of the paper. To better illustrate the results, the value of price informativeness for each of the
applications is normalized by the level of price informativeness in each application when c = 1. This figure graphically
extends the anything-goes result from Theorem 2 to cases with multidimensional heterogeneity, since it shows that price
informativeness can increase, decrease, or remain constant when trading costs increase. We use the following parameters
for each of the applications. Application 1: µ = 0.7, τθ = 1, τθ = 1, τsI = 1, γ I = 1.2, and γ R = 1.5. Application 2: µ = 0.7
and τθ = 1. Application 3: µ = 0.6, τθ = 1, τsI = 1, and γ = 1.5. Application 4: µ = 0.4 and τθN = 0.25.

                               Figure 1: Price Informativeness Across Applications



4.1    Institutional and retail investors

In our first application, we model a group of investors with access to better information and with higher
risk tolerance (institutional investors), relative to another group of investors who are less informed and
less willing to bear risk (retail investors). Formally, suppose that there are two groups of investors
that differ along two different dimensions: the precision of their private information and their risk
aversion. We refer to one group as institutional investors. These investors receive private signals about
the fundamental, τsI > 0, and have low risk aversion, γ I > 0. We refer to the other group as retail
investors. These investors do not have any private information about the fundamental, τsR = 0, and they
have high risk aversion, γ R > γ I . There is a fraction µ of institutional investors and a fraction 1 − µ of
retail investors.




                                                              15
   The equilibrium demand coefficients for institutional investors satisfy
                                                     τsI                     τθ
                                             αsI =          and αθI =           ,
                                                     κI                      κI
while those of retail investors satisfy
                                                                             τθ
                                             αsR = 0 and αθR =                  ,
                                                                             κR
                               −1
where κI = γ I τθ + τsI + τp̂         + c and κR = γ R (τθ + τp̂ )−1 + c. Since       1
                                                                                     κR
                                                                                          <    1
                                                                                              κI
                                                                                                 ,   institutional investors’
asset demand is more sensitive to trading costs than retail investors. Moreover, institutional investors
contribute more to the informational content of the price than retail investors, since
                                        αsI  αI   αR αR
                                            − θ > s − θ.
                                        αs   αθ    αs   αθ
Both observations allow us to exploit Lemma 2 to conclude that an increase in trading costs decreases
                                                           dτp̂
price informativeness in this scenario, that is,            dc    < 0. Intuitively, institutional investors are better
informed and more sensitive to trading costs, so an increase in trading costs disproportionately reduces
the share of informed trades.

4.2   Perfectly informed and uninformed investors

Our second application models a group of investors with extremely precise information who trades with
another group of investors who confidently rely on a signal that has no relation to the fundamental
payoff of the asset. Formally, suppose that there are two groups of investors that differ along two
different dimensions: the precision of their private signal and the precision of their prior. We refer to
one group as informed investors. These investors perfectly observe the fundamental, τsI = ∞, and have a
non-degenerate prior, τθI ∈ (0, ∞). We refer to the other group as uninformed investors. These investors
fully trust their prior, τθU = ∞, and find their private signal completely uninformative, τsU = 0. There
is a fraction µ of informed investors and a fraction 1 − µ of uninformed investors.
   The equilibrium demand coefficients for informed investors satisfy
                                              1
                                        αsI = I and αθI = 0,
                                             κ
while those of uninformed investors satisfy
                                                            1
                                       αsU = 0 and αθU = U ,
                                                           κ
        I     U
where κ = κ = c. Note that both groups of investors perceive the asset as safe and bear no residual
uncertainty after observing their priors and signals, hence, they behave as if they were risk neutral and
react to trading costs and the price in the same way.
   Informed investors exclusively trade on their signal, while uninformed investors only trade on their
prior. Since all investors fully trust the information at their disposal, neither informed nor uninformed
traders face any uncertainty, so differences in risk aversion do not affect the equilibrium. Moreover,
investors do not learn from the price, since they believe they have nothing to learn, given that their
signals are perfectly informative. However, all investors respond to changes in the price and in trading
costs, in the same way, κI = κU = c. From Lemma 2, this implies that an increase in trading costs does
                                                                      dτp̂
not affect price informativeness in this scenario, that is,            dc    = 0.

                                                              16
4.3   Elastic noise traders

In our third application, we consider one group of investors who act as noise traders, in the sense that
they purely trade on their prior beliefs that are unrelated to fundamental, but they are responsive to
the level of trading costs. These noise traders trade against partially informed investors, who only rely
on their private signals, with precision τsI ∈ (0, ∞), and have a flat prior, τθI = 0. These investors add no
noise to the price. Formally, the elastic noise traders do not get any signals, but fully trust their prior,
i.e., τsU = 0 and τθU = ∞. We assume that all investors have the same risk aversion γ and we respectively
denote by µ and 1 − µ the measures of informed traders and noise traders.
   The equilibrium demand coefficients for informed investors satisfy

                                                   τsI
                                           αsI =              and αθI = 0,
                                                   κI
while those of uninformed investors satisfy
                                                                                1
                                          αsU = 0 and αθU =                       ,
                                                                               κU
                        −1
                                                               1        1
where κI = γ τsI + τp̂         + c and κU = c. Since          κI
                                                                   <   κU
                                                                          ,   uninformed investors’ asset demand is more
sensitive to trading costs, at the same time that they only contribute noise to price. At the same time,
informed investors contribute more to the informational content of the price, but their demands are less
sensitive to the level of trading costs, so
                                                   "                      #
                                                       αsi  αi 1
                                           Covx            − θ , i < 0.
                                                       αs αθ κ

Both observations allow us to exploit Lemma 2 to conclude that an increase in trading costs increases
                                                       dτp̂
price informativeness in this scenario, that is,        dc    > 0. We will contrast this result below with the case
of classic noise traders, who do not trade on information while submitting asset demands that are fully
insensitive to the cost of trading, in our fourth and final application.

4.4   Classic noise traders

Our final application captures the classic noise trader formulation, which has been exploited by a large
literature following Grossman and Stiglitz (1980). Formally, we consider two groups of investors. A
fraction µ of investors are fundamental investors and trade after having observed the true value of the
asset θ, i.e., τsF = ∞ and τθF = 0. The remaining 1 − µ investors are noise traders whose demand is
                                      −1 
exogenous and given by θN ∼ N 0, τθN         . Crucially, these investors do not react to the price or to
trading costs. Hence, the relevant demand coefficients for fundamental investors are given by
                                                       1
                                           αsF =              and αθF = 0,
                                                       c
while we can interpret noise traders as having demand coefficients of the form

                                           αsN = 0 and αθN = 1.



                                                              17
In this case, price informativeness is given by
                                                               2                         2
                                                          αs                        µ 1
                                                                              
                                              τp̂ =                 τθN   =                    τθN .
                                                          αθ                       1−µc
         It follows from the expression above that price informativeness decreases with trading costs, so
dτp̂
 dc      < 0. Intuitively, since noise traders do not react to trading costs, the amount of noise contained in
the price remains constant. However, the amount of information decreases because the proportion
of informed trades by fundamental investors decreases as trading costs increase.                              The widespread
presumption that an increase in trading costs unequivocally decreases price informativeness follows from
this framework. However, once one takes a deeper look at where noise in prices is coming from and
considers noise being elastic, the effect of trading costs on informativeness depends on the specific setup,
as we illustrate in the applications in this section.
         Comparing Applications 4.3 and 4.4 indicates that existing common wisdom is driven by the fact
that noise traders do not react to trading costs at all. Given its importance, we highlight this result in
the following remark.
Remark. (Comparison with standard noise trading formulations) Our irrelevance argument crucially
depends on the fact that all investors are symmetrically affected by the change in trading costs. At
times, for tractability, models of learning in financial markets assume an ad-hoc supply/demand shock,
often referred to as “noise trading”. Taken at face value, this assumption leads us to believe that high
trading costs are associated with low price informativeness. In these models, an increase in trading costs
reduces the amount of information in asset prices because only informed investors react to this change,
while noise traders’ demand is fully inelastic. The classic noise trading formulation can be viewed as a
particular case of our model in which a group of investors inelastically trades on private trading motives.
Theorem 2 shows that increasing trading costs in an economy with a set of perfectly inelastic investors
who do not trade on information makes prices less informative.


5         Endogenous information acquisition
So far, our analysis has treated the precision of investors’ private information as a primitive of the model.
In this section, we allow investors to optimally choose the precision of their private signals about the
fundamental θ and show that higher trading costs are associated with lower price informativeness.17 To
isolate the effects coming from information acquisition, we focus our attention on the case with ex-ante
identical investors, which generates a symmetric equilibrium that satisfies the irrelevance result shown
in Theorem 1. Hence, any effects on price informativeness must be driven by investors’ information
acquisition decision.
         The model with exogenous precisions can be interpreted as capturing the short-run response to
changes in trading costs, when investors have not adjusted their information gathering technology. The
model with endogenous information acquisition can be interpreted as capturing long-run responses, after
investors are able to adjust how they gather information.
    17
         In previous versions of this paper, we allowed investors to receive a private signal about the source of aggregate noise.
In that scenario, investors also acquire less information about that additional signal when trading costs increase.


                                                                          18
Environment            The exact timing of the investors’ choices is represented in Figure 2. As in the baseline
model, investors choose their portfolio allocation q1i at date 1, after observing the realizations of their
private signal si and their prior θ̂i , while filtering the information contained in the asset price. Now,
at date 0, every investor chooses the precision of his private signal τsi at a cost λ (τsi ), where λ (·) is
continuous and twice differentiable function that satisfies λ0 (·) > 0, λ00 (·) ≥ 0, and the Inada condition
limτsi →∞ λ0 (τsi ) = ∞. To simplify the analysis, we set q0i = 0 and µθ = µθ̄ = 0.

                                              t=0                t=1                        t=2

                                    Precision choice        Portfolio choice           Payoffs realized
                                           τsi                    q1i                         θ


                               Figure 2: Timeline for endogenous information acquisition

      The equilibrium of this augmented game is subgame perfect, that is, it takes into account the
equilibrium played in the trading stage. We continue to restrict our attention to equilibria in linear
strategies in the trading stage. Since investors could potentially choose different precisions at date
0, there may be multiple equilibria in the trading subgame, so we must allow for a non-degenerate
probability distribution over the subgame equilibria when looking at the information acquisition decision
of investors.
      Let S(τs ) be the set of all stable equilibria when the precisions of the private signals chosen by the
investors is τs ≡ {τsi }i . Let {πh (τs )}h∈S(τs ) be the probability distribution over all stable equilibria in
                                P
the trading stage, with           h πh (τs )       = 1. As we show in Lemma 1, when investors are ex-ante identical,
                                                                      αs        τs
the equilibrium in the trading game is unique with                    αθ   =    τθ .   We define by τs,−i ≡ {τsj }j6=i the set of
private information precisions for all investors different from i.

Definition. (Equilibrium) An equilibrium in the information acquisition game is a set of precision
choices for each investor i, τs? = {τsi
                                     ? } and a probability distribution over the equilibria in the trading
                                        i
                                                                                               ? to maximize
stage, {πh (τs )}h∈S(τs ) such that each investor chooses the precision of his private signal τsi
              
         ?
V τsi ; τs,−i                                                                                     ? .
              , as defined in Eq. (12), taking as given the precision choices of other investors τs,−i

Investors’ information choice Each investor i takes the equilibrium of the model starting at date
1 and the other investors’ precision choices, τs,−i as given when choosing the precision of his private
signal. Specifically, an investor i optimally chooses τsi by solving
                                                                  X                             h               i
      max V (τsi ; τs,−i ) ,     where V (τsi ; τs,−i ) =                  πh (τsi ; τs,−i ) E vih (τsi ; τs,−i ) − λ (τsi ) ,   (12)
       τsi
                                                                h∈S(τs )
                   h                    i
and where E vih (τsi ; τs,−i )               corresponds to the mean-variance utility of investor i if equilibrium
h ∈ S (τs ) arises in the trading game in which the profile of private information precisions is given
                                    h                   i
by τs . More specifically, E vih (τsi ; τs,−i ) is given by
        h                i              h     h            i              i     1       h                i     2 
      E vih (τsi ; τs,−i ) = Cov            Ehi θ| θ̂i , si , ph − ph , q1i
                                                                         h?
                                                                            −        γVarih θ| θ̂i , si , ph + c E q1i
                                                                                                                    h?
                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                  2



                                                                  19
       h? and ph correspond to the date 1 outcomes in equilibrium h, which are a function of the precision
where q1i
choices of all investors.18 The conditional moments of θ take into account the trading equilibrium played,
h, and the precision of investor i’s information, and the expectation E [·] is taken over the realization of
the prior, θ̂i , the realization of the signal, si , and the equilibrium played if there are multiple equilibria
in the trading stage of the game.

Best responses and equilibrium determination In an interior solution, the first order condition
of the investor’s problem in Eq. (12) characterizes the best response of investor i when the second order
condition for the investor’s problem holds. Formally, the best response τsi (τs,−i ) is given by the solution
to
                                                                                                                                         
                                            h      h               i              i                    h            i
          X                        ∂Cov         Ehi θ| θ̂i , si , p − p , q1i
                                                                            h?                    h
                                                                                            γ ∂Vari θ| θ̂i , si , p
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                          2 
                                                                                                                       h?
                  πh (τsi ; τs,−i )                                                    −                           E q1i                         (13)
                                  
                                                                                                                            
       h∈S(τs )
                                                         ∂τsi                              2       ∂τsi                    
                                    |                      {z                       }       |                    {z                   }
                                                    ∆ in accuracy                                       ∆ in perceived risk
                                                                                                                
                                                                              h    i                    h    i
                                                                         h?
                                                                i ∂Var q1i             h?
                                         γ     h                             c ∂Var q1i                         
                                                                                                                              λ0 (τsi )
             X
        =              πh (τsi ; τs,−i )  Varih θ| θ̂i , si , p            +                                    +                           .
                                                                                                                
            h∈S(τs   )
                                         2                         ∂τsi      2   ∂τsi                                       | {z }
                                        |                   {z                      }       |      {z        }        ∆ in information cost
                                                     ∆ in risk taking                       ∆ in trading costs

       The left hand side of Eq. (13) represents the expected marginal benefit of increasing the precision of
the private signal. It has two terms. First, increasing the precision of the signal about the fundamental
changes the accuracy of the demand function submitted by an investor i (in each equilibrium h). An
investor wants to have a high demand for the risky asset when it offers a good return, and vice versa.
Second, increasing the precision of the signal about the fundamental reduces the level of risk perceived
by the investor. The right hand side of Eq. (13) represents the expected marginal cost of increasing the
precision of the private signal. It has three terms. The first term captures the change in risk born by the
investor when the expected final asset holdings change. The second term corresponds to the marginal
change in trading costs. The last term is the marginal cost of increasing the precision of the signal. Note
that since investors are infinitesimal, an individual investor’s choice does not affect the set of equilibria
in the trading stage nor the probability of an equilibrium being played.
       A higher precision of the private signal received by investors increases the accuracy of their demand
and reduces their perceived variance of the fundamental. Then, by inspecting Eq. (13), we can see that,
since investors can benefit less from acquiring information when trading costs are higher, information
acquisition decreases with trading costs. This is the main result of this section, formally stated in
Theorem 3.

Theorem 3. (Negative effect of trading costs on endogenous information acquisition) When
investors are ex-ante identical, an increase in trading costs decreases the precision of the information
acquired about the asset payoff in an interior symmetric equilibrium. This reduction in information
acquisition also generates a reduction in price informativeness, Formally,
                                                          ?
                                                        dτsi                      dτp̂
                                                             < 0,       and            < 0.
                                                         dc                       dc
  18
       Our choice of objective function is standard in these environments. It is studied and justified in Veldkamp (2009) and
Van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp (2010). They show that the expected utility case delivers analogous qualitative insights.


                                                                        20
         As Theorem 3 shows, higher trading costs induce investors to choose less precise signals in equilibrium,
which makes prices less informative. Figure 3 further illustrates the effect of trading costs on the
equilibrium information acquisition choices and price informativeness.

              0.6                                                         20

              0.5
                                                                          15
              0.4

              0.3                                                         10

              0.2
                                                                           5
              0.1

               0                                                           0
                    0         10       20      30       40      50             0         10       20      30       40      50


                        (a) Equilibrium information precision                      (b) Equilibrium price informativeness
Note: The left figure shows investors’ optimal information acquisition choice in a symmetric equilibrium as a function of
the level of trading costs c. The right figure shows the equilibrium price informativeness implied by the equilibrium choice
                                                    2
of τs? . In both figures, we set λ (x) = 0.01 x2 , γ = 1, τθ = 0.1, τθ̄ = 1, and τθ̂ = 0.1.

                                              Figure 3: Equilibrium comparative statics

         Our irrelevance result derived in the case of exogenously given information precisions for identical
investors does not extend to situations in which investors acquire information. Intuitively, the presence
of trading costs makes acquiring information less profitable for every individual investor. In equilibrium,
even though the reduction on the precision of information acquired by every other investor in the economy
due to the trading costs increases the incentives for an individual investor to acquire information (he
learns less from the price), this effect is not large enough to overcome the original reduction of information
precision choice caused by the higher trading cost. While intuitive, to our knowledge, the derivation of
these results is novel.


6         Linear costs
In this section, we adapt the baseline environment from Section 2 to incorporate linear trading costs.
Modeling linear (and fixed) costs introduces significant technical challenges, due to the to the impact
of the presence of inaction regions on the filtering problem solved by investors.19 To overcome these
challenges, we modify the baseline model in three dimensions. First, we introduce a finite number
of investor types, each facing a type-specific shock to their beliefs about the asset payoff. Second,
we augment the information set of investors to include the measures of sellers and buyers of each type.
    19
         Inaction regions arise because investors whose initial asset holdings are close to their optimal level of asset holdings
experience a second-order welfare gain from adjusting their portfolios, but face a first-order welfare loss associated with
trading. When trading costs are quadratic, the welfare loss is second-order, so it is optimal for (almost) every investor to
have a non-zero net trading position.


                                                                     21
Finally, we introduce random hedging needs to prevent the price from being fully revealing. The modified
environment guarantees the existence of an equilibrium in linear strategies, as described below.

Environment          We consider an economy with preferences and investment opportunities identical to
those described in the baseline model in Section 2. We denote the asset payoff by θ. We assume that
there are n = {1, ..., N } types of investors, each of them in unit measure. We denote the set of type n
investors by I n . We index individual investors of any given type by i.
       An investor i of type n has risk aversion γn and an initial endowment of the risky asset given by q0n ,
normalized to 0. Moreover, every investor i of type n receives a private signal sni about the asset payoff
θ of the form
                                                                                         
                                                                             −1
                                     sni = θ + εnsi ,     where εnsi ∼ N 0, τsn ,

where the realizations of εnsi are independent across investors. Every investor i of type n has a prior
about the asset payoff given by
                                                                             
                                                  θ ∼ N θ̂in , (τθn )−1

where θ̂in denotes the prior expected asset payoff for a given investor. This prior mean is also stochastic
and it is distributed according to
                                                        θ̂in = θn + εnθ̂i ,

where
                                                    −1                                    
                                 εnθ̂i ∼ N 0, τθ̂n               and θn ∼ N ωθ , τθ−1 ,

and where all random variables are independent of each other.
       Finally, investors have an endowment at date 2 which is correlated with the asset payoff. This
endowment is given by nn2i = hni θ, where hni = δ + εnhi with
                                                                                           
                                  εnhi ∼ N 0, (τhn )−1           and δ ∼ N ωδ , τδ−1 .

The random variable hni denotes the hedging need of an investor i of type n and δ is the aggregate
hedging need in the economy, which is not observable.
       This formulation implies that there are N + 2 sources of aggregate uncertainty in the economy: N
coming from the average prior means of the asset payoff for each investor type n = {1, . . . , N }, the
aggregate hedging need in the economy δ, and the asset payoff θ. As in the previous sections, we assume
that investors take their private trading motives as given and do not use them to make inferences about
the noise in the price, which allows us to provide equilibrium existence in Lemma 3.20
       Investors face a linear trading cost φ ≥ 0 per share traded of the risky asset. In this case, a change
                                            n | incurs a trading cost, in units of the numeraire, of
in the asset holdings of the risky asset |∆q1i

                                                                n
                                                           φ |∆q1i |,

so the final wealth of an investor i of type n is

                                      n
                                     w2i = nn2i + q1n
                                                   n
                                                      θ + q0n p − q1i
                                                                   n           n
                                                                      p − φ |∆q1i |.                          (14)
  20
       It is well-known from Ganguli and Yang (2009) and Manzano and Vives (2011) that equilibrium existence is not
guaranteed if investors use private trading motives to make inferences about the noise.


                                                                 22
There are two benefits of modeling trading costs as linear. First, linear costs overcome the problem
of order slicing associated with any nonlinear trading cost. This is the reason why policy discussions
regarding transaction taxes revolve around linear taxes. Second, linear costs can be derived as the
compensation to a group of perfectly competitive outside agents that operate a constant returns to scale
technology that enables trading. This interpretation allows us to directly interpret changes in trading
costs as reductions in the physical cost of trading that are passed through as lower trading fees to
investors.
         Each investor of type n is characterized ex-ante by the set of parameters λn                                        =
    τsn , τθn , τθ̂n , τhn , γn , q0n

                                        . When there are linear trading costs, some investors will find the cost of trading
too high and choose not to trade altogether. The set of active investors within each group depends on the
realization of the aggregate variables. This dependence implies that the equilibrium price is non-linear
in the fundamental, which prevents us from solving investors’ filtering problem as in standard models.
To overcome this challenge and guarantee the existence of an equilibrium in linear strategies, we expand
the information set of investors and assume that all investors observe the measures of buyers and sellers
of each type, µnB and µnS .21 As it will become clear when characterizing the equilibrium below, these
measures contain information about the fundamental value of the asset and act as public signals.

Definition. (Equilibrium) A rational expectations equilibrium in linear strategies with linear trading
                                                  n for each investor i of type n and a price function p
costs consists of a linear net portfolio demand ∆q1i
                                                       n to maximize his expected utility subject to his
such that: a) each investor i of each type n chooses ∆q1i
wealth accumulation constraint in Eq. (14) and given his information set, which includes the measures
of buyers and sellers of each type, µnB and µnS , and b) the price function p is such that the market for
                               P ´       n di = 0.
the risky asset clears, that is n I n ∆q1i

Characterization of equilibrium The demand for the risky asset of an investor i in group n is given
by the solution to
                                                                                  γn                 n 2
                  max (En [θ|Iin ] − p) q1i
                                         n
                                            + pq0n − hni γn Varn [θ|Iin ] q1i
                                                                           n
                                                                              −      Varn [θ|Iin ] (q1i          n
                                                                                                        ) − φ |∆q1i |,
                   n
                   q1i                                                             2
                                        n       o          
where       Iin = θ̂in , hni , sni , p, µjB , µjS              denotes   the information set of an investor i of type n and
                                                  j={1,...,N }
  n ≡
∆q1i           n − q n . The optimal portfolio choice of an
              q1i                                                        investor i of type n, which features an inaction
                     0
region, is given by
                            
                               n+   En [θ|Iin ]−hn             n
                                                 i γn Varn [θ|Ii ]−p−φ                  n+
                            
                            
                            
                            ∆q1i =                        n
                                               γn Varn [θ|Ii ]
                                                                       − q0n ,     if ∆q1i >0
                            
                            
                    n                                                                   n+            n−
                  ∆q1i =     0,                                                    if ∆q1i ≤ 0, and ∆q1i ≥0                (15)
                            
                                     En [θ|Iin ]−hn              n
                                                  i γn Varn [θ|Ii ]−p+φ
                            
                                n−                                                      n−
                            
                            ∆q1i  =                                    − q0n ,    if ∆q1i < 0.
                            
                            
                                                γn Varn [θ|I n ]
                                                            i

         The measure of active buyers and sellers of each type of investor depends on the realization of the
asset payoff θ, on the realization of the type specific sentiment, θn , and on the aggregate hedging need
    21
         Since the measure of active investors corresponds to the sum of measures of buyers and sellers, that is, µn    n    n
                                                                                                                   A = µB + µS ,
knowledge about two out of the three measures is sufficient to back out the other. The realism of this assumption varies
with the environment considered. At times, it may be easy to argue that investors have a good understanding of demand
and supply pressures among different market participants.


                                                                   23
in the economy, δ. Therefore, these measures contain information about θ. We respectively denote by
µ̂nB and µ̂nS the unbiased signals about the asset payoff θ contained in the measures of buyers and sellers
of type n. We formally describe how to calculate such signals starting from the information set of an
investor i in the Appendix. In an equilibrium in linear strategies, we postulate (and subsequently verify)
                                                               n+       n−
that investors’ net demand functions for buyers and sellers, ∆q1i and ∆q1i , are respectively given by
                                                                       N                    
                         n+                                                jn j         jn j
                                                                       X
                       ∆q1i = αsn sni + αθn θ̂in − αhn hni − αpn p +         αµB µ̂B + αµS µ̂S + ψ n+
                                                                       j=1
                                                                       N                    
                         n−                                                jn j         jn j
                                                                       X
                       ∆q1i = αsn sni + αθn θ̂in − αhn hni − αpn p +         αµB µ̂B + αµS µ̂S + ψ n− ,
                                                                       j=1

                               jn        jn
where αsn , αθn , αhn , αpn , αµB , and αµS are non-negative scalars, while ψ n+ and ψ n− can take positive or
negative values. Investors’ net demands are linear in the private signals si , their prior θ̂in , their private
hedging needs hni , the price p, and in the signals contained in the measures of buyers and sellers of each
type j, respectively µ̂jB and µ̂jS , but not necessarily in the measures µjB and µjS themselves.

Lemma 3. (Existence) An equilibrium in linear strategies with linear tradings costs generically exist.

       By expanding the information set of the investors at the time of trading, the equilibrium price
remains linear in the fundamental, which allows investors to solve a linear-gaussian filtering problem. We
explicitly characterize the equilibrium step-by-step in the Appendix. Without expanding the information
set to allow investors to observe the measures of buyers and sellers of each type, it is not possible to solve
for a linear equilibrium, since the measures of active investors of each type depend on the realization
of θ. If these measures are not observed by investors, this dependence makes the price not linear in θ,
making it impossible to solve the filtering problem.

Price informativeness and linear trading costs In the Appendix, we show that the set of buyers
and the set of sellers contain the same unbiased signal of the price, i.e., µ̂nB = µ̂nS .22 Therefore, we can
                                        jn
assume without loss of generality that αµS = 0 for all j, n. Given this, it’s worth highlighting that we
need N + 2 sources of aggregate noise to avoid perfect revelation of information, since investors have
N + 1 public signals: the N measures of buyers/sellers and the price.
       Market clearing in the asset market implies
                                               N                      N αn
                                        αs    X   αθn µnA      αh    X   µB n     ψ
                                  p=       θ+             θn −    δ+        µ̂B +    ,                                (16)
                                        αp    n=1
                                                    αp         αp    n=1
                                                                         αp       αp
                PN      n n             PN    n n     n     PN    nj n          PN      n n
where αs =         n=1 αs µA ,   αh =   n=1 αh µA , αµB =    j=1 αµB µA , αp =    n=1 αp µA , ψ         is a constant term
defined in the Appendix, and         µnA = µnB + µnS is the measure of active investors of type         n. Since µ̂nB forms
part of investors’ information set, the unbiased signal of θ contained in the price for an external observer
who observes all public signals but only learns from the price can be expressed as a linear transformation
  22
       This result is by no means obvious, as carefully explained in the Appendix. Even though investors need to know the
measure of buyers and sellers to be able to conjecture the equilibrium price, the informational content of both measures is
identical, because of the symmetry of the normal distribution.



                                                              24
of the price as follows
                                                       N                          N αn
                                                                                                             !
                                     αp                X αθn µnA         αh      X   µB n     ψ
                                p̂ =              p−                ωθ +    ωδ −        µ̂B −
                                     αs                n=1
                                                              αp         αp      n=1
                                                                                     αp       αp
                                              N
                                              X αθn µnA                       αh
                                    =θ+                       θn − ωθ −            (δ − ωδ ) .
                                              n=1
                                                       αs                       αs
                                                                               n      oN       
For a given realization of the set of aggregate states θ, θn                                  , δ , price informativeness corresponds
                                                                                        n=1
to
                                             2                                N
                                        αs
                                    
                                                                   (αN )2 ≡          (αθn µnA )2 τθ−1 + (αh )2 τδ−1 .
                                                                               X
                            τp̂ =                 ,   where
                                        αN                                     n=1
     Unlike in the case of quadratic costs, the level of price informativeness depends in general on the
realization of the set of aggregate states through the measure of active investors of each type. However,
since the measures of buyers and sellers of each type are publicly observed, investors and external
observers alike can back out the degree of price informativeness in the economy without uncertainty.
After formally defining price informativeness, we are ready to establish a new irrelevance result.

Theorem 4. (Irrelevance result with ex-ante identical investors and linear trading costs)
In an economy with linear trading costs, when investors are ex-ante identical, price informativeness
is independent of the level of trading costs. Formally, the precision of the unbiased signal about the
fundamental revealed by the asset price τp̂ is independent of φ, that is
                                                                  dτp̂
                                                                       = 0,     ∀φ.
                                                                  dφ
     Theorem 4 shows that our irrelevance argument is not specific to assuming quadratic trading costs,
applying also when trading costs are linear. When trading costs are linear, an increase in trading costs
is associated with a reduction in trading on both intensive and extensive margins – some investors cease
to trade altogether. However, because the decrease in trading at the extensive margin reduces both
fundamental and sentiment trades in equal proportions, price informativeness remains unchanged when
φ varies. This result is valid for any realization of the set of aggregate states. In fact, when investors are
ex-ante identical, there exists a linear equilibrium even without augmenting the investors’ information
set. In this equilibrium, the asset price is independent of the measures of buyers and sellers, eliminating
the potential dependence of price informativeness on the realizations of aggregate states. It is trivial
to prove the more general irrelevance result with both linear and quadratic trading costs, given by
φ |∆q1i | + 2c |∆q1i |2 .
     We introduce the directional results as in Section 3. We first characterize an intermediate result that
expresses the response of informativeness to trading costs as a function of a few high-level endogenous
variables, and then use this result to show that the relation between linear trading costs and price
informativeness is ambiguous and it depends on the source of investor heterogeneity.

Lemma 4. ( Directional characterization with linear trading costs) When the difference between
the marginal relative contribution to the average sensitivities to information and noise of a change in the
                                                        ∂αs       ∂αN
                                                        ∂µn       ∂µn
share of active investors of each group,                  A
                                                         αs   −   αN
                                                                    A
                                                                        , is positively (negatively) correlated in the cross-section

                                                                         25
of investors with the marginal impact of an increase in linear costs on the measure of active investors,
∂µn
  A
 ∂φ
µAn   , an increase in trading costs φ increases (decreases) price informativeness in a given equilibrium.
                                                                                                      n      oN      
                          dτp̂
Formally, the sign of     dφ ,   for a given realization of the set of aggregate states               θ, θn         , δ , is
                                                                                                              n=1
determined by
                                                                           ∂αN       ∂µn
                                                          
                                                                 ∂αs
                                                                                           
                                                                                       A
                                     dτp̂
                                           
                                                                 ∂µn
                                                                   A       ∂µn
                                                                             A        ∂φ
                                 sgn            = sgn Covn           −         ,          ,                        (17)
                                     dφ                          αs        αN        µnA

where sgn (·) denotes the sign function and Covn [·, ·] denotes a cross-sectional covariance calculated
among the active investors of types n = {1, . . . , N }.

      The first term inside the covariance corresponds to the difference between the marginal relative
contribution of a change in the share of active investors of each group n to the information and noise
contained in the price, respectively. The second term captures the marginal change of an increase in linear
trading costs on the share of active investors of each group n, capturing the extensive margin impact
                                  ∂µn
of a change in φ – note that        A
                                   ∂φ   < 0. Lemma 4 shows that when investors are ex-ante heterogeneous,
the response of price informativeness to a change in linear trading costs depends on the cross-sectional
covariance across groups between the relative contribution of information to noise of each group and
their extensive margin response to changes in linear costs. Intuitively, if the fraction of active investors
of types that (marginally) contribute relatively more information to the price drop out of the market
relatively more (less) when the linear trading cost increases, price informativeness will decrease (increase)
when linear trading costs increase. Somewhat unexpectedly, given that linear costs reduce trading at the
intensive and extensive margins, linear trading costs affect price informative only through the extensive
margin participation of investors. This is due to the fact that, in our model, the demand sensitivities to
information and noise for a given type of investor, αsn and αθn are invariant to the level of linear costs φ.
      Consistent with our anything-goes result under quadratic costs, the relation between linear trading
costs and price informativeness is in general ambiguous. We formalize how one-dimensional heterogeneity
among investors determines the relation between trading costs and price informativeness in the following
theorem. In order to provide an explicit analytical characterization, we focus on the tractable case
in which heterogeneity among investors is small and linear costs go to zero, although the ambiguous
comparative statics naturally extend outside that limiting case.

Theorem 5. (Directional results under one-dimensional heterogeneity with linear trading
costs) Let investors types differ only in one of the three following dimensions: precision of their private
signal about the fundamental, precision of their prior, or risk aversion. Let the heterogeneity in parameter
z ∈ {τs , τθ , γ} be given by zn = z + ηhn where η > 0 and hn is a type-specific scalar. In the limit, when
the heterogeneity across investors is small and the linear trading cost is small, i.e., for sufficiently small
values of η when φ → 0, if investors differ in:
      a) The precision of their private signal, τsn = τs +ηhn , price informativeness can increase or decrease
                                                                      ? and τ ? such that
with linear trading costs. More specifically, there exist thresholds τs1     s2
                                                
                                                                      ? , τ? )
                                                               τs ∈ (τs1
                                         dτp̂  < 0, if                    s2
                                                                                     .
                                         dφ  ≥ 0,               otherwise

                                                          26
       b) The precision of their prior, τθn = τθ + ηhn , price informativeness can increase or decrease with
                                                                 ? , τ ? , and τ ? such that
linear trading costs. More specifically, there exist thresholds τθ,1  θ,2       θ,3
                                          
                                                               ? , τ? )
                                                        τθ ∈ (τθ1
                                                                          S     ? , ∞)
                                     dτp̂  < 0, if                 θ2        (τθ3
                                                                                         .
                                     dφ  ≥ 0,                   otherwise

       c) Risk aversion, γn = γ + ηhn , price informativeness decreases with linear trading costs. Formally,
                                                         dτp̂
                                                              < 0,
                                                         dφ
where all the thresholds in this theorem are a function of the primitives of the economy.

       The effect of one-dimensional heterogeneity on the relation between trading costs and price
informativeness is ambiguous and it depends on the specific parameter in which investors differ.23 It
should not be too surprising to find an ambiguous relation when there are inaction regions, since the
shape of the distribution becomes an important primitive. However, this ambiguity persists even in the
limit in which the distribution behaves approximately as uniform, which suggests that the anything-goes
result is not only driven by assumptions on the shape of the distribution of investors.
       We formally show in the Appendix (Lemma 8) that the way in which the marginal impact of
                                                                                ∂µn
                                                                                  A
                                                                                 ∂φ
an increase in linear costs on the measure of active investors,                 µn    , varies across types in the limit
                                                                                  A
considered is driven by two effects. The first effect (concentration effect) accounts for how concentrated
the distribution of investors with zero net trades is across types, which depends on the equilibrium
               √
distribution of τ∆n across types. Intuitively, an increase in trading costs will reduce the set of active
traders by more when there are many marginal traders. The second effect (threshold sensitivity effect)
depends on the sensitivity of investors’ inaction thresholds across types, which depends on the equilibrium
                     1
distribution of     κn   across types. Intuitively, an increase in trading costs will reduce the set of active
traders by more when their inaction thresholds vary significantly with the level of trading costs. For all
three parameters considered here, both effects work in opposite directions, which opens the door to an
ambiguous relation between trading costs and price informativeness.
       We now explain our results in all three cases. First, when investors differ in the precision of their
private signals, τsn , investors with more precise signals contribute relatively more information than noise
to the price. However, the marginal impact of an increase in linear costs on the measure of active
investors for types with more precise private signals may be higher or lower than for less informed
investors, depending non-trivially on the level of τs . On the one hand, the concentration effect implies
that the mass of investors with more precise private signals that stops trading with a small linear trading
cost is lower.24 On the other hand, the threshold sensitivity effect implies that investors with more precise
signals have more sensitive thresholds. If one could shut down the concentration effect, we would recover
the negative relation between informativeness and trading costs from the quadratic trading cost model.
  23
       Note that price informativeness does not depend on the realizations of the set of aggregate states when η → 0 and
φ → 0, since the set of inactive investors vanishes. The same logic applies to the fixed cost case.
  24
     This effect is at the same time determined by the net impact of two mechanisms: investors with precise signals have
more dispersed net trades, because they are more aggressive, but they have less dispersed net trades because their signals
are concentrated. The first mechanism always dominates in the environment considered here.


                                                            27
However, whenever the concentration effect is at play, it may be the case that higher linear trading costs
are associated with higher price informativeness even when investors only differ on the precision of their
private signals.
    Second, when investors differ in the precision of their prior, τθn , investors with more precise priors
contribute relatively more noise than information to the price. As in the previous case, the marginal
impact of an increase in linear costs on the measure of active investors for types with more precise priors
may be higher or lower than for investors with less precise priors, depending non-trivially on the level
of τθ . On the one hand, the concentration effect implies that the mass of investors with more precise
priors that stops trading with a small linear trading cost is lower. On the other hand, the threshold
sensitivity effect implies that investors with more precise priors have more sensitive thresholds. If one
could shut down the concentration effect, we would recover the positive relation between informativeness
and trading costs from the quadratic trading cost model. However, whenever the concentration effect is
at play, it may be the case that higher linear trading costs are associated with lower price informativeness
even when investors only differ on the precision of their private signals.
    Third, when investors are heterogeneous in their risk aversion, γn , investors with higher risk aversion
contribute relatively more noise than information to the price. At the same time, the marginal impact
of an increase in linear costs on the measure of active investors for types with higher risk aversion turns
out to be lower than for investors with lower risk aversion. On the one hand, the concentration effect
implies that the mass of investors with higher risk aversion that stops trading with a small linear trading
cost is higher. On the other hand, the threshold sensitivity effect implies that investors with higher risk
aversion have less sensitive thresholds. It turns out that the threshold sensitivity effect dominates in this
case, implying that the relation between informativeness and trading costs is negative when investors
differ in their risk aversion.


7    Fixed costs
In this section, we adapt the baseline environment from Section 2 to incorporate fixed trading costs.
The findings with fixed costs are very similar to those with linear trading costs, so we follow closely the
exposition and the discussion of the results in Section 6.

Environment        We consider an environment identical to the one in Section 6, with the only difference
that investors now face a fixed cost of trading χ ≥ 0, instead of a linear cost. Formally, an investor who
changes the asset holdings of the risky asset incurs a trading cost, in units of the numeraire, of χ, so the
final wealth of an investor i of type n is

                                  n                    n               n
                                 w2i = n2i + q1i θ − ∆q1i p − χ · 1 [∆q1i 6= 0] ,                       (18)

            n| =
where 1 {|∆q1i                                                                    n | is different from
               6 0} denotes the indicator function that takes the value one if |∆q1i
zero and zero otherwise. Fixed costs of trading can capture participation costs or other trading costs
that are invariant to the size of the trade.
    As in the case of linear costs, we expand the information set of investors and assume that all investors
observe the measures of buyers and sellers of each type, µnB and µnS . We also assume that investors have

                                                       28
two private trading motives: random heterogeneous priors for each type and random hedging needs.

Definition. (Equilibrium) A rational expectations equilibrium in linear strategies with fixed trading
                                                  n for each investor i of type n and a price function p
costs consists of a linear net portfolio demand ∆q1i
                                                       n to maximize his expected utility subject to his
such that: a) each investor i of each type n chooses ∆q1i
wealth accumulation constraint in Eq. (18) and given his information set, which includes the measures
of buyers and sellers of each type j, µjB and µjS , and b) the price function p is such that the market for
                               P ´        n di = 0.
the risky asset clears, that is n I n ∆q1i

Characterization of equilibrium The demand for the risky asset of an investor i in group n is given
by the solution to
                                                                                      γn                 n 2
          max (En [θ|Iin ] − p) q1i
                                 n
                                    − γn Varn [θ|Iin ] hni q1i
                                                            n
                                                               −                         Varn [θ|Iin ] (q1i              n
                                                                                                            ) − χ · 1 {∆q1i 6= 0} ,
           n  q1i                                                                      2
                                               n            o           
where   Iin   =         θ̂in , sni , hni , p,   µjB , µjS                    denotes the information set of an investor i. The optimal
                                                          j={1,...,N }
portfolio choice of an investor i of type n, which features an inaction region, is given by
                                          
                                             E θ|I n −p
                                           n [ i ] n − hn
                                                                n
                                                            i − q0i ,                  if W1n (Ii ) − W0n (Ii ) > χ
                                     n      γn Varn [θ|Ii ]
                                   ∆q1i =
                                                        0,                           otherwise,
                                          
                                          

where W1n (Iin ) and W0n (Iin ), defined in the Appendix, respectively denote the indirect utility of an
investor if he participates in the market and if he does not.
   As in the case in which investors face linear costs, the measure of active
                                                                          buyers andsellers of each         n     oN
type of investor depends on the realization of the set of aggregate states                                  θ, θn         , δ . This implies
                                 n              o                                                                   n=1
that the measures µB    S
                   n , µn                               contain information about θ. As in the previous section, we respectively
                                                    n
denote by      µ̂nB      and     µ̂nS   the unbiased signals about the fundamental contained in the measure of buyers
and sellers of type n. In an equilibrium in linear strategies, we postulate (and subsequently verify) net
demand functions for active investors of type n to be
                                                                                       N                      
                                                                                           jn j        jn j
                                                                                       X
                                  n
                                ∆q1i = αsn sni + αθn θ̂in − αhn hni − αpn p +               αµB µ̂B + αµS µ̂S + ψ n ,
                                                                                      j=1

                               jn        jn
where αsn , αθn , αhn , αpn , αµB , and αµS are non-negative scalars, while ψ n can take positive or negative
values. We explicitly characterize the equilibrium coefficients in the Appendix.

Lemma 5. (Existence) An equilibrium in linear strategies with fixed tradings costs generically exists.

   As in the linear cost case, augmenting investors’ information sets to account for the measure of buyers
and sellers is enough to guarantee the existence of an equilibrium with fixed costs of trading. This is to
our knowledge the first characterization of a linear equilibrium with fixed trading costs in a model with
rich investor heterogeneity and learning.




                                                                                29
Price informativeness and fixed trading costs Building on the same logic used to characterize
the equilibrium with linear costs, we can exploit market clearing to express the equilibrium asset price
as follows,
                                            N                       N αn
                                     αs    X   αθn µnA      αh     X   µB n     ψ
                                  p=    θ+             θn −     δ+        µ̂B +     ,
                                     αp    n=1
                                                 α p        α p    n=1
                                                                       αp       α p

               P       n n       n =       P      nj n            P    n n                 P     n n
where αs =          n αs µA ,   αµB          j   αµB µA , α h =     n αh µA ,       αp =      n αp µA ,   ψ is a constant term defined
in the Appendix, and        µnA   =   µnB   + µnB    is the measure of active investors of type n. Since µ̂nB is observable,
the unbiased signal of θ contained in the price for an external observer who observes all public signals
but only learns from the price can be expressed as a linear transformation of the price as follows
                                                     N                         N αn
                                                                                                            !
                                     αp              X αθn µnA        αh      X   µB n      ψ
                                p̂ =           p−                ωθ +    ωδ −         µ̂B −                     .
                                     αs              n=1
                                                           αp         αp      n=1
                                                                                  α p       α p
                                             N
                                             X αθn µnA                      αh
                                  =θ+                        θn − ωθ −           (δ − ωδ ) .
                                             n=1
                                                     αs                       αs
                                                                              n      oN       
For a given realization of the set of aggregate states θ, θn                                 , δ , price informativeness corresponds
                                                                                       n=1
to
                                            2                                N
                                      αs
                                  
                                                                (αN )2 ≡            (αθn µnA )2 τθ−1 + (αh )2 τδ−1 ,
                                                                              X
                          τp̂ =                  ,   where
                                      αN                                      n=1
and where     µnA   is the measure of active investors of type n. As in the case of linear costs, the level of price
informativeness depends in general on the realization of the set of aggregate states through the measure
of active investors of each type. After formally defining price informativeness, we are ready to establish
the final irrelevance result.

Theorem 6. (Irrelevance result with ex-ante identical investors and fixed trading costs)
In an economy with fixed trading costs, when investors are ex-ante identical, price informativeness
is independent of the level of trading costs. Formally, the precision of the unbiased signal about the
fundamental revealed by the asset price τp̂ does not depend on χ, that is,
                                                              dτp̂
                                                                   = 0,        ∀χ.
                                                              dχ
     Theorem 6 shows that our irrelevance argument extends to the case of fixed costs. As in the case
of linear costs, some investors find it optimal to stop trading altogether when they face fixed costs.
Therefore, an increase in trading costs is associated with a reduction in trading along the extensive
margin. However, because the decrease in trading at the extensive margin reduces both fundamental
and sentiment trades in equal proportions when investors are ex-ante identical, price informativeness
remains unchanged when χ varies. The same arguments given when studying linear costs regarding the
validity of the irrelevance result for any realization of the aggregate states apply here too. Finally, we
characterize an intermediate result that expresses the change in informativeness to trading costs as a
function of a few high-level endogenous variables, and then use this result to show that the relation
between fixed trading costs and price informativeness is ambiguous and it depends on the source of
investor heterogeneity.

                                                                      30
Lemma 6. (Directional characterization with fixed trading costs) When the difference between
the marginal relative contribution to the average sensitivities to information and noise of a change in the
                                            ∂αs       ∂αN
                                            ∂µn       ∂µn
share of active investors of each group,      A
                                             αs   −   αN
                                                        A
                                                            , is positively (negatively) correlated in the cross-section
of investors with the marginal impact of an increase in fixed costs on the measure of active investors,
∂µn
  A
 ∂χ
µAn   , an increase in trading costs χ increases (decreases) price informativeness in a given equilibrium.
                                                                                                      n      oN      
                          dτp̂
Formally, the sign of     dχ ,   for a given realization of the set of aggregates states              θ, θn         , δ , is
                                                                                                              n=1
determined by
                                                                 ∂αN ∂µn
                                                               
                                                            ∂αs
                                                                         
                                                                       A
                                       dτp̂
                                                             n    n
                                                            ∂µ   ∂µ   ∂χ
                                 sgn          = sgn Cov n  A − A , n  ,
                                      dχ                            αs      αN      µA

where sgn (·) denotes the sign function and Covn [·, ·] denotes a cross-sectional covariance calculated
among the active investors of types n = {1, . . . , N }.

      The expression that determines the sign of the relation between price informativeness and fixed
trading costs is identical to the one with linear trading costs in Eq. (17). The economics behind these
results are analogous to those in the linear cost case. Both expressions are identical because, as described
above, linear trading costs affect price informative only through the extensive margin participation of
investors, the only margin affected when investors face fixed costs.

Theorem 7. (Directional results under one-dimensional heterogeneity with fixed trading
costs) Let investors types differ only in one of the three following dimensions: precision of their private
signal about the fundamental, precision of their prior, or risk aversion. Let the heterogeneity in parameter
z ∈ {τs , τθ , γ} be given by zn = z + ηhn where η > 0. In the limit, when the heterogeneity across investors
is small and the fixed trading cost is small, i.e., for sufficiently small values of η when χ → 0, if investors
differ in:
      a) The precision of their private signal τsn = τs + ηhn , price informativeness can increase or decrease
                                                                     ? and τ ? such that
with fixed trading costs. More specifically, there exist thresholds τs1     s2
                                            
                                                                         ? , τ? )
                                                                  τs ∈ (τs1
                                        dτp̂  < 0, if                        s2
                                                                                    .
                                        dχ  ≥ 0,                   otherwise

      b) The precision of their prior τθn = τθ + ηhn , price informativeness can increase or decrease with
                                                                ? , τ ? , and τ ? such that
fixed trading costs. More specifically, there exist thresholds τθ,1  θ,2       θ,3
                                       
                                                                 ? , τ? )
                                                          τθ ∈ (τθ1
                                                                            S     ? , ∞)
                                   dτp̂  < 0, if                     θ2        (τθ3
                                                                                           .
                                   dχ  ≥ 0,                        otherwise

      c) Risk aversion γn = γ + ηhn , price informativeness decreases with fixed trading costs. Formally,

                                                          dτp̂
                                                               < 0.
                                                          dχ
where all the thresholds in this theorem are a function of the remaining parameters of the economy.



                                                             31
    As in the linear case, the effect of one-dimensional heterogeneity on the relation between trading
costs and price informativeness is ambiguous and it depends on the specific parameter in which investors
differ. By focusing on the tractable case in which heterogeneity among investors is small and fixed costs
go to zero, we are able to derive Theorem 7, with fixed trading costs, to exactly mimic Theorem 5, with
linear trading costs. The economic mechanisms underlying both results are exactly identical, so we refer
the reader to our discussion of Theorem 7 in page 31 for a detailed explanation of this result.


8    Practical implications
Before concluding, with the goal to focus existing policy discussions and to facilitate future empirical work
in the area, we summarize several practical implications of our findings. First, our results contribute to
the ongoing policy debate on the desirability of implementing financial transaction (Tobin) taxes. Tobin
taxes are often advocated on the grounds that they would reduce noise/speculative trading (Summers
and Summers, 1989; Stiglitz, 1989). As in our model, a financial transaction tax is conceived as a linear
trading cost paid by investors. If a planner could differentiate between noise/speculative trades and
fundamental-driven trades, she could set investor specific taxes. However, in practice, as in our model,
all investors end up facing the same transaction tax. Our results show that the impact of a transaction
tax on price informativeness is ambiguous and subtle, and crucially depends on the sources of noise and
on the sources of heterogeneity in the economy. Therefore, one cannot argue that a transaction tax
would make prices more or less informative without further discussing specific forms of heterogeneity, as
discussed next. It is somewhat surprising that our irrelevance and directional results have been absent
from policy discussions to this date.
    Second, our results imply that one would expect price informativeness to be less affected by trading
costs/taxes in markets with homogeneous participants. It is therefore necessary to consider specific
forms of heterogeneity. For instance, our first application in Section 4 shows that environments in which
sophisticated investors with better information and higher risk tolerance coexist with investors who are
less informed and less risk tolerant unsophisticated are likely to feature a negative relation between
the level of trading costs/taxes and price informativeness: this may be a good description of the stock
market. Alternatively, specialized secondary markets in which most of the trading is done by professional
investors with similar risk attitudes and information processing abilities seem to map better to a model
with ex-ante identical investors. In those environments, our results predict that price informativeness
should in principle not be affected by the level of trading costs/transaction taxes.
    Third, even when considering markets with ex-ante identical investors, our results with endogenous
information acquisition imply that it is important to distinguish between the short-term impact of a
change in trading costs, in which investors have not had enough time to adjust the form in which they
acquire information, relative to the long-term impact. Our results imply that over longer horizons price
informativeness should decline after increases in trading costs, with the strength of this effect modulated
by the ability of investors to adjust information choices. This interpretation associating a reduction in
trading costs with an increase in information acquisition can be used to rationalize the rise in the share
of trading-type financial activities in aggregate GDP since the mid-1970s, as documented by Philippon


                                                     32
(2015) and Greenwood and Scharfstein (2013).
    Finally, our results point out to a few endogenous but potentially measurable variables that are
sufficient to determine how price informativeness varies with the level of trading costs. Lemmas 2,
4, and 6 show that recovering the distribution of demand sensitivities to information and to non-payoff
relevant trading sources, along with demand sensitivities to trading costs and extensive margin responses
for the whole population of investors is sufficient to compute our directional characterizations directly.
Undertaking that non-trivial measurement effort will enable to test the the results introduced in this
paper.


9    Conclusion
In this paper, we provide a systematic formal analysis of the effects of trading costs on information
aggregation and information acquisition in financial markets. When investors are ex-ante identical,
an irrelevance result emerges when investors’ information precisions are predetermined:               price
informativeness is independent of the level of trading costs. Intuitively, a change in trading costs equally
reduces the amount of payoff relevant and non-payoff relevant trading, leaving the market signal-to-noise
ratio unchanged. When investors are ex-ante heterogeneous, anything-goes, and a change in trading
costs can increase or decrease price informativeness, depending on the source of heterogeneity. Through
a reduction in information acquisition, trading costs reduce price informativeness. We study the cases of
quadratic, linear, and fixed costs, which allows us to consider how trading costs modify investors’ trading
decisions at the intensive and extensive margins. Our results provide a clear framework to develop tests
on the impact of trading cost on price informativeness and have the potential to discipline future policy
discussions on the impact of financial transaction taxes.




                                                    33
References
Abel, Andrew B, Janice C Eberly, and Stavros Panageas. 2013. “Optimal inattention to the stock market
  with information costs and transactions costs.” Econometrica, 81(4): 1455–1481.
Admati, A.R. 1985. “A noisy rational expectations equilibrium for multi-asset securities markets.” Econometrica:
  Journal of the Econometric Society, 629–657.
Albagli, Elias, Aleh Tsyvinski, and Christian Hellwig. 2012. “A theory of asset prices based on
  heterogeneous information.” Working Paper.
Amihud, Yakov, and Haim Mendelson. 1986. “Asset pricing and the bid-ask spread.” Journal of Financial
  Economics, 17(2): 223–249.
Barlevy, Gadi, and Pietro Veronesi. 2000. “Information acquisition in financial markets.” The Review of
  Economic Studies, 67(1): 79–90.
Biais, B., L. Glosten, and C. Spatt. 2005. “Market microstructure: A survey of microfoundations, empirical
  results, and policy implications.” Journal of Financial Markets, 8(2): 217–264.
Blackwell, David. 1953. “Equivalent comparisons of experiments.” The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 265–
  272.
Bond, Philip, and Diego Garcıa. 2018. “The equilibrium consequences of indexing.” Working Paper.
Breon-Drish, Bradyn. 2015. “On existence and uniqueness of equilibrium in a class of noisy rational expectations
  models.” The Review of Economic Studies.
Budish, Eric, Peter Cramton, and John Shim. 2015. “The High-Frequency Trading Arms Race: Frequent
  Batch Auctions as a Market Design Response.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(4): 1547–1621.
Cai, Jinghan, Jibao He, Wenxi Jiang, and Wei Xiong. 2017. “The whack-a-mole game: Tobin tax and
  trading frenzy.” Working Paper.
Cespa, Giovanni, and Xavier Vives. 2015. “The Beauty Contest and Short-Term Trading.” The Journal of
  Finance, 70(5): 2099–2154.
Chabakauri, Georgy, Kathy Yuan, and Konstantinos Zachariadis. 2015. “Multi-Asset Noisy Rational
  Expectations Equilibrium with Contingent Claims.” Working Paper.
Colliard, Jean-Edouard, and Peter Hoffmann. 2017. “Financial transaction taxes, market composition, and
  liquidity.” The Journal of Finance, 72(6): 2685–2716.
Constantinides, G.M. 1986. “Capital market equilibrium with transaction costs.” The Journal of Political
  Economy, 842–862.
Dang, Tri Vi, and Florian Morath. 2015. “The Taxation of Bilateral Trade with Endogenous Information.”
  Working Paper.
Davila, Eduardo. 2014. “Optimal Financial Transaction Taxes.” Working Paper, NYU Stern.
Diamond, D.W., and R.E. Verrecchia. 1981. “Information aggregation in a noisy rational expectations
  economy.” Journal of Financial Economics, 9(3): 221–235.
Dow, James, and Rohit Rahi. 2000. “Should Speculators Be Taxed?” The Journal of Business, 73(1): 89–107.
Ganguli, Jayant Vivek, and Liyan Yang. 2009. “Complementarities, multiplicity, and supply information.”
  Journal of the European Economic Association, 7(1): 90–115.
Gârleanu, Nicolae, and Lasse Heje Pedersen. 2013. “Dynamic trading with predictable returns and
  transaction costs.” The Journal of Finance, 68(6): 2309–2340.
Goldstein, Itay, Yan Li, and Liyan Yang. 2014. “Speculation and hedging in segmented markets.” Review of
  Financial Studies, 27(3): 881–922.
Greenwood, Robin, and David Scharfstein. 2013. “The growth of finance.” The Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 3–28.
Grossman, Sandford. 1976. “On the efficiency of competitive stock markets where trades have diverse
  information.” Journal of Finance, 31(2): 573–585.
Grossman, S.J., and J.E. Stiglitz. 1980. “On the impossibility of informationally efficient markets.” The
  American Economic Review, 393–408.
Hayek, FA. 1945. “The Use of Knowledge in Society.” The American Economic Review, 35(4): 519–530.
Hellwig, Christian, and Laura Veldkamp. 2009. “Knowing what others know: Coordination motives in
  information acquisition.” The Review of Economic Studies, 76(1): 223–251.


                                                      34
Hellwig, M.F. 1980. “On the aggregation of information in competitive markets.” Journal of Economic Theory,
  22(3): 477–498.
Huang, Chi-fu, and Robert H Litzenberger. 1988. Foundations for financial economics. Vol. 4, North-Holland
  New York.
Ingersoll, J.E. 1987. Theory of financial decision making. Vol. 3, Rowman & Littlefield Pub Incorporated.
Kyle, A.S. 1989. “Informed speculation with imperfect competition.” The Review of Economic Studies, 56(3): 317–
  355.
Lin, Tse-Chun, Qi Liu, and Bo Sun. 2015. “Contracting with Feedback.” Working Paper.
Lucas, Robert E. 1976. “Econometric policy evaluation: A critique.” Carnegie-Rochester conference series on
  public policy, 1: 19–46.
Manzano, Carolina, and Xavier Vives. 2011. “Public and private learning from prices, strategic
  substitutability and complementarity, and equilibrium multiplicity.” Journal of Mathematical Economics,
  47(3): 346–369.
Modigliani, F., and M.H. Miller. 1958. “The cost of capital, corporation finance and the theory of investment.”
  The American economic review, 48(3): 261–297.
Pálvölgyi, Dömötör, and Gyuri Venter. 2017. “Multiple Equilibria in Noisy Rational Expectations
  Economies.” Working Paper.
Philippon, Thomas. 2015. “Has the US Finance Industry Become Less Efficient? On the Theory and
  Measurement of Financial Intermediation.” American Economic Review, 105(4): 1408–38.
Scheinkman, Jose A, and Wei Xiong. 2003. “Overconfidence and Speculative Bubbles.” Journal of Political
  Economy, 111(6).
Schmidt, Klaus D. 2003. “On the covariance of monotone functions of a random variable.” Working Paper.
Stiglitz, J.E. 1989. “Using tax policy to curb speculative short-term trading.” Journal of Financial Services
  Research, 3(2): 101–115.
Subrahmanyam, A. 1998. “Transaction Taxes and Financial Market Equilibrium.” The Journal of Business,
  71(1): 81–118.
Summers, L.H., and V.P. Summers. 1989. “When financial markets work too well: a cautious case for a
  securities transactions tax.” Journal of financial services research, 3(2): 261–286.
Tobin, J. 1978. “A proposal for international monetary reform.” Eastern Economic Journal, 4(3/4): 153–159.
Van Nieuwerburgh, Stijn, and Laura Veldkamp. 2010. “Information acquisition and under-diversification.”
  The Review of Economic Studies, 77(2): 779–805.
Vayanos, D., and J.L. Vila. 1999. “Equilibrium interest rate and liquidity premium with transaction costs.”
  Economic theory, 13(3): 509–539.
Vayanos, Dimitri. 1998. “Transaction costs and asset prices: A dynamic equilibrium model.” Review of Financial
  Studies, 11(1): 1–58.
Vayanos, Dimitri, and Jiang Wang. 2012. “Market Liquidity - Theory and Empirical Evidence.” Foundations
  and Trends Journal Articles, 6(4): 221–317.
Veldkamp, Laura. 2009. “Information Choice in Macroeconomics and Finance.” Manuscript, New York
  University.
Verrecchia, Robert E. 1982. “Information acquisition in a noisy rational expectations economy.” Econometrica:
  Journal of the Econometric Society, 1415–1430.
Vives, Xavier. 2008. Information and Learning in Markets: the Impact of Market Microstructure. Princeton
  University Press.
Vives, Xavier. 2016. “Endogenous public information and welfare.” Review of Economic Studies, Forthcoming.
Yuan, K. 2005. “Asymmetric price movements and borrowing constraints: a rational expectations equilibrium
  model of crises, contagion, and confusion.” The Journal of Finance, 60(1): 379–411.
Yuan, Kathy. 2006. “The Price Impact of Borrowing and Short-Sale Constraints.” Working Paper.




                                                      35
                                                         Appendix
A     Proofs
A.1     Section 3: Price informativeness and trading costs
Investors’ portfolio problem
Under the assumptions of CARA utility and normal uncertainty, an investor i solves the following mean-variance
problem
                                                       γi
                                        max Ei [w2i ] − Vari [w2i ] ,
                                         q1i           2
where w2i is the investor’s terminal wealth given by Eq. (3) in the text. After discarding constants, investor i
solves Eq. (4) in the text, with an optimality condition given by
                                   h               i     h              i
                            γi Vari θ| θ̂i , si , p   Ei θ| θ̂i , si , p − p              c
                   q1i =         h              i            h              i+        h               i    q0i ,
                         γi Vari θ| θ̂i , si , p + c γi Vari θ| θ̂i , si , p   γi Vari θ| θ̂i , si , p + c
                         |           {z              }|         {z           } |         {z              }
                                       ≡ωi (c)                            ≡q̂1i                        ≡1−ωi (c)

                      = ωi (c) q̂1i + (1 − ωi (c)) q0i .

where q̂1i corresponds to the expression for investors’ demands in the absence of trading costs. We can write the
net demand for the risky asset of investor i as

                                                        ∆q1i = ωi (c) (q̂1i − q0i ) .

In an equilibrium in linear strategies we guess (and verify) that the optimal net asset demand of investor i takes
the form
                                         ∆q1i = αsi si + αθi θ̂i − αpi p + ψi ,                               (A1)
where αsi , αθi , and αpi are non-negative scalars, and ψi can take positive and negative values. The market clearing
           ´
condition ∆q1i di = 0 implies that the equilibrium price takes the form

                                                               αs    αθ    ψ
                                                         p=       θ+    θ+    ,                                                 (A2)
                                                               αp    αp    αp

where we define
                            ˆ                           ˆ                            ˆ                             ˆ
                     αs ≡       αsi di,          αθ ≡       αθi di,           αp ≡       αpi di,      and ψ ≡          ψi di.

We assume a Strong Law of Large Numbers, as described in the Appendix of Vives (2008), which guarantees that
´                   ´                                                  ´                    ´
  αsi εsi di → 0 and αθi εθi di → 0 almost surely, so that we can write αsi si di = αs θ and αθi θi di = αθ θ in Eq.
(A2). Using the distribution of θ, defined in Eq. (2) in the text, we can write the conditional distribution of the
equilibrium price p given the fundamental θ as follows
                                                                    2       !
                                              αs      αθ       ψ    αθ     −1
                                    p|θ ∼ N      θ+      µ +     ,       τ      .
                                              αp      αp θ αp αp          θ


                    αp     αθ          ψ
We denote by p̂ =   αs p − αs µθ   −   αs   the unbiased signal of θ contained in the price, which is distributed as follows
                                                                                                     2
                                                  
                                                             −1
                                                                                                αs
                                       p̂|θ ∼ N θ, (τp̂ )             ,     where τp̂ =                    τθ ,
                                                                                                 αθ




                                                                          A1
which denotes the precision of the unbiased signal of θ contained in the price. Solving the optimal filtering problem
– as described in the Online Appendix – from the perspective of investor i allows us to write
                                                   h               i τ θ̂ + τ s + τ p̂
                                                                       θi i     si i     p̂
                                                 Ei θ| θ̂i , si , p =                       ,
                                                                         τθi + τsi + τp̂
                                                   h               i         1
                                               Vari θ| θ̂i , si , p =                 .
                                                                      τθi + τsi + τp̂

The expected value and the variance of θ, conditional on the investor’s prior, his private signal and the equilibrium
price, are the inputs in the portfolio decision of an investor, as described in Eq. (5) in the text.
    We define κi , to simplify notation, as
                                                         h               i
                                             κi ≡ γi Vari θ| θ̂i , si , p + c.

Matching coefficients with our initial guess in Eq. (A1), we show that αsi , αθi , αpi , and ψi must satisfy
                                1       τsi
                          αsi =                      ,                                                                              (A3)
                                κi τθi + τsi + τp̂
                                1       τθi
                          αθi =                      ,                                                                              (A4)
                                κi τθi + τsi + τp̂
                                                            
                                1                 τp̂     αp
                          αpi =      1−                        , and                                                                (A5)
                                κi        τθi + τsi + τp̂ αs
                                                                                            i 
                                   1          τp̂         αθ      ψ             h
                           ψi = −                            µθ +      + γi Vari θ|θ̂i , si , p q0i .                               (A6)
                                  κi τθi + τsi + τp̂ αs           αs
                                                                                                                   h               i
                                                                               αs
Combining Eq. (A3) and Eq. (A4) allows us to characterize                      αθ ,   and consequently τp̂ and Vari θ| θ̂i , si , p , as a
                                   ´
function of primitives.   αs
                               =   ´ αsi di   is implicitly characterized by
                          αθ         αθi di
                                                            ´      1       τsi
                                                        αs         κi τθi +τsi +τp̂ di
                                                           =´      1       τθi         .
                                                        αθ         κi τθi +τsi +τp̂ di


Proof of Lemma 1. (Existence/Uniqueness)
                                 αs
Proof. Since τp̂ depends only on α θ
                                     , the solution to the system in Eqs. (A3)-(A6) and, hence, an equilibrium, is
                       ?
                        αs
fully characterized by αθ , which is given by the fixed point of
                                                             ´             τsi
                                                                 γi +c(τθi +τsi +x2 τθ )
                                                                                         di
                                                    J (x) = ´              τθi              ,                                       (A7)
                                                                 γi +c(τθi +τsi +x2 τθ )
                                                                                         di

                                                                                  αs
where we used that the equilibrium individual demand sensitivities depend on α     θ
                                                                                      through τp̂ . J (x) determines
                    αs
the aggregate ratio αθ when investors expect the signal-to-noise ratio in the price to be x. The fixed point of Eq.
                                                      ? 
                                                       αs
(A7) can also be found as the value that satisfies H   αθ     = 0, where
                                                                  ´             τsi
                                                                      γi +c(τθi +τsi +x2 τθ )
                                                                                              di
                                                H (x) ≡ −x + ´                  τθi              .                                  (A8)
                                                                      γi +c(τθi +τsi +x2 τθ )
                                                                                              di

Note that
                                              lim H (x) > 0      and        lim H (x) = −∞.
                                              x→0                          x→∞

Therefore, an equilibrium always exists, since H (·) is a continuous function.
   Even though a non-negative root of H (·) always exists, there may be multiple equilibria. We adopt a
conventional notion of stability. The function H (x) is defined such that if H (x0 ) > 0, then J (x0 ) > x0 , which


                                                                      A2
implies that if investors in the model expect the signal-to-noise ratio to be x0 , the realized value of this ratio will
be x1 = J (x0 ) > x0 . Let x? be a solution to H (x? ) = 0. Then, we will say that the equilibrium x? is stable if for
                                                                      ∞
all x0 ∈ (x? − εδ , x? + εδ ) and for some εδ > 0 the sequence {xm }m=0 where xm = J (xm−1 ) for m > 1 converges
to x? . This sequence will converge only if |J 0 (x? )| < 1, which implies H 0 (x? ) < 0. Hence, in all stable equilibria,
H 0 (x? ) < 0, that is,                         ˆ              
                               0                      αsi    αθi 1                     
                             H (x) = −1 − 2cτp̂           −         Vari θ| si , θ̂i , p di < 0.
                                                      αs     αθ κi
When investors are ex-ante identical,
                                                                                   τs
                                                                           γ+c(τθ +τs +x2 τθ )                 τs
                                                    H (x) ≡ −x +                   τθ            = −x +           ,
                                                                           γ+c(τθ +τs +x2 τθ )
                                                                                                               τθ

                                                                                                   ?
                                                                                               αs            τs
which implies that H (x) = 0 has a unique solution given by                                    αθ        =   τθ .   Note that this equilibrium is stable
        0
since H (x) = −1 < 0.

Proof of Theorem 1. (Irrelevance result with ex-ante identical investors)
                                          ?                                                                           ?
                                      αs                                                                            αs            τs
Proof. Recall that τp̂ =              αθ        τθ . When investors are ex-ante identical,                          αθ        =   τθ ,   which is independent of
c.

Proof of Lemma 2. (Directional characterization)
                              αs                                αs
Proof. From the definition of αθ
                                 we know that, in equilibrium, α  θ
                                                                     is a root of H, where H (·) is defined as in Eq.
                                            0
(A8). Moreover, in any stable equilibrium, H < 0. Using the Implicit Function Theorem, we have that
                                                        ∂H
                                                 αs
                                              d α θ
                                                           ∂c αs
                                                               αθ
                                                     =      ∂H
                                                                    ,                                            (A9)
                                                dc       − ∂x αs
                                                                                            αθ


where
                   ´                                        
                                                                                ˆ 
            ∂H          − κ1i αsi αθ +            1
                                                 κi αθi αs       di        αs         αsi   αθi
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                         1        αs
                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                          αsi   αθi 1
                                                                                                                                      
               =                                2                     =−                  −                 di = − Covx       −    ,    ,
            ∂c                        (αθ )                                αθ         αs    αθ           κi       αθ      αs    αθ κi

where Covx [zi , yi ] denotes the cross-sectional covariance between z and y in the population of investors. Since in
any stable equilibria H 0 < 0, Eq. (A9) implies that
                                         
                                             αs
                                         d α                                   
                                   sgn 
                                              θ
                                                 = − sgn Covx αsi − αθi , 1        .
                                           dc                       αs    αθ κi

                           2
                       αs
Using that τp̂ =       αθ        τθ , Eq. (11) follows immediately.

Proof of Theorem 2.                               (Anything-goes:                     directional results under one-dimensional
heterogeneity)
Proof. The proof of this theorem uses Lemma 2 and the result that the covariance of two monotone increasing
functions is positive (see Schmidt (2003)). The structure of the proof is the same for all dimensions of heterogeneity
considered.
    From Lemma 2 we know that
                                                                            
                                          dτp̂                   αsi    αθi 1
                                    sgn          = − sgn Covx        −      ,      .                            (A10)
                                          dc                     αs     αθ κi

                                                                                 A3
    There are four sources of heterogeneity across investors τsi , τθi , γi , and q0i . Given the expression in Eq.
(A10) and the definition of αsi and αθi in Eq. (A3) and Eq. (A4), respectively, the only relevant dimensions of
heterogeneity that affect price informativeness are τsi , τθi , and γi .
    a) Suppose that investors only differ in the precision of their private information τsi . In that case, we can
write                                                
                                         αsi   αθi 1
                                  Covx       −    ,       = Covx [Fs (τsi ) , Gs (τsi )] ,
                                         αs    αθ κi
where Fs (τsi ) =     αsi
                      αs    − ααθiθ =   1        τsi
                                        αs γ+c(τθ +τsi +τp̂ )   − α1θ          τθ
                                                                        γ+c(τθ +τsi +τp̂ )   and Gs (τsi ) =             1
                                                                                                                         κi   =   γ        1
                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                        . Note that the
                                                                                                                                                   +c
                                                                                                                                      τθ +τsi +τp̂

functions Fs (·) and Gs (·) are increasing in τsi , since
                      ∂F (τsi )   1 ∂αsi    1 ∂αθi
                                =         −
                       ∂τsi       αs ∂τsi   αθ ∂τsi
                                                                                                                                           !
                                     1      γi + c (τθi + τp̂ )        1                                        cτθi
                                   =                                 −                  −                                                      > 0,
                                     αs (γi + c (τsi + τθi + τp̂ ))2   αθ                    (γi + c (τsi + τθi + τp̂ ))
                                                                                                                                       2


and                                                                                                2
                                                    ∂G (τsi )     1             
                                                              =      2 γ i Vari   θ| s i , θ̂ i , p   > 0.
                                                     ∂τsi       (κi )
Therefore, since the covariance of two monotone increasing functions is positive (Schmidt, 2003),

                                                            Covx [Fs (τsi ) , Gs (τsi )] > 0.

      b) Similarly, when investors only differ in the precision of their priors τθi , we can write
                                                       
                                          αsi    αθi 1
                                   Covx       −      ,    = Covx [Fθ (τθi ) , Gθ (τθi )] ,
                                          αs      αθ κi
                      1        τs                    1       τθi                                  1                    1
where Fθ (τθi ) =     αs γ+c(τθi +τs +τp̂ )     −   αθ γ+c(τθi +τs +τp̂ )    and Gθ (τθi ) =      κi    =   γ        1
                                                                                                                                  . Note that
                                                                                                                             +c
                                                                                                                τθi +τs +τp̂


                          ∂F (τθi )   1 ∂αsi     1 ∂αθi
                                    =         −
                           ∂τθi       αs ∂τθi   αθ ∂τθi
                                        1            cτsi                 1      γi + c (τsi + τp̂ )
                                    =−                                2 −                                 < 0,
                                       αs (γi + c (τsi + τθi + τp̂ ))     αθ (γi + c (τsi + τθi + τp̂ ))2
and                                                                                            2
                                                    ∂G (τθi )     1            
                                                              =       2 γi Vari θ| si , θ̂i , p > 0.
                                                     ∂τθi       (κi )
Then,
                                                            Covx [Fθ (τθi ) , Gθ (τθi )] < 0.
                                                                                       αs        τs
      c) Finally, if investors only differ in their risk aversion γi ,                 αθ    =   τθ ,   which is independent of c.

A.2       Section 5: Endogenous information acquisition
Given the other investors’ choices τs,−i , an investor i chooses τsi to solve
                                   X
                                          πh ({τsi , τs,−i }) E vih ({τsi , τs,−i }) − λ (τsi ) ,
                                                                                   
                            max
                                      τsi ≥0
                                               h∈S(τs )
                
where E vih (τs ) is the mean-variance utility of investor i if equilibrium h ∈ S
                                                                                 (τ s ) is played in the trading game
                                                                                  h
when the profile of private information precisions is given by τs . Formally, E vi (τs ) is given by
   h          h                h?          h                 h?  1           h
                                                                                                           h h? 2 i
E vi (τs ) = E        Ei     θ| θ̂i , si , p − p    E q1i + Cov         Ei     θ| θ̂i , si , p − p , q1i −               γVari         θ| θ̂i , si , p + c E    q1i
                                                                                                                   2
                                                                1                                  h             2 i
                           Ehi θ| θ̂i , si , p − p , q1i
                                                      h?
                                                                  γVarih θ| θ̂i , si , p + c E               h?
                                                                                  
              = Cov                                      −                                                  q1i
                                                                2
                  1
                    Cov Ehi θ| θ̂i , si , p − p , q1i
                                             h? 
              =                                       ,
                  2


                                                                              A4
where the equilibrium h considered affects the conditional moments and the optimal trading choice of investor i
                                       h                                                 25
through the expectation
               h h        operator
                                 i   i i [·], which depends on price informativeness. Moreover, we use the fact that
                                     E
E q1i = κ1i E Ehi θ| θ̂i , si , p − p = 0, since q0i = 0 and µθ = µθ = 0.
   h? 
                                                                                                         ?
    Given the other investors’ precision decisions, τs,−i , the optimal precision choice of investor i, τsi , is given by
the solution to                                X
                                                                       ?
                                                         πh (τs ) Hh (τsi ; τs,−i ) = 0,
                                               ?      
                                                       h∈S       τsi , τs,−i

where                                                                                h h                 i         i
                                                           1 ∂Cov
                                                                                                                  h?
                                                                                       Ehi θ| θ̂i , si , p − p , q1i
                                            ?
                                       Hh (τsi ; τs,−i ) =                                                                           − λ0 (τsi ) .
                                                           2                                         ∂τsi
The second order condition of the information choice problem is given by
                                                                                             h? 
        X                      ?
                        ∂Hh (τsi ; τs,−i )     X                ∂ 2 Cov Ehi θ| θ̂i , si , p − p , q1i
                            πh (τs )                             =                                   πh (τs )                              2
                                                                                                                                                                     − λ00 (τsi ) < 0.
                                              ∂τsi                                                                                   ∂τsi
           ?                                                                      ?
  h∈S     τsi , τs,−i                                                h∈S         τsi , τs,−i




Proof of Theorem 3.                               (Negative effect of trading costs on endogenous information
acquisition)

Proof. Recall that the equilibrium in the trading stage is unique when investors are ex-ante identical.
Therefore, since investors are infinitesimal, when τsj = τs? for all j 6= i the FOC for the information
acquisition stage is given by
                                                                            h             h                 i                 i
                                                             1 ∂Cov               Ehi θ| θ̂i , si , p − p , q1i
                                                                                                             h?
                                   ?
                               H (τsi ; τs,−i ) =                                                                                   − λ0 (τsi ) = 0.
                                                             2                                  ∂τsi
The implicit function theorem implies that for any equilibrium in the trading stage in an interior
symmetric equilibrium of the information acquisition game

                                                                   ?       si s      ∂H(τ ;τ ? )
                                                                 dτsi     ∂c
                                                                      = ∂H(τ     ?                                      < 0,
                                                                  dc   − ∂τsisi;τs )
                                                                                                           τsi =τs?

                                                                     ∂H(τsi ;τs? )
because the second order condition is                                  ∂τsi                           < 0 and
                                                                                   τsi =τs?
                                                                                               h h                     i                i
                                                                            ∂ 2 Cov                                      ?
                                                                                                E θ| θ̂i , si , p − p , q1i
                                         ∂H (τsi )
                                                                      =                                                                        < 0.
                                           ∂c            τsi =τs?                                         ∂τsi ∂c

To see the last result note that
                                              h h                      i
                                                                          ?
                                                                                               i         1     h h               i    i
                                    Cov          E θ| θ̂i , si , p − p , q1i =                               Var E θ| θ̂i , si , p − p
                                                                                                          κi
where
                                                                                                    2                                                                 2
                                                                                                αs                                  αs                               αθ
                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                          τθ−1 +                                                               τθ̄−1
                                                                                                                                                       
        Var E θ| θ̂i , si , p − p =                 1 − τθ Var θ| θ̂i , si , p −                                         τθ + τp̂            Var θ| θ̂i , si , p −
                                                                                                αp                                  αθ                               αp
                                                                            2                                     2
                                                                                 + τθ2 Var θ| θ̂i , si , p              τθ̂−1
                                                                                                
                                             + τsi Var θ| θ̂i , si , p
  25
   As described in Veldkamp
                           (2009), we are formally assuming that investors’ preferences correspond to
                                         −γ w
E ui E Ui (w2i ) |θ̂i , si , p          , where Ui (w2i ) = −e                   i    2i
                                                                                           and ui (x) = − ln (−x).



                                                                                                A5
is independent of c since τsj = τs? for all j 6= i. Hence,
                                                             h h                     i           i
                                                1
               ∂H (τsi )            ∂2          κi Var          E θ| θ̂i , si , p − p
                         =
                 ∂c                                               ∂τsi ∂c
                                                                                                                                  h h                i        i
                                                1                                                                    1
                                    ∂2          κi
                                                                  h h                     i         i    ∂           κi       ∂Var E θ| θ̂i , si , p − p
                               =                         Var E θ| θ̂i , si , p − p +
                                    ∂τsi ∂c                                                                      ∂c                         ∂τsi
                                                                  h h                        i         i
                                                         1
                                        1 ∂              κi Var         E θ| θ̂i , si , p − p
                               =−                                                                            .
                                        κi                                 ∂τsi
When the FOC holds,                                                h h                       i         i
                                                         1
                                                ∂        κi Var         E θ| θ̂i , si , p − p
                                                                                                                 = λ0 (τsi ) > 0,
                                                                            ∂τsi
which implies that                                                                               h h                         i       i
                                                                                     1
                                    ∂H (τsi )                               ∂2       κi Var         E θ| θ̂i , si , p − p
                                                                        =                                                                  < 0.
                                      ∂c                     τsi =τs?                               ∂τsi ∂c



A.3     Section 6: Linear costs
Characterization of the sets of buyers and sellers

Let Bn , Sn , and An be the sets of buyers, sellers, and active investors of type n, respectively. An investor
i ∈ I n will be a buyer in the asset market if
                                                                                     n+
                                                                                   ∆q1i > 0,
         n+
where ∆q1i   is defined in Eq. (15) in the text. Combining the equilibrium price in Eq. (16) in the text
with investors assets demands, we can express equilibrium asset demands for buyers as follows

                                                                αsn αpn                              αhn αpn                             αpn n
                                                                              !                                           !                              !
    n+
  ∆q1i   =αsn εnsi   +   αθn εθ̂i   −   αhn εnhi         +         −                 αs θ −             −                     αh δ + 1 −    µ  αθn θn
                                                                αs   αp                              αh   αp                             αp A
                                                                                                                                                
             αpn X j j           N    αjn  αn             αjn  αn                                                                                            ψ n+ αpn
                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                     µB − p  αj µ̂j +  µS − p  αj µ̂j  +
                                X
           −         µA αθ θj +                  µB B                µS S                                                                                        −          ψ.
             αp j6=n            j=1   αj   αp             αj   αp                                                                                             ψ    αp
                                                                    µB                                                µS

                                                   n+
Consequently, we can express the distribution of ∆q1i as follows
                                                                    n                     oN                                          
                                                                                                                    −1
                                              n+
                                            ∆q1i θ, δ, θj , µjB , µjS                               ∼ N ∆+
                                                                                                         n , (τ∆n )    ,
                                                                                              j=1

where
                αsn αpn                                        αhn αpn                        αpn n          αpn X j j
                                        !                                     !                                           !
         ∆+
          n   ≡    −                        αs θ −                −                αh δ + 1 −    µA αθn θn −        α µ θj                                              (A11)
                αs   αp                                        αh   αp                        αp             αp j6=n θ A
                                                                                                                             
                                     jn
                     N
                                                  αpn             αjn  αn                                                                  ψ n+ αpn
                                                                                                                                                         !
                                    αµB
                                                       αj µ̂j +  µS − p  αj µ̂j  +
                     X
                 +                            −        µB B                µS S                                                              −             ψ,
                     j=1
                                     j
                                    αµB           αp              αj   αp                                                                   ψ    αp
                                                                                          µS

and
                                                                                                                                           −1
                                    (τ∆n )−1 = (αsn )2 τsn
                                                        −1
                                                           + (αhn )2 (τhn )−1 + (αθn )2 τθ̂n                                                     .                      (A12)

                                                                                          A6
                                                         n oN                                          n                oN
Since for a given aggregate state                 θ, δ, θj                   and measures µjB , µjS                              all investors i from type n
                                                                   j=1                                                    j=1
       n+
with ∆q1i > 0 are buyers, the measure of buyers of type n is given by
                                                   √            √       
                                       µnB = 1 − Φ − τ∆n ∆+
                                                          n   = Φ    τ  ∆+
                                                                      ∆n n .

Similarly, an investor i ∈ I n will be a seller in the asset market if
                                                                          n−
                                                                        ∆q1i < 0,

where                                                     n                  oN                                           
                                                                                                       −1
                                       n−
                                     ∆q1i θ, δ, θj , µjB , µjS                         ∼ N ∆−
                                                                                            n , (τ∆n )    ,
                                                                                 j=1
and
              αsn αpn                              αhn αpn                         αpn n          αpn X j j
                                 !                                  !                                        !
         ∆−
          n ≡    −                   αs θ −           −                 αh δ + 1 −    µA αθn θn −        α µ θj                                                  (A13)
              αs   αp                              αh   αp                         αp             αp j6=n θ A
                                                                                                            
                    N             jn                         jn
                                         αpn                      αpn                                                      ψ n− αpn
                                                                                                                                               !
                                 αµB            j    j     αµS
                                                                       αj µ̂j  +
                    X
                +                    −      αµB µ̂B +       −        µS S                                                  −                    ψ.
                    j=1
                                  j
                                 αµB     αp                α j    α p                                                       ψ    αp
                                                                                 µS
                                                                                n oN                                          n              oN
Therefore, since for a given aggregate state                            θ, δ, θj                    and measures                 µjB , µjS               all investors i
                                                                                          j=1                                                      j=1
                      n−
from type n with    ∆q1i      < 0 are sellers, the set of sellers of type n is given by
                                                   √            √
                                          µnS = Φ − τ∆n ∆−        τ∆n ∆−
                                                                        
                                                         n =1−Φ        n .

     Since all parameters are known in the economy, knowing the measure of sellers and buyers of each
type reveals information about the fundamental θ. By inverting the normal c.d.f. Φ (·), one can recover
∆+           −
   n and ∆n , and using Eqs. (A11) and (A13), one can recover the unbiased linear signals contained in
these measures, denoted by µ̂nS and µ̂nB . By inspecting (A11) and (A13), it is clear that µ̂nS = µ̂nB , where
µ̂nB is given by
                           αn        αn                                          αn
                                                                                       
                                 −    p
                                                                         1−       p  n   n
                                     αp α h                                      αp µA αθ
                            h
                           α
                                                                                                                     
        zn µ̂nB = θ +      hn
                           αs        αn
                                                 (δ − ωδ ) +  αn                  αn
                                                                                                       θ n − ωθ
                                      p
                           αs    −   αp α s                              αs
                                                                             s
                                                                                 − αpp αs
                                                                                                  !                                           !            
                                                                                 αjn
                                                                                  µB          αn
                                                                                               p                               αjn
                                                                                                                                µS        αn
                                                                                                                                           p
                  αn
                   p             j j
                                                          
                                                                            −       j               −       j
                           j6=n αθ µA θj −
                       P
                                                      ωθ          N  αjµB                   αp                                          αp
                                                                                   αµB         αjµS        αµS
                                                                                                                   
                  αp                                             X                        j                      j
              −             n
                              αs    αn
                                                              +     
                                                                      αns
                                                                             αn
                                                                                       µ̂B + αn αn
                                                                                                             µ̂S 
                                                                                                                   ,
                                 −   p
                                                                            −  p    α               −  p   α
                                    αp α s
                                                                                      s           s          s
                              αs                                 j=1    αs   αp                αs    αp
                                                                                                                   


where zn is a constant that guarantees that µ̂nB (equivalently µ̂nS ) are unbiased for all n. Given the
measure of active investors, the measures of buyers and sellers contain the same information, so we can
     jn
set αµS = 0 for all j, n, which implies that
                                               αn          αn                                           αn
                                                                                                              
                                                      −     p
                                                                                                1−       p   n   n
                                                           αp αh                                        αp µ A α θ
                                                h
                                               αh
                                                                                                                                         
                        zn µ̂nB = θ +          n
                                               αs          αn
                                                                       (δ − ωδ ) +  αn                   αn
                                                                                                                              θn − ωθ                           (A14)
                                                            p
                                               αs     −    αp αs
                                                                                                    s
                                                                                                   αs   − αpp αs
                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                    αjn
                                                                                                     µB          αn
                                                                                                                  p
                                     αn
                                      p             j j
                                                                                 
                                                                                                             −             j
                                              j6=n αθ µA θj −
                                           P
                                                                            ωL            N                      αp
                                     αp                                                             αjµB                  αµB
                                                                                                                                 µ̂jB .
                                                                                          X
                                 −             n
                                                 αs    αn
                                                                                     +            
                                                                                                        αn       αn
                                                                                                                    
                                                    −   p
                                                                                                             −    p        αs
                                                       αp αs
                                                                                                         s
                                                 αs                                       j=1           αs       αp



                                                                                 A7
        Note that this expression can be written in matrix form as follows
                                                                    
z       µ̂B = θ1N ×1 + B θ − ωθ 1N ×1
                                            !                                     !                                                             !            
                              α11     α1                         α21       α1                                                 αN 1   α1
                               µB
                                    − αp                          µB
                                                                         − αp                                                  µB
                                                                                                                                   − αp
                             α1       p                         α2         p                                                 αN       p                      
                                 α1µB                                                   α2µB                                                         αN                1                             
                               µB                                 µB                                                           µB                                                α1
                                                                                                                                                     µB
                                                                                                                                                                        α
                 
                    α1   α  1    αs
                                                               
                                                                   α1 α1
                                                                                        αs         ···                      
                                                                                                                               α1   α 1              αs
                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                         αh
                                                                                                                                                                           h− p
                                                                                                                                                                                 αp
                       s− p                                         s− p                                                        s− p
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                    αs   αp                                        αs αp                                                       αs   αp
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                 α1
                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                 !                       αs      p                     
                
                                                                                                                              αN 2   α2
                                                                                                                                                                        αs
                                                                                                                                                                             −   αp
                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                µB
                                                                                                                                   − αp
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                             ..
                                                                                                                                     p
                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                N
                          ..                                             ..                                                                          αN
                                                                                                                             α                                                                       
                          .                                                   .                    ···
                                                                                                                                µB                    µB      
                                                                                                                                                               B 
                                                                                                                                                                             .                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                         αh
                                                                                                                                    α2                αs
                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                         α (δ − ωδ ) ,
               +                                                                                                              α2                              µ̂ + 
                
                                                                                                                               αs
                                                                                                                                 s− p
                                                                                                                                    αp
                                                                                                                                                                              ..                        
                                                                                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                      s
                          ..                                             ..                        ..                                  ..                            N N                           
                            . !                                            .                                .                            . !
                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                      ααh − ααp
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                        h       p                    
                   α 1N
                          αN                                                                                                 αN N       αN
                                                                                                                                                             
                     µB
                        − αp                                                                                                  µB         p
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                    −                                              N
                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                         αN      α
                                                                                                                                        αp
                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                    1        p                                                                                              αN
                                                                                                                                                                         s − p
                   α             α1                                                                                                                  αN
                  µB                                                                                                        µB                                         αs      αp
                                                                                                                                                             
                                 µB                                     ···                        ···                                             µB      
                  αN    αN       αs                                                                                          αN        αN            αs      
                            p   s                                                                                              s         p
                               αs
                                    −   αp                                                                                    αs
                                                                                                                                    −   αp



where              denotes the Hadamard product (element-wise multiplication), z = [z1 , . . . , zN ]T , µ̂B =
h                        iT             h                      iT
    µ̂1B , . . . , µ̂N
                     B        , θ = θ1 , . . . , θ N                , 1N ×1 is an N by 1 vector of ones, and
                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                    α1
                                                               1− αp µ1A α1θ                     α1
                                                                                                  p 2 2                                                  α1
                                                                                                                                                          p N N
                                                       p                                           α µ
                                                                                                 αp θ A
                                                                                                                                                            α µ
                                                                                                                                                         αp θ A
                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                
                                                    1
                                                   αs     α1
                                                                                               1
                                                                                                αs    α1
                                                                                                                                   ···                  1
                                                                                                                                                         αs   α1
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                            p
                                                                                                   − αp α s                                                 − αp α s
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                  αs
                                                       −  αp
                                                                αs                              αs                                                       αs
                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                      p                                                       p                   
                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                   α2
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                    α2                                              p 2                                                  α2
                                                     p 1 1                                    1− α µA α2θ                                                p N N
                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                 αp αθ µ                                         p                                                       α µ
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                              A                                                                                          αp θ A
                                                  α2     α2
                                                                                               
                                                                                                   α2 α2
                                                                                                                                   ···                  2
                                                                                                                                                         αs   α2
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                             B≡
                                                   s
                                                   αs
                                                            p
                                                       − α αs
                                                            p
                                                                                                    s− p
                                                                                                   αs αp
                                                                                                                             αs                          αs
                                                                                                                                                            − αp α s
                                                                                                                                                               p
                                                                                                                                                                                   .
                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                        ..                                                     ..                  ..                          ..                 
                                                          .                                                      .                       .                       . 
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                           αp N
                                                    αn                                              αn
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                     p 1 1                                          p 2 2                                           1−    αp
                                                                                                                                                                  µN
                                                                                                                                                                   A       αN
                                                                                                                                                                            θ
                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                        α µ                                            α µ
                                                 αnp θn A                                         αp θ A
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                          αp
                                                                                          
                                                                                                   αn   αn
                                                                                                                                   ···                                          
                                                  αs
                                                                    −α             αs               s − p α                                              αN       αN
                                                                                                                                                                   p
                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                               αs                                  αs   αp  s                                             s   −            αs
                                                                          p                                                                              αs       αp



Then,                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                      µ̂B = A θ1N ×1 + B θ − ωθ 1N ×1 + C (δ − ωδ ) ,

where                                                           !                                                   !                                                            !               −1
                                                  α11       α1                             α21        α1                                                          αN 1   α1
                                                   µB
                                                          − αp                              µB
                                                                                                    − αp                                                            µB
                                                                                                                                                                       − αp
                                                 α1         p                             α2          p                                                            N     p                       
                                            α1    µB                                       µB                               α2µB                                 α
                                                                                                                                                                    µB                  αN        
                       z1 − 
                                        α1
                                            αµB                                    −  α1        α1
                                                                                                                             αs        ···              −             α1
                                                                                                                                                                                        µB
                                                                                                                                                                                         αs
                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                               α1
                                 s− p           s                                               s− p                                                               α1s− p
                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                αs      αp                                                     αs αp                                                               αs   αp
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                 !               
                                                                                                                                                                  αN 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                   µB    α2
                                                                                                                                                                       − αp
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                          p
                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                  ..                                                               ..                                                            αN                    αN        
                                                                                                                                                                   µB                    µB
                                   .                                                                       .                           ···              −               2             αs
                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                    A≡                                                                                                                                             2   α
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                  αs
                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                   αs
                                                                                                                                                                      − αp                        
                                                                                                                                                                         p                       
                                   ..                                                                 ..                               ..                                  ..                    
                                     . !                                                                .                                    .                               .
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                       !         
                            α 1N
                                      αN                                                                                                                           αN N           αN
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                              µB
                                 − αp                                                                                                                               µB
                                                                                                                                                                                 − αp
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                             1         p                                                                                                                          αN               p             
                            α               α1                                                                                                                                              αN
                       −  µB                                                                                                                                      µB
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                           µB                                                      ···                                 · · · zN −                                         µB   
                            αN      αN      αs                                                                                                                        αN        αN          αs   
                                       p          s                                                                                                                     s         p
                                                 αs
                                                      −   αp                                                                                                           αs
                                                                                                                                                                             −    αp




                                                                                                                A8
and                                                                               
                                                                     α1 α1
                                                                      h− p
                                                                    αh αp               
                                                                                       
                                                                 α1
                                                                    
                                                         α1
                                                           s− p
                                                                                         
                                                          αs     αp
                                                                                        
                                                                                        
                                                            ..                          
                                                      
                                                             .                          
                                                                                          αh
                                                    C≡       ..                         α .
                                                                                         
                                                               .
                                                      
                                                                                         s
                                                        N N                           
                                                       αh αp                            
                                                         αh
                                                             −α                          
                                                                 p                      
                                                                                      
                                                       αN αN     p
                                                                                         
                                                                      s   −
                                                                     αs       αp


                                                               = 1, ∀i, so the signals in µ̂B are unbiased. Then,
                                                P
The constants z1 , ..., zN are such that             m Aim
                                                X                                 
                                   µ̂nB = θ +        (AB)nj θj − ωθ + (AC)n (δ − ωδ ) ,
                                                j

where (AB)nj denotes the element (n, j) of matrix AB and (AC)n is element n of vector AC.
    The public signals in vector µ̂B are correlated among themselves. The linear filtering solved by
investor i in group n, which can be found in the Online Appendix, implies that
                                                      τθn θ̂in + τsn sni + 11×(N +1) Λ̃−1 ΓT x1
                                     En [θ|Iin ] =                       +1 −1
                                                                                                                                               (A15)
                                                         τθn + τsn + N
                                                                                            P
                                                                       h=1 Λ̃hh
                                                              1
                                   Varn [θ|Iin ] =              P +1 −1 ,
                                                   τθn + τsn + N h=1 Λ̃hh
for i ∈ I n , n = 1, ..., N , where Λ and Γ are, respectively, the diagonal eigenvalue matrix and eigenvector
matrix in the eigen-decomposition of Ω, Λ̃ is a normalization of Λ described in the Online Appendix,
                                                                                            h          iT
and where the vector of N + 1 unbiased public signals, x1 ≡ p̂, µ̂B                                          is such that
                                                                                                
                                                x1 | θ ∼ N θ1(N +1)×1 , Ω ,
with
                                                               τ −1
                                                                                                            
                                                                              0     ...         ...    0                                                       T
        α1 µ1     α2 µ2             αN µN                                                                                                     αN µN
                                                                                                              α1 µ1       α2 µ2
         θ A       θ A               θ   A      αh              θ                                                  θ A        θ A              θ   A    αh
         αs        αs
                            ···       αs        αs             0         τ −1         0        ...    0          αs         αs
                                                                                                                                      ···       αs      αs
                                                                              θ
                            ···                                                                                                       ···
    (AB)        (AB)12            (AB)1N    (AC)1
                                                                                                             (AB)        (AB)12          (AB)1N    (AC)1
                                                                                                                                                               
          11                                                    ..                  ..                 ..              11
Ω=                                                                                                                                                             .
                                                                                                                                                          
       ..                   ..        ..       ..              .         0            .    ...        .         ..                ..        ..       ..
       .          ···         .       .        .
                                                                                                                 .        ···        .       .        .
                                                                                                                                                               
                                                               0         ...          0    τ −1       0     
       (AB)N 1   (AB)N 2    ···    (AB)N N   (AC)N                                              θ                (AB)N 1    (AB)N 2   ···    (AB)N N   (AC)N
                                                                0             0     ...         ...   τδ−1

    The posterior mean is linear in all the signals and the posterior prior is independent of the realization
of the signals, as it is usual in Bayesian updating problems with linear Gaussian structures.
    Using the expression in Eq. (A15) and the first order conditions of the investors’ problems we have
that
                           τsn          τθn
                     αsn =     , αθn =      , αhn = 1
                           γn           γn
                             n                             α
                     jn
                           K(j+1)      jn         n
                                                       1 − αps K1n
                   αµB =          , αµS = 0, αp =
                             κn                           κn
                                                                                                                          
                                                                   N α                                       j
                              1                    αθ    αh      X    µB j   ψ
                   ψ n+    =     −κn q0n − φ − K1n  ωθ −    ωδ +        µ̂B + 
                             κn                     αs    αs      j=1
                                                                      αs      αs
                                                                                                                          
                                                                   N α                                       j
                              1                    αL    αh      X    µB j   ψ
                   ψ n−    =     −κn q0n + φ − K1n  ωθ −    ωδ +        µ̂B +  ,
                             κn                     αs    αs      j=1
                                                                      αs      αs


                                                                         A9
where Kin is the ith element of the Kalman gain vector for an investor of type n, given by
           11×(N +1) Λ̃−1 ΓT
K n=                PN +1             , κn ≡ γn Varn [θ|Iin ], and where without loss of generality we are imposing
     τθn +τsn +       h=1
                               Λ̃−1
                                 hh
      jn
that αµS  = 0.
    The precision of the unbiased signal of θ contained in the price from the perspective of an external
observer who observes all public signals but only learns from the price, which we denote by τp̂ , is the
relevant measure of price informativeness. Price informativeness is given by
                                                                                               2
                                                                                          αs
                                                                                      
                                                                            τp̂ =                   ,
                                                                                          αN
where                                                                              2
                                                          N         2       N
                                                 (αN )2 ≡     αθj µjA τ −1      µjA  τδ−1 .
                                                          X                   X
                                                                        θ
                                                                           +
                                                                    j=1                                 j=1

Linear trading costs affect price informativeness through the set of active investors An . The direct effect
of this change is through the extensive margin, since
                                                                           τsn                              τθn
                                                                αsn =                 and αθn =
                                                                           γn                               γn
do not depend on the set of active investors of each type.

Equilibrium price characterization

In an equilibrium in linear strategies, we conjecture (and subsequently verify) net demand functions for
            n+                  n−
buyers (∆q1i   ) and sellers (∆q1i ) of type n respectively given by
                                                                                                  N                         
                                                                                                      jn j          jn j
                           ∆qin+ = αsn sni + αθn θ̂in − αhn hni − αpn p +
                                                                                                  X
                                                                                                         αµB µ̂B + αµS µ̂S + ψ n+
                                                                                                  j=1
                                                                                                  N                         
                                                                                                      jn j          jn j
                           ∆qin−
                                                                                                  X
                                      =   αsn sni    +   αθn θ̂in   −   αhn hni   −   αpn p   +          αµB µ̂B + αµS µ̂S + ψ n− ,
                                                                                                  j=1

where µ̂B        S
        n and µ̂n are the unbiased signals about the fundamental contained in the measures of buyers
and sellers of type n, respectively, and αθn , αsn , and αpn are positive scalars, while ψ n+ and ψ n− can take
positive or negative values. We define as Bn , Sn and An the sets of buyers, sellers, and active investors
of type n, respectively. Market clearing in the asset market is given by
                                      N      ˆ                          N   ˆ                           N     ˆ
                                                                                  ∆qin+ di +                       ∆qin− di = 0,
                                      X                                 X                               X
                                                     ∆qin di =
                                      n=1 An                            n=1 Bn                          n=1 Sn

which allows us to express the equilibrium price p as
                PN       n     n                      N  ˆ                              ˆ                              !
   αs               n=1 αθ θn µA            αh    1 X         n n   n n       n n
                                                                                   
                                                                                              n n      n n       n n
                                                                                                                      
p=    θ+                                  −    δ+            α ε + αθ εθ̂i − αh εhi di +     αs εsi + αθ εθ̂i − αh εhi di
   αp                      αp               αp    αp n=1 Bn s si                          Sn
     N         n                 n                   N 
                                             !
     X        αµB               αµS                  X                                    
 +                  µ̂nB   +          µ̂nS       +          ψ n+ µnB + ψ n− µnS
     n=1
               αp               αp                   n=1
                                                   N   n          n
                PN                                                                                  !
   αs                    n     n                      αµB        αµS
                    n=1 αθ θn µA            αh                                                              ψ
                                                  X
                                                             n
 =    θ+                                  −    δ+          µ̂B +     µ̂nS                               +      ,
   αp                      αp               αp    n=1
                                                       α p       α p                                        αp

                                                                                      A10
              PN    n n             PN    n n                       PN       n n
where αs =     n=1 αs µA ,   αh =    n=1 αh µA ,         αp =           n=1 αp µA ,        and
                                          N 
                                          X                                                          
                                    ψ=            ψ n+ µnB + ψ n− µnS + mn+ + mn− ,
                                          n=1

where   mn+   and   mn−   are given by:
                                                  ˆ                                             
                                         n+
                                     m        =                αsn εnsi + αθn εnθ̂i − αhn εnhi di
                                                  ˆBn                                           
                                     mn− =                 αsn εnsi + αθn εnθ̂i − αhn εnhi di.
                                                    Sn

We can further express mn+ and mn− as follows. Note that
                                                                                                        
                                wn ≡ αsn εnsi + αθn εnθ̂i − αhn εnhi ∼ N 0, (τ∆n )−1 ,

where τ∆n is defined in Eq. (A12). Moreover, given the characterization of the sets of buyers and sellers
in the previous subsection, we have that
                  ˆ             h            i         ˆ
                       wn di = E wn |wn > ∆+               wn di = E wn |wn < ∆−
                                                                                   
                                           n     and                              n ,
                      Bn                                                          Sn

which are the expected values of a truncated normal at ∆+      −
                                                        n and ∆n , respectively. Then,
                                                                            +    
                                                                 Φ0        √∆n
                                                                            τ∆n            1
                                              mn+ =                          +       √
                                                               1−Φ        √∆n              τ∆n
                                                                             τ∆n
                                                                           −     
                                                               −Φ0       √∆n
                                                                          τ∆n          1
                                              mn− =                      −     √         .
                                                                Φ       √∆n            τ∆n
                                                                         τ∆n

Since ∆+      −
       n and ∆n can be recovered from the measures of buyers and sellers of type n as

                                              Φ−1 (µnB )                       Φ−1 (µnS )
                                    ∆+
                                     n =       √                    and ∆−
                                                                         n = −  √         ,
                                                 τ∆n                              τ∆n
                                                                                                             n   o
mn+ and mn− are effectively observed given investors’ information set, and the price is linear in θ, θn              ,
                                                                                                                 n
δ, and {µ̂nB , µ̂nS }n , as guessed above.

Proof of Lemma 3 (Existence)

Proof. Our existence proof uses Brouwer’s fixed point theorem.                  Note that equilibrium price
informativeness
     h            τp̂  can  be expressed
                                i         explicitly as a function of the measures of active buyers and sellers,
       1       N      1       N
y = µB , ..., µB , µS , ..., µS , as follows:

                                                                       N τsj j 2
                                                                P               
                                                                       j=1 γj µA
                                  τp̂ = P                         2                               .
                                                                                            j 2 −1
                                                                                 P         
                                             τθj
                                         N
                                              j=1     γj   µjA          τ −1
                                                                          θ
                                                                             +         N
                                                                                          µ
                                                                                       j=1 A   τδ

Then, an equilibrium is fully characterized by the solution to the following system of equations
                                                      √                   
                                      µnB = Φ     τ∆n ∆+
                                                       n , ∀n = 1, ..., N                                    (A16)
                                                  √
                                         µnS = Φ − τ∆n ∆−
                                                          
                                                         n , ∀n = 1, ..., N,


                                                                      A11
where ∆+         −
        n and ∆n are functions of y and τ∆n known in equilibrium given investors’ information set. We
can rewrite the system in Eq. (A16) as the fixed point of a mapping T : [0, 1]2N → [0, 1]2N , where T is
continuous in y.26 An application of Brouwer’s fixed point theorem implies that a solution to Eq. (A16)
exists.

Claim. (Stability) In equilibrium, price informativeness is given by the fixed point of
                                                       P             2    
                                                        N τsj j
                                                        j=1 γj µA (x)
                       HL (x) ≡ −x +     PN  τθj j     2        P           2         = 0.
                                                             −1           j
                                                 µ
                                          j=1 γj A  (x)    τ θ
                                                                +   N
                                                                        µ
                                                                    j=1 A   (x)   τδ−1

In a stable equilibrium, HL0 (x? ) < 0.

Proof. Local stability follows from Eq. (A17) using local continuity and the implicit function theorem.
In an equilibrium, τp̂ is implicitly characterized by the fixed point JL (x) = x, where JL (x) is defined by
                                                      P
                                                       N τsj j       2     
                                                       j=1 γj µA (x)
                             JL (x) ≡   PN  τθj j     2        P           2      ,                           (A17)
                                                            −1     N     j         −1
                                                µ
                                         j=1 γj A  (x)    τ θ
                                                               +       µ
                                                                   j=1 A   (x)   τδ

and where we used the contribution to the equilibrium aggregate demand sensitivities of each group,
which depend on x through the set of active investors µnA (x) and through the equilibrium demand
sensitivities. Using the implicit function theorem, we know that µjA (x) is a continuous and differentiable
function of x in a neighborhood of τp̂ . The function JL (x) determines price informativeness when
investors expect the price informativeness to be x.
    We adopt a conventional notion of stability. The function HL (x) is such that if HL (x0 ) > 0, then
JL (x0 ) > x0 , which implies that if investors in the model expect the signal-to-noise ratio to be x0 , the
realized value of this ratio will be x1 > x0 . Let x? be a solution to HL (x? ) = 0. Then, we will say that
the equilibrium x? is stable if for all x0 ∈ (x? − εδ , x? − εδ ) for some εδ > 0 the sequence {xm }∞
                                                                                                    m=0 where
                                                ?                                           0   ?
xm = JL (xm−1 ) for m > 1 converges to x . This sequence will converge only if |JL (x )| < 1, which
implies HL0 (x? ) < 0. Hence, in all stable equilibria, HL0 (x? ) < 0.

Proof of Theorem 4 (Irrelevance theorem with ex-ante identical investors and linear trading
costs)
                                                                                                 τs2
When investors are ex-ante identical, price informativeness is given by τp̂ =              τ 2 −1
                                                                                                              , which is
                                                                                            θ τ
                                                                                           N θ
                                                                                                  +γ 2 τδ−1
independent of the level of the linear trading cost φ.

Proof of Lemma 4 (Directional characterization with linear trading costs)

Using the implicit function theorem we have that
                                                            ∂H
                                                             L
                                                   ∂τp̂    ∂φ
                                                        =              ,
                                                   ∂φ     −HL0
                                                                 τp̂

 26
      When y = 0, we define the mapping T as the limit implied by Eq. (A16).




                                                         A12
where
                                                                                                                           2                                                 
                                  PN            ∂µjA (x)               2                   2   PN    j                            ∂µjA (x) −1         PN       ∂µn
                                                                                                                                                                 A (x) −1
                     2αs (x)               j
                                      j=1 αs      ∂φ       (αN (x)) − 2 (αs (x))                j=1 µA (x)             αθj          ∂φ τ θ      +          n=1   ∂φ τδ
∂HL
                 =                                                                                     4
 ∂φ     τp̂ =x                                                                            (αN (x))
                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                   2
                                                                                      j
                                                                           PN        ∂µA (x)     j     j       −1   PN    n       −1
                                      2        PN     j    ∂µjA (x)                           α     µ   (x) τ    +     µ   (x) τ
                                                  j=1 αs
                                                                               j=1     ∂φ       θ      A             n=1 A       δ
                       
                           αs (x)                            ∂φ                                              θ                       
                 =2                                                   −                                        2
                                                                                                                                      
                           αN (x)                   αs (x)                                          (αN (x))                         

                                                           2                PN
                                                                                                 
                                         N                    j   j       −1          n       −1
                       
                           αs (x)
                                      2 X
                                                      αsj   α θ µ A (x) τ    +      µ
                                                                                 n=1 A  (x) τ      j
                                                                                             δ  ∂µA (x)
                                                                          θ
                 =2                                      −                                               ,
                                                
                           αN (x)
                                                
                                                  αs (x)                        2                
                                                                                                   ∂φ
                                            j=1                         (αN (x))

where                                                                                                                       2
                                                             N
                                                                                      !2                N
                                                                       τθj j                              j
                                          (αN (x))2 ≡                                      τ θ−1 +               µA (x) τδ−1 .
                                                             X                                          X
                                                                          µ (x)                       
                                                             j=1
                                                                       γj A                                j=1

Hence,
                                                                                                                                                                ∂µn (x)
                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                       j
                                                  N
                                               2 X                       (αθn )2 µnA (x) τ θ−1 + N           −1                  P
                                                                                                  j=1 µA (x) τδ
                                                                                                                      A
   ∂HL                   αs (x)                                     αn
                              
                                                                                                                      ∂φ 
                      =2                             µjA (x) Covn  s −                                          ,
    ∂φ      τp̂ =x       αN (x)                  j=1
                                                                   αs (x)                 (αN (x))2                µnA (x)

                 ∂HL
Note that         ∂φ     keeps price informativeness constant as φ changes. Therefore,
                                                                                                                                                          ∂µn (x)
                                                                                                             2 n             PN                                     !
                                      
                                          αs (x) 2 PN
                                                 
                                                         j                             αn           (αnθ )    µA (x)τ −1 +        j=1
                                                                                                                                        µjA (x)τδ−1         A
                                                                                                                                                            ∂φ
                                  2       αN (x)    j=1 µA (x) Covn
                                                                                         s
                                                                                      αs (x)   −                     θ
                                                                                                                                  2                   ,   µn
           ∂τp̂                                                                                                     (αN (x))                               A (x)
                              =                                                                                                                                         .
           ∂φ        τp̂ =x                                                                    −HL0

Note that
                                                                                      N
                                            ∂ (αN )2       ∂αN         n 2 n −1
                                                                                         µjA τδ−1 .
                                                                                     X
                                                     = 2αN      = 2 (α θ ) µ  τ
                                                                             A θ + 2
                                              ∂µnA         ∂µjA                      j=1

Since the denominator is positive in any stable equilibrium, we have that
                                                                                                                                             ∂µn
                                                                                                                                             
                                          αs          n 2 n −1                                                    PN      j −1
                                  d       αθ    αsn (αθ ) µA τθ +                                                    j=1 µA τδ
                                                                                                                                               A
                                                                                                                                              ∂φ
                        sgn      = sgn Covn
                                                 −                                                                                     ,         
                              dφ                αs             (αN )2                                                                        µnA
                                                                                         ∂αN        ∂µn
                                                                          
                                                                               ∂αs
                                                                                                             
                                                                                                      A
                                                                               ∂µn
                                                                                 A       ∂µn
                                                                                           A         ∂φ
                                                    = sgn Covn                     −          ,             .
                                                                               αs        αN         µnA

    The first term inside the covariance is the difference between the marginal contribution of group n
to the information and noise in the price, respectively. The second term is the effect of linear trading
costs on the extensive margin of group n. When this covariance is positive, an increase in linear trading
costs induces less investors to stop trading in groups that contribute relatively more information than
noise to the price. In this case, price informativeness increases with linear trading costs.

Proof of Theorem 5 (Directional results under one-dimensional heterogeneity with linear
trading costs)

The proof of this theorem uses Lemma 4 and the result that the covariance of two monotone increasing
functions is positive (see Schmidt (2003)). The structure of the proof is the same for all dimensions

                                                                                     A13
of heterogeneity considered. We will denote by zn = z + ηhn the group specific parameter over which
investor groups differ. Then, we can write
                                                                       ∂µn
                                                                            
                    n 2 n −1                    PN       j −1
              αsn (αθ ) µA τθ +                     j=1 µA τδ
                                                                         A
                                                                        ∂φ
       Covn     −                                                 ,          = Covn [FL (zn ; α, τp̂ , Ω) , GL (zn ; α, τp̂ , Ω)] ,
              αs             (αN )2                                    µnA

where α is the vector of all aggregate demand sensitivities, Ω denotes the variance-covariance matrix of
the vector of public signals, and
                                           n 2 n −1        −1                                                               ∂µn
                                     αsn (αθ ) µA τθ + αh τδ                                                                  A
                                                                                                                             ∂φ
              FL (zn ; α, τp̂ , Ω) ≡    −                                               and GL (zn ; α, τp̂ , Ω) ≡                ,
                                     αs         (αN )2                                                                      µnA
                                  j
where we used that αh = N
                                  P
                             j=1 µA (x).
                                                                                     ∂FL           ∂GL
    The main part of the proof consists of characterizing                            ∂zn    and    ∂zn .        To characterize these partial
derivatives, we use the following intermediate results.27
Lemma 7. When the linear cost is small, the set of active investors is the same across groups, i.e.,
                                                            ∂µnA (zn ; α, τp̂ , Ω)
                                                        lim                        = 0.
                                                        φ→0        ∂zn
Proof. The measure of active investors of type n is given by
                                          √               √       
                                                                  −
                           µnA = 1 − Φ − τ∆n ∆+      n + Φ − τ∆n ∆n    .                                                                  (A18)

Suppose investors differ only in dimension z with zn = z + ηfn for fn ∈ R and z ∈ {γ, τs , τθ }. Then,
               ∂µnA (zn ; α, τp̂ , Ω)  0  √     
                                                           0  √     − − 1
                                                                              1 ∂τ∆n
                                     = Φ − τ∆n ∆+
                                                n   ∆ +
                                                      n − Φ  −  τ  ∆
                                                                 ∆n n ∆ n    √
                      ∂zn                                                   2 τ∆n ∂zn
                                                                                                                             !
                                                    √          0
                                                                    √               ∂∆+         √        ∂∆−
                                                +       τ∆n Φ −          τ∆n ∆+
                                                                              n
                                                                                        n
                                                                                             − Φ − τ∆n ∆−
                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                        n
                                                                                                              n
                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                      ∂zn                   ∂zn
which can be rewritten as
 ∂µnA (zn ; α, τp̂ , Ω)  0  √     
                                             0  √      − − 1
                                                                 1 ∂τ∆n
                       = Φ − τ∆n ∆+
                                  n   ∆ +
                                        n − Φ  −  τ∆n ∆n ∆ n    √
        ∂zn                                                    2 τ∆n ∂zn
                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                          φ
                                        
                              √             √                √         ∂∆+      √        ∂ κn
                                  τ∆n  −Φ0 − τ∆n ∆−       0          +      n
                                                                               − 2Φ0 τ∆n ∆−
                                                     
                          +                        n   + Φ    −  τ  ∆
                                                                  ∆n n                    n
                                                                                                   
                                                                           ∂zn                 ∂zn

using that
                                                                                                               φ
                                  ∆−    +
                                   n = ∆n + ψ
                                              n−
                                                 − ψ n+                      and ψ n− − ψ n+ = 2                  .
                                                                                                               κn
             ∂µn (z ;α)
Note that A∂znn      keeps the aggregate demand sensitivities constant. Taking limits when the linear
cost goes to zero gives
                                                ∂µnA
                                            lim      = 0,
                                            φ→0 ∂zn
since
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                       1
                                                                                              ∂       κn
                                  lim ∆−        +
                                       n = lim ∆n = ∆n ,                      and     lim φ                    = 0.
                                  φ→0               φ→0                               φ→0         ∂zn

  27
    Note that all the partial derivatives that we compute are meant to keep aggregates constant. These partial derivatives
seek to characterize how these functions change in the cross section of investors. The same logic applies to the fixed cost
case.


                                                                        A14
Lemma 8. The change in the extensive margin for different groups of investors when heterogeneity is
small and linear costs go to zero is
                                                                  √                              
                                                                                              1
                                                                                                      √
                                                                                                                
                                                                  ∂ τ∆n 1               ∂
                                                                                    +        κn
                                                                                                          τ∆n       √2
                           ∂GL (zn ; α, τp̂ , Ω)                   ∂zn κn                   ∂zn                      2π
                   lim lim                       = lim lim −                                                              .
                   φ→0 η→0       ∂zn               φ→0 η→0                              µnA
Proof. Using the definition of µnA in Eq. (A18) we have
                                      ∂µn           √       √        +     √     − √τ  ∂∆−
                                                Φ0 − τ∆n ∆+    τ∆n ∂∆     0
                                                                                    
                                                                    ∂φ − Φ − τ∆n ∆n
                                        A                             n                    n
                                       ∂φ                 n                           ∆n ∂φ
             GL (zn ; α, τp̂ , Ω) =         =
                                      µnA                                   µnA
where
                                                     N        n
                                             ∂∆+n
                                                    X   ∂∆+
                                                          n ∂µA   ∂ψ n+
                                                  =       n     +       .
                                              ∂φ    n=1
                                                        ∂µA ∂φ     ∂φ
Using that
                                                                                    φ
                                        ∆−    +
                                         n = ∆n + ψ
                                                    n−
                                                       − ψ n+ = ∆+
                                                                 n +2
                                                                                    κn
we have
                                                     ∂∆+n   ∂∆−n
                                                          =      .
                                                     ∂µnA   ∂µnA
Then,
                                                                                        N
                                                                                                                    !
                    ∂µnA  0  √     
                                          0  √       − √
                                                                                       X ∂∆+   n
                                                                                            n ∂µA
                        = Φ − τ∆n ∆+
                                   n   − Φ  −  τ∆n ∆ n    τ∆n
                     ∂φ                                                                 n=1
                                                                                                  ∂µnA ∂φ
                                  √       √     ∂ψ n+        √     − √     ∂ψ n−
                             + Φ0 − τ∆n ∆+
                                         n    τ∆n       − Φ 0
                                                              −  τ  ∆
                                                                  ∆n n    τ∆n       ,
                                                   ∂φ                          ∂φ
which is the same as
                                                                                            N
                                                                                                                     !
                     ∂µnA  0  √     
                                            0  √     − √
                                                                                           X ∂∆+   n
                                                                                                n ∂µA
                         = Φ − τ∆n ∆+
                                    n   − Φ   −  τ  ∆
                                                  ∆n n    τ∆n
                      ∂φ                                                                    n=1
                                                                                                  ∂µnA ∂φ
                                 √                 √     − √     1
                                                            
                              − Φ0 − τ∆n ∆+
                                          n   + Φ 0
                                                    −  τ  ∆
                                                        ∆n n    τ∆n ,
                                                                   κn
where we used that
                                            ∂ψ n+     1           ∂ψ n−    1
                                                  =−      and           =    .
                                             ∂φ      κn            ∂φ     κn
Note that                                √                √          
                                lim lim Φ0 − τ∆n ∆+
                                                  n   − Φ 0
                                                            −  τ∆n ∆ −
                                                                     n    =0
                                φ→0 η→0

and                                     √                    √
                            lim lim Φ00 − τ∆n ∆+            00      −
                                               n = lim lim Φ − τ∆n ∆n = 0.
                           φ→0 η→0                         φ→0 η→0
                             ∂µn
Then, using that limφ→0        A
                             ∂zn   = 0 and that limφ→0 µnA = 1 we have
                                                                 √             
                        ∂GL (zn ; α, τp̂ , Ω)                ∂        τ∆n κ1n
                                                                                    Φ0 (0) + Φ0 (0)
                                                                                                                
                lim lim                       = lim lim −
                φ→0 η→0       ∂zn               φ→0 η→0           ∂zn
                                                                  √
                                                                                     
                                                                                1
                                                                ∂   τ∆n 1   ∂  κn √        2
                                                  = lim lim −            +         τ∆n  √ .
                                                    φ→0 η→0       ∂zn κn      ∂zn          2π


                                                          A15
There are two effects that determine how the measure of active investors changes with the linear trading
costs across groups. First, different groups will have different dispersion in the distribution of their net
realized demands. When this dispersion is low (higher τ∆n ), the fraction of active investors decreases
more with linear trading costs. Second, the scale of the net demands is different across groups. Groups
with higher scales (lower κn ) react more in the extensive margin to changes in linear trading costs. These
two effects are captured by the two terms in brackets in the expression above.

   a) Suppose that investor groups are heterogeneous only in the precision of their private information,
with τsn = τs + ηfn . Recall that
                                                                        N 
                                                                            τθ j 2 −1
                                                                                
                                                       (αN )2 ≡               µA τ + (αh )2 τδ−1
                                                                        X
                                                                                       γ                     θ
                                                                        j=1
             PN        j
and αh =          j=1 µA .      Then,
                                                         ∂ (αN )2
                                                                  = 2 (αθn )2 µnA τ −1 + 2αh τδ−1
                                                           ∂µnA                     θ

and
                                                 ∂FL (τsn ; α, τp̂ , Ω)   1 1    (αθn )2 τ θ−1 ∂µnA
                                                                        =      −                    .
                                                       ∂τsn               γ αs     (αN )2 ∂τsn
Using Lemma 7 we have
                                                                       ∂FL (τsn ; α, τp̂ , Ω)   1 1
                                                       lim lim                                =      > 0.
                                                       φ→0 η→0               ∂τsn               γ αs
Moreover, from Lemma 8 we have
                                                                                                                 √
                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                   1
                            ∂GL (τsn ; α, τp̂ , Ω)               ∂ τ∆n 1         √        2                                               ∂       κn
                    lim lim                        = lim lim −           +        τ∆n  √ ,
                    φ→0 η→0       ∂τsn               φ→0 η→0      ∂τsn κn   ∂τsn          2π

which is the same as
                                     
            ∂GL   τsn ; α, τp̂ , Ω                     1√
                                                               
                                                                       1 1            1
                                                                                                
                                                                                                      2
  lim lim                                = lim lim −     τ∆n       −            τ∆n        +1        √
 φ→0 η→0           ∂τsn                   φ→0 η→0      γ               2γ             κn              2π
                                                                                                                                              N +1
                                                                                                                                                               !        !
                                                     1√                 1                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                 −1                          X
                                                                                           2 −1           2 −1                                            −1
                                         = lim lim −   τ∆n          −           τsn +     τθ τ       +   γ τh                τsn + τθ +                 Λ̃hh       +1       √
                                           φ→0 η→0   γ                  2                     θ̂                                                                             2π
                                                                                                                                                  h=1

                                                                                                                                              N +1
                                                                                                                                                               !                                !
                                                     1√                                                              1                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                              X
                                                                                                    −1 −1
                                                                                 2 −1           2
                                                                                                                                                        −1                   2 −1       2 −1
                                         = lim lim −   τ∆n         τsn + τθ τ              + γ τh                −           τsn + τθ +                 Λ̃hh       + τsn + τθ τ       + γ τh        √
                                           φ→0 η→0   γ                       θ̂                                      2                                                         θ̂                     2π
                                                                                                                                                  h=1
                                                                                                                                                                               
                                            1√                                                  1                                 τs2
                                                                                −1 −1                                                               + τθ2 τ −1 + γ 2 τh−1  √2
                                                           2 −1             2
                                                                                  
                                         =−   τ∆    τs + τθ τ       + γ τh                   τs − τθ −                     −1
                                            γ                 θ̂                                2                        τ2τ                                       θ̂                  2π
                                                                                                                          θ θ
                                                                                                                           N
                                                                                                                                  + γ 2 τ −1
                                                                                                                                              δ


since
                                                 √
                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                  1
                                                ∂ τ∆n   1 1           1                                                  ∂       κn                1
                                                      =− √    (τ∆n )2 2 ,                                                                 =          ,
                                                 ∂τsn   2 τ∆n        γ                                                       ∂τsn                  γ
and
                                                          N +1
                                                                                                                 N 2 τs2
                                                                   Λ̃−1
                                                          X
                                                    lim              hh = τp̂ =                                                  .
                                                    η→0
                                                          h=1
                                                                                                    N τθ2 τθ−1    + γ 2 N 2 τδ−1
Since                                                                                                               
                                                       1                                           τs2                   2 −1     2 −1
                                         Ss (τs ) ≡      τs − τθ −                                                   + τθ τθ̂ + γ τh
                                                                                                                     
                                                       2                              τθ2 τ −1
                                                                                           N
                                                                                            θ
                                                                                                    + γ 2 τδ−1

                                                                                            A16
                                                               ? and τ ? such that:
is quadratic and concave in τs . Then, there exist thresholds τs1     s2
                         ? ) (τ ? , ∞)
    i) for all τs ∈ (0, τs1
                            S
                               s2

                                                                                                  ∂µn
                                                                                                      
                                             n 2 n −1         −1
                                        αn (αθ ) µA τ θ + αh τδ     A
                                                                   ∂φ
                             sgn Covn  s −                     , n  > 0
                                        αs           αθ2          µA

and price informativeness increases with linear trading costs as investors who contribute less to the
information contained in the price are the ones who disproportionately exit the market (recall that
∂µn
 ∂φ < 0) .
   A

                        ? , τ? )
     ii) for all τs ∈ (τs1   s2

                                                                                                  ∂µn
                                                                                                      
                                                αn              (αθn )2 µnA τ θ−1 + αh τδ−1         A
                                                                                                   ∂φ
                             sgn Covn          s         −                                  ,          < 0
                                                   αs                      αθ2                    µnA

and price informativeness decreases with linear trading costs as investors who contribute more to the
information contained in the price are the ones who disproportionately exit the market.
    b) Suppose that investor groups are heterogeneous only in the precision of their prior, with
τθn = τθ + ηfn . In this case,
                                                                        n 2 −1
                           ∂FL (τθn ; α, τp̂ , Ω)     2αθn 1 n −1 (αθ ) τθ ∂µnA
                                                  =−           µ  τ
                                                                 A θ −             ,
                                 ∂τθn                (αN )2 γn         (αN )2 ∂τθn

and using Lemma 7
                                        ∂FL (τθn ; α, τp̂ , Ω)   2αn 1 n −1
                                 lim lim                       =− θ      µA τ θ < 0.
                                φ→0 η→0       ∂τθn                αθ2 γn
Moreover, from Lemma 8 we have
                                                                                  √
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                             1
                        ∂GL (τθn ; α, τp̂ , Ω)               ∂ τ∆n 1         √        2             ∂       κn
                lim lim                        = lim lim −           +        τ∆n  √ ,
                φ→0 η→0       ∂τθn               φ→0 η→0      ∂τθn κn   ∂τθn          2π

which is the same as
                                                                        
        ∂GL (τθn ; α, τp̂ , Ω)             1√          1     τθn 1            2
lim lim                        = lim lim −    τ∆n − τ∆n              +1 √
φ→0 η→0       ∂τθn               φ→0 η→0   γ           γ      τθ̂ κn          2π
                                                                       N +1
                                                                                 !                                  !
                                            1 1                         X
                                                                              −1   τθn            2 −1        2  −1    2
                               = lim lim − 3 √         − τs + τθn +         Λ̃hh         + τs + τθn τθ̂ + γ (τh )     √
                                 φ→0 η→0   γ   τ∆n                                  τθ̂                                 2π
                                                                        h=1
                                                                                                         !
                                                                      N 2 τs2
                                                      
                                    1 1            τθ                                 τθ              −1    2
                               =− 3√           1−        τs −                             + γ 2 (τh )      √ ,
                                   γ    τ∆n        τθ̂        N τθ τ + γ 2 N 2 τδ−1 τθ̂
                                                                   2 −1
                                                                                                            2π
                                                                                  θ

since
    √
                                                               
                                                            1                               N +1
   ∂ τ∆n      1           1 τθn                    ∂       κn        1                                                        N 2 τs2
                  (τ∆n )2 2                                                                        Λ−1
                                                                                            X
         = −√                   ,                                   = ,     and       lim           hh = τp̂ =                                .
    ∂τθn      τ∆n        γ τθ̂                      ∂τθn             γ                η→0
                                                                                            h=1
                                                                                                                     N τθ2 τθ−1+ γ 2 N 2 τδ−1

    Let                                                                                !
                                         τθ          τθ                                        
                   Sθ (τθ ) ≡   −N 2 τs2       + τs − τs + γ 2 (τh )−1 N τθ2 τθ−1 + γ 2 N 2 τδ−1 .
                                         τθ̂         τθ̂



                                                                       A17
                                                                                                                  
Note that Sθ (·) is a cubic function of τθ and that Sθ (0) =                                  τs + γ 2 (τh )−1 γ 2 N 2 τδ−1 > 0, Sθ0 (0) =
                                                                        
−N 2 ττs τs + γ 2 τδ−1 < 0 , Sθ00 (0) = τs + γ 2 (τh )−1 2N τθ−1 > 0 and limτθ →∞ Sθ (τθ ) = −∞. Then,
       θ̂
                                           ? , τ ? , and τ ? such that
generically, there exist three thresholds τθ,1  θ,2       θ,3
                   ? )         ? , τ ? ),    ∂µn
   i) If τθ ∈ [0, τθ1
                         S
                             (τθ2   θ3
                                               A
                                              ∂φ      is decreasing in τθn and

                                                                                                 ∂µn
                                                                                                     
                                            αs
                                              n   (αθn )2 µnA τ θ−1 + αh τδ−1 ∂φA
                                sgn Covn      −                            , n  > 0
                                            αs              (αN )2            µA

which implies price informativeness increases with linear trading costs.
                                          n
                 ? , τ ? ) S (τ ? , ∞), ∂µA is increasing in τ
   ii) If τθ ∈ (τθ1   θ2       θ3        ∂φ                   θn and

                                                                                                 ∂µn
                                                                                                     
                                                n 2 n −1         −1
                                           αn (αθ ) µA τ θ + αh τδ      A
                                                                      ∂φ 
                                sgn Covn  s −                     ,       <0
                                           αs          αN 2           µnA

which implies price informativeness decreases with linear trading costs.
   c) Suppose that investor groups are heterogeneous only in their risk aversion, with γn = γ + ηfn .
Then,
                   ∂FL (γn ; α, τp̂ , Ω)     1 αsn     1 (αθn )2 µnA −1 (αθn )2 ∂µnA −1
                                         =−        +2               τ −             τ .
                          ∂γn               γn αs     γn (αN )2 θ       (αN )2 ∂γn θ
Taking limits when heterogeneity and the linear trading cost go to zero, we have
                                                                               2 −1       2 2 −1
                 ∂FL (γn ; α, τp̂ , Ω)    1 αs    1 (αθ )2 −1 1 − (N − 2) τθ τ θ − γ N τδ
         lim lim                       =−      +2         τ =                                    < 0,
         φ→0 η→0       ∂γn                γ αs    γ (αN )2 θ  γ     N τθ2 τ θ−1 + γ 2 N 2 τδ−1

                                              n              n                           2
    we used Lemma 7 and that limφ→0 limη→0 µA = 1, limη→0 αs = αs = αs and limη→0 (αN ) =
where
1
γ2
    N τθ2 τ −1
            θ
               + γ 2 N 2 τδ−1 .
    Moreover, from Lemma 8 we have
                                                               √
                                                                                                                        
                          ∂GL (γn ; α, τp̂ , Ω)               ∂ τ∆n 1   ∂ κ1n √        2
                  lim lim                       = lim lim −          +         τ∆n  √ ,
                  φ→0 η→0       ∂γn               φ→0 η→0      ∂γn κn    ∂γn           2π

which is the same as
                                                                               √
                ∂GL (γn ; α, τp̂ , Ω)              τ                        1 τ∆n 2
                                                                        
        lim lim                       = lim lim − ∆n    τs + τ 2 −1
                                                                τ
                                                              θ θ̂    − 1          √
        φ→0 η→0       ∂γn               φ→0 η→0     γn2                     γ n κn   2π
                                                                                                                         (τ ) 23 1     2
                                                                                                                               ∆n
                                             = lim lim − τs +         τθ2 τθ̂−1    − τs +      τθ2 τθ̂−1   +   γn2 τh−1                   √
                                                  φ→0 η→0                                                                      γn3   κn     2π
                                                                               3
                                                                  (τ )         2    1 2
                                             =    lim lim γn2 τh−1 ∆n3               √ >0
                                                  φ→0 η→0           γn             κn 2π
since
                           √                                       3
                          ∂ τ∆n    1   τ2           −1
                                                           (τ∆n ) 2                
                                = √   2 ∆n
                                         3
                                            τs + τ τ
                                                  θ θ̂    =    3
                                                                       τs + τθ2 τθ̂−1 ,
                           ∂γn   2 τ∆n γn                     γn
and                                                                    PN +1 −1 
                                              1
                                     ∂       κn               τs + τθ +     h=1Λ̃    hh              1 1
                                                      =−                                      =−          .
                                         ∂γn                          γn2                           γn κn


                                                                      A18
                                                 Table A1: Summary of effects, Theorem 5

        Information to noise                    Extensive Margin                     Concentration and thresholds                                 Price Informativeness
                                                                                                √
                                                                                                                           1
                   ∂F                                          ∂G                              ∂ τ∆n                  ∂    κn                                   dτp̂
                   ∂z                                          ∂z                               ∂zn           and         ∂zn                                   dφ
 τs               >0                                          R0                                     > 0 and < 0                                                R0
 τθ               <0                                          R0                                     > 0 and < 0                                                R0
 γ                <0                                          >0                                     < 0 and > 0                                                <0


Therefore,
                                                                                                                          ∂µn
                                                                                                                                  
                                                                 αn            (αθn )2 µnA τ θ−1 + αh τδ−1                  A
                                                                                                                           ∂φ
                                     lim lim Covn                s       −                                           ,             < 0.
                                    φ→0 η→0                         αs                         αθ2                        µnA

Table A1 summarizes the results.




A.4      Section 7: Fixed costs
Characterization of the sets of buyers and sellers

Note that W1n (Ii ) ≡ γn Var2n [ θ|Ii ] (q1i
                                          n? )2 + pq n measures the welfare of an investor i of type n if he chooses
                                                    0
to participate in the asset market and optimally chooses to trade q1i              n? − q n units of the risky asset.
                                                                                         0i
Analogously, W0n (Ii ) ≡ En [θ|Ii ] q0i   n − γn Var [ θ| I ] (q n )2 measures the welfare of an investor i of type
                                                 2     n    i   0i
n if he does not participate in the asset market. Since q0i        n = 0 for all investors, we have that an investor

i of type n will choose to participate in the asset market if
                                                                                           γn                 n 2
                                    ∆Wn ≡ W1n (Ii ) − W0n (Ii ) =                             Varn [θ|Ii ] (∆q1i ) > χ,
                                                                                            2
where, in an equilibrium in linear strategies,
                                                          αpn                            αpn                         αpn n                        αpn X j j
                                                                                                                              
             n                                      αsn                            αhn
           ∆q1i   =αsn εn
                        si   +   αθn εn
                                      θ̂i   +           −             αs θ −           −            αh δ +        1−    µA             αθn θn −        µA αθ θj
                                                    αs    αp                       αh    αp                          αp                           αp
                                                                                                                                                     j6=n
                        N
                                                          !                                    !              !
                                      jn                                        jn
                                                    αpn                                  αpn                                       αpn
                                                                                                                          n
                                                                                                                                         
                        X            αµB                                       αµS                                        ψ
                    +                       −                  j
                                                              αµB µ̂jB +             −              j
                                                                                                   αµS µ̂jS       +         −                ψ.
                                      j
                                     αµB            αp                          j
                                                                               αµS       αp                               ψ   αp
                        j=1


      Note that                                                       n                  oN                                   
                                                      n
                                                    ∆q1i |θ, δ, θj , µ̂jA , µjA                               −1
                                                                                                    ∼ N ∆n , τ∆n
                                                                                          j=1

with

                  αsn αpn                                         αhn αpn                       αpn n          αpn X j j
                                            !                                    !                                        !
             ∆n =    −                           αs θ −              −               αh δ + 1 −    µA αθn θn −        µ α θj
                  αs   αp                                         αh   αp                       αp             αp j6=n A θ
                                                                                                                          
                             N               jn                            jn
                                                       αpn                      αpn                                                      ψ n αpn
                                                                                                                                                      !
                                            αµB               j    j     αµS
                                                                                     αj µ̂j  +
                             X
                        +                          −      αµB µ̂B +       −        µS S                                                 −               ψ
                             j=1
                                             j
                                            αµB        αp                α j    α p                                                      ψ    αp
                                                                                          µS

and
                                                                                                                                    −1
                                      (τ∆n )−1 = (αsn )2 τsn
                                                          −1
                                                             + (αhn )2 (τhn )−1 + (αθn )2 τθ̂n                                               .



                                                                                     A19
Then, the set of active buyers of type n is
                                                                             (                       s          )
                                                                                        n                 2
                                                                      Bn =       i:   ∆q1i   >              χ ,
                                                                                                         κn

where κn ≡ γn Varn [θ|Ii ]. The measure of active buyers of type n is
                                                                                                 s                          !!
                                                                                 √                    2
                                                        µnB      =1−Φ                 τ∆n               χ − ∆n                    .
                                                                                                     κn

Similarly, the set of active sellers is
                                                                           (                         s             )
                                                                                      n                    2
                                                                  Sn =         i:   ∆q1i    <−               χ ,
                                                                                                          κn

and the measure of active sellers is
                                                                                            s                          !!
                                                                           √                       2
                                                          µnS     =Φ           τ∆n −                 χ − ∆n                   .
                                                                                                  κn

    Since all parameters are known in the economy, knowing the measure of buyers and sellers of each
type reveals information about the fundamental θ, through ∆n . Hence, the information contained in the
set of buyers is the same as the one contained in the set of sellers, i.e., µ̂B = µ̂S . Hence, without loss of
                        jn
generality we can set αµS  = 0 for all n, j. Then, the linear signals contained in the measure of buyers of
type n is given by the system,
                                                                                                                                                αjn                         
                                                                                                                                                             αn
                αn       αn                         αn
                                                                                                                                                µB        p
                     −    p
                                           1−        p
                                                       µn        αθn                   αn                                                                −
                                                                                                        αθj µjA θj
                 h
                                  αh                                                                                                    N
                                                                                        p
                                                                                            P                                                                αp        j
                αh       αp                         αp A                               αp        j6=n                                  X  αjµB                      αµB      
zn µ̂n                                                                                                                                                                      µ̂jB 
                                                                                  
     B = θ+              n
                                      δ+  n            n
                                                                       θ n − µθ −                     n
                                                                                                                          θ j − µθ +      
                                                                                                                                                              n
                                                                                                                                                                                    ∀n,
                αn
                 s
                     −
                         αp
                                  αs
                                               αs
                                                    −
                                                        αp
                                                                 αs
                                                                                            αn
                                                                                             s
                                                                                                 −
                                                                                                     αp
                                                                                                              αs
                                                                                                                                           αns
                                                                                                                                                         −
                                                                                                                                                             αp       αs         
                αs       αp                    αs       αp                                  αs       αp                                 j=1         αs       αp


where zn are such that the signals µ̂nB are unbiased. Note that this unbiased signal is the same as the
one in Eq. (A14) for the linear cost case. Hence, the filtering problem solved by the investors in this
case is the same as the one in the linear cost case. Using the expressions in Eq. (A15), we have that the
equilibrium coefficients are
                                                                                                                                   n
                                                                                                                                  Kj+1
                                  τsn                   τθn                            jn
                     αsn =            ,     αθn =           ,          αhn = 1,       αµB =                                                         oN 
                                  γn                    γn                                                                                      n
                                                                                                     γn Varn θ|θ̂in , sni , hni , p̂, µjB
                                                                                                                                                         j=1
                                          αp n
                                  1−      αs K 1
                     αpn =                          ,    and
                                       κn
                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                   j
                          1                  αh    αθ      X αµB j    ψ
                      ψ=      −κn q0n − K1n − ωδ +    ωθ +       µ̂B + 
                         κn                   αs    αs      j
                                                               αs      αs

where Kin is the ith element of the Kalman gain vector in Eq. (A15) for an investor of type n, where as
in the cases with quadratic and linear costs the overlined variables are averages of the individual demand
parameters.
    The precision of the unbiased signal of θ from the perspective of an external observer who observes
the measures of buyers and sellers of each type, which we denote by τp̂ , is the relevant measure of price
informativeness. Price informativeness is given by

                                                                                        (αs )2
                                                                               τp̂ =           ,
                                                                                        (αN )2

                                                                                       A20
where
                                                                     N         2
                                                   (αN )2 ≡              αθj µjA τ −1 + (αh )2 τδ−1
                                                                     X
                                                                                         θ
                                                                     j=1
            PN        j
with αh =        j=1 µA .


Equilibrium price characterization

The characterization in this subsection follows the one for linear costs. In an equilibrium in linear
strategies, we conjecture net demand functions for active investors of type n given by
                                                                                          N                         
                                                                                              jn j           jn j
                                                                                          X
                           n
                         ∆q1i = αsn si + αθn θ̂in − αhn hni − αpn p +                             αµB µ̂B + αµS µ̂S + ψ n ,
                                                                                          j=1

where µ̂B        S
        n and µ̂n are the unbiased signals about the fundamental contained in the measures of buyers
and sellers of type n, respectively, and αθn , αsn , and αpn are positive scalars, while ψ n can take positive or
negative values. We define as Bn , Sn and An the sets of buyers, sellers, and active investors of type n,
respectively. Market clearing in the asset market is given by
                           N ˆ
                           X                   N ˆ
                                               X                  XN ˆ
                                      n                     n                 n
                                   ∆q1i di =            ∆q1i di +          ∆q1i di = 0,
                                    n=1 An                           n=1 Bn                      n=1 Sn

which implies
            PN        n     n                     N  ˆ                              ˆ                              !
   αs            n=1 αθ θn µA           αh    1 X         n n   n n       n n
                                                                               
                                                                                          n n      n n       n n
                                                                                                                  
p=    θ+                              −    δ+            α ε + αθ εθ̂i − αh εhi di +     αs εsi + αθ εθ̂i − αh εhi di
   αp                   αp              αp    αp n=1 Bn s si                          Sn
     N      n                 n                   N
                                          !
     X     αµB               αµS                  X
 +               µ̂nB   +          µ̂nS       +         ψ n µnA
     n=1
            αp               αp                   n=1
                                               N   n          n
            PN                                                                               !
   αs                 n     n                     αµB        αµS
                 n=1 αθ θn µA           αh                                                           ψ
                                              X
                                                         n
 =    θ+                              +    δ+          µ̂B +     µ̂nS                            +      ,
   αp                   αp              αp    n=1
                                                   α p       α p                                     αp
             PN        n n                        PN    n n                     PN      n n
where αs =        n=1 αs µA ,       αh =           n=1 αh µA ,         αp =        n=1 αp µA ,       and
                                                                  N 
                                                                  X                                     
                                                         ψ=                ψ n µnA + mn+ + mn− ,
                                                                  n=1

with
                                                                 ˆ                                         
                                                        n+
                                                   m         =              αsn εnsi + αθn εnθ̂i − αhn εnhi di
                                                                 ˆBn                                       
                                                   mn− =                   αsn εnsi + αθn εnθ̂i − αhn εnhi di.
                                                                  Sn

Note that                                                                                                       
                                              wn ≡ αsn εnsi + αθn εnθ̂i − αhn εnhi ∼ N 0, (τ∆n )−1 .
Moreover, given the characterization of the sets of buyers and sellers in the previous subsection, we have
that
      ˆ              "          s            #          ˆ              "            s           #
                                    2                                                  2
           wn di = E wn |wn >         χ − ∆n      and       wn di = E wn |wn < −         χ − ∆n ,
        Bn                         κn                    Sn                           κn


                                                                                 A21
                                                                                    q                             q
                                                                                         2                             2
which are the expected values of a truncated normal at                                  κn χ   − ∆n and −             κn χ   − ∆n , respectively.
Then,                   q                                                                         q                 
                                      2                                                                      2
                                     κn
                                        χ−∆n                                                        −       κn
                                                                                                               χ−∆n
                           Φ0       √
                                         τ∆n
                                                                                          −Φ0          √
                                                                                                             τ∆n
                                                                                                                       
                                                            1                                                                 1
                 mn− =          q                  √                  and mn+ =                   q                 √         .
                                          2
                                            χ−∆n            τ∆n                                     −     2
                                                                                                            χ−∆n              τ∆n
                                         κn                                                              κn
                          1 − Φ         √
                                             τ∆n
                                                                                              Φ       √
                                                                                                            τ∆n
                                                                                                                      


Since ∆n can be recovered from the measures of buyers as
                                                            s
                                                                  2    Φ−1 (1 − µnB )
                                                   ∆n =             χ−    √           ,
                                                                 κn         τ∆n
                                                                                                                                         n   o
mn+ and mn− are constants given the information set of the investors and the price is linear in θ, θn                                              ,
                                                                                                                                               n
δ, and {µ̂nB , µ̂nS }n , as guessed above.

Proof of Lemma 5 (Existence)

Proof. The proof is analogous to the one in the previous section for linear trading costs. Note that
equilibrium price informativeness
                        h           τp̂ can be expressed
                                                    i         explicitly as a function of the measures of active
                          1        N    1         N
buyers and sellers, y = µB , ..., µB , µS , ..., µS , as follows:

                                                                           N τsj j 2
                                                                  P                
                                                                                 µ
                                                                           j=1 γj A
                                     τp̂ = P                          2                            .
                                                                                             j 2 −1
                                                                                   P        
                                                τθj
                                            N
                                                   j=1     γj   µjA        τ −1
                                                                             θ
                                                                                +       N
                                                                                           µ
                                                                                        j=1 A   τδ

Then, an equilibrium is fully characterized by the solution to the following system of equations
                                                                    s                !!
                                                       √                 2
                               µnB   =1−Φ                  τ∆n             χ − ∆n          , ∀n = 1, ..., N                               (A19)
                                                                        κn
                                                                s                   !!
                                               √                     2
                               µnS   =Φ            τ∆n −               χ − ∆n            , ∀n = 1, ..., N,
                                                                    κn

where ∆n and κn are functions of y and τ∆n is a constant. We can rewrite the system in Eq. (A19) as
the fixed point of a mapping T : [0, 1]2N → [0, 1]2N , where T is continuous in y.28 An application of
Brouwer’s fixed point theorem implies that a solution to Eq. (A19) exists.

Claim. (Stability) In equilibrium, price informativeness is given by the fixed point of

                                                              N τsj j
                                                                      P     2                 
                                                              j=1 γj µA (x)
                       HF (x) ≡ −x +           PN  τθj j     2         P          2                               = 0.                (A20)
                                                                                j
                                                j=1 γj µA (x)    τ θ−1 +   N
                                                                           j=1 µA (x)   τδ−1

In a stable equilibrium, HF0 (x? ) < 0.

Proof. The proof is identical to the one in the linear cost case.
 28
      When y = 0, we define the mapping T as the limit implied by Eq. (A19).




                                                                        A22
Proof of Theorem 6 (Irrelevance result with ex-ante identical investors and fixed trading
costs)
                                                                                  τs2
When all investors are ex-ante identical, τp̂ =                             τ 2 −1
                                                                                                   which is independent of χ.
                                                                             θ τ
                                                                            N θ
                                                                                   +γ 2 τδ−1


Proof of Lemma 6

From Eq. (A20), using the implicit function theorem we have
                                                                                     F ∂H
                                                                           dτp̂    ∂χ
                                                                                =      ,
                                                                           dχ     −HF0
                                                                                             ∂HF
where HF0 < 0 in any stable equilibrium. Note that                                            ∂χ       keeps price informativeness constant as χ
changes. Moreover,
                                                                                                                          2                                          
                                             j
                                PN       j ∂µA (x)               2                     2   PN     j                              ∂µjA (x) −1          PN   ∂µn
                                                                                                                                                             A (x) −1
                      2αs (x)       j=1 αs ∂χ        (αN (x)) − 2αs (x)                      j=1 µA        (x)        αθj          ∂χ τ θ         +    n=1   ∂χ τδ
 ∂HF
                  =                                                                                    4
  ∂χ     τp̂ =x                                                                         (αN (x))
                                                                                                                          2                                             
                                             j
                                PN       j ∂µA (x)               2                     2 PN   ∂µjA (x)                                                PN
                      2αs (x)       j=1 αs ∂χ        (αN (x)) − 2αs (x)                      j=1       ∂χ             αθj        µjA   (x) τ −1   +         n
                                                                                                                                                       n=1 µA   (x) τδ−1
                                                                                                                                             θ
                  =                                                                                    4
                                                                                           (αN (x))
                                                                        2                                   
                       
                           αs (x)
                                       N
                                    2 X
                                                     αsj             αθj        µjA (x) τ −1 + αh τδ−1  ∂µj (x) 
                                                                                         θ
                  =2                                         −                                          A       .
                                               
                           αN (x)
                                               
                                                    αs (x)                                  2              ∂χ
                                         j=1                                      (αN (x))

Hence,
                                                                                                       ∂αN           ∂µn
                                                                                      
                                                                                           ∂αs
                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                       A
                                                dτp̂
                                                       
                                                                                           ∂µn
                                                                                             A         ∂µn
                                                                                                         A            ∂χ
                                            sgn              = sgn Cov n                         −             ,           ,
                                                dχ                                          αs          αN           µnA
since
                                                    ∂ (αN )2
                                                             = 2 (αθn )2 µnA τ −1 + 2αh τδ−1 .
                                                      ∂µnA                     θ


Proof of Theorem 7

The proof of this theorem follows the same structure as the proof of Theorem 5 in the case of linear
trading costs. We use Lemma 6 and the result that the covariance of two monotone increasing functions
is positive (see Schmidt (2003)). We will denote by zn = z + ηfn the group specific parameter over which
investor groups differ. Then, analogous to the case with linear costs, we can write
                                                                                ∂µn
                                                                                     
                            αn          (αθn )2 µnA τθ−1 + αh τδ−1                A
                                                                                 ∂χ
                  Covn      s      −                                      ,           = Covn [FF (zn ; α, τp̂ ) , GF (zn ; α, τp̂ )] ,
                               αs                (αN )2                         µnA

where αis the vector of all aggregate demand sensitivities, Ω is the variance-covariance matrix of the
vector of public signals, and
                                                   n 2 n −1        −1                                                                                 ∂µn
                                             αsn (αθ ) µA τθ + αh τδ                                                                                    A
                                                                                                                                                       ∂χ
                      FF (zn ; α, τp̂ , Ω) ≡    −                                                          and GF (zn ; α, τp̂ ) ≡                          .
                                             αs         (αN )2                                                                                        µnA
                                                                                              ∂FF                    ∂GF
The main part of the proof consists of characterizing                                         ∂zn          and       ∂zn    . To characterize these partial
derivatives, we use the following intermediate results.

                                                                                  A23
Lemma 9. When the fixed trading cost is small, the set of active investors is the same across groups,
i.e.,
                                       ∂µnA (zn ; α, τp̂ , Ω)
                                  lim                         = 0.
                                  χ→0         ∂zn
Proof. The measure of active investors of type n is given by
                                                                              s                           !!                                        s                    !!!
                                                              √                     2                                    √                                2
                          µnA       =        1−Φ                    τ∆n               χ − ∆n                          +Φ  τ∆n −                             χ − ∆n                                  (A21)
                                                                                   κn                                                                    κn

Suppose investors differ only in dimension with zn = z + ηfn for fn ∈ R and z ∈ {γn , τsn , τθn }. Then,
                      
  ∂µn   zn ; α, τp̂ , Ω       1
                                                                  q
                                                                          2
                                                                                        q
                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ∂τ∆n
    A                                             0       √                                                                     0       √
                          = √                   −Φ         τ∆n                χ − ∆n                          χ − ∆n           −Φ        τ∆n       −          χ − ∆n                 χ + ∆n               +
         ∂zn               2 τ∆n                                         κn                              κn                                              κn                    κn                  ∂zn
                                                     q                                               q                                              
                                        0   √                   2                       0       √                     2                        √         ∂∆n
                           +        Φ            τ∆n                χ − ∆n         −Φ               τ∆n       −            χ − ∆n                  τ∆n
                                                              κn                                                      κn                                 ∂zn


and taking limits when χ → 0 we have

                                                                                  ∂µnA (zn ; α, τp̂ , Ω)
                                                                              lim                        = 0.
                                                                              χ→0        ∂zn



Lemma 10. The change in the extensive margin across different groups of investors when heterogeneity
is small and fixed costs go to zero is
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                            τ∆n
                                                                                                                                                        1 ∂ κn
                                                                                                                                               s
                                                            ∂GF (zn ; α, τp̂ , Ω)
                                            lim lim                               = lim lim −2Φ0 (0)                                                            .
                                            χ→0 η→0               ∂zn               χ→0 η→0                                                            2χ ∂zn

Proof.Using      the      definition     of      n in
                                                  µq      Eq.                                                                                                   (A21)               we              have
                                                   A
 n             √     q
                         2
                                        √    
                                                       2
µA = 1 − Φ       τ∆n    κn χ − ∆n     +Φ     τ∆n − κn χ − ∆n
                                                          s                        !!                                           s                         !!!                s
        ∂µnA        √                                          2                                              √                      2                             √               1
             = − Φ0   τ∆n                                        χ − ∆n                     +Φ       0
                                                                                                                  τ∆n −                χ − ∆n                          τ∆n
         ∂χ                                                   κn                                                                    κn                                           2κn χ
                                                          s                                                                     s
                                                                                                                                                                             X ∂∆j ∂µj
                                                                                   !!                                                                     !!!
                                0       √                      2                                     0        √                      2                             √                 A
                     + Φ                     τ∆n                 χ − ∆n                     −Φ                    τ∆n −                χ − ∆n                          τ∆n                         .
                                                              κn                                                                    κn                                       j       ∂µjA ∂χ

Note that
X ∂∆n ∂µn (xn ; α, τp̂ , Ω)     X ∂∆n  √          r                           r                       r
        A                                   0             2                0 √            2               √         1
    n                       =−       n    Φ     τ∆n          χ − ∆n    +Φ      τ∆n −         χ − ∆n         τ∆n
n
  ∂µA       ∂χ                  n
                                   ∂µA                   κ n                             κ n                      2κnχ

                                                                                                             X ∂∆j ∂µj
                                                 r                           r              
                                         0 √                             0 √                           √
                              X ∂∆n                    2                               2                               A
                            +      n   Φ      τ∆n         χ −  ∆n    − Φ     τ∆n   −      χ −  ∆ n       τ∆n        j ∂χ
                                                                                                                         .
                              n
                                 ∂µA                  κ n                             κ n                     j  ∂µ A

                                                                     √
                                                                                                  0 √
                                                                          q                            q             √     q
                                                   ∂∆n
                                                                Φ0             2                                2                       1
                                            P
        X ∂∆n ∂µn                   −            n ∂µn                 τ∆n    κn χ −  ∆  n    + Φ     τ ∆n  −  κn χ − ∆ n       τ∆n   2κn χ
                          A                          A
                              =                                       √                               √                     √         .
             ∂µnA ∂χ
                                                                               q                            q
                                                            ∂∆n                     2
                                                                      Φ0                           − Φ0    τ∆n − κ2n χ − ∆n
                                                      P
        n                                   1−            n ∂µn            τ∆n     κ n χ − ∆n                                       τ∆n
                                                              A


Note that                                                            s                          !!                                        s                        !!
                                             0       √                    2                                       0    √                        2
                              lim Φ                       τ∆n               χ − ∆n                       −Φ                    τ∆n −              χ − ∆n                =0
                              χ→0                                        κn                                                                    κn


                                                                                                         A24
and                                    s                          !                      s                                 !
                                 00         2    √                              00            2    √
                        lim Φ                 χ − τ∆n ∆n              = lim Φ        −          χ − τ∆n ∆n                       = 0.
                        χ→0                κn                           χ→0                  κn
                                                                           ∂µn
                                                                             A (zn ;α,τp̂ ,Ω)
Then, since limχ→0 µnA (zn ; α, τp̂ , Ω) = 1 and limχ→0                          ∂zn              = 0,we have
                                                                                                        q
                                                    r                        r            r ∂ τ∆n
        ∂GF (zn ; α, τp̂ , Ω)                   √         2                  √         2              1   κn
lim lim                       = lim lim − Φ0      τ∆n       χ − ∆n    + Φ0     τ∆n −     χ − ∆n
χ→0 η→0       ∂zn               χ→0 η→0                  κn                           κn             2χ ∂zn
                                                       q
                                                 r ∂ τ∆n
                                                    1    κn
                              = lim lim −2Φ0 (0)             ,
                                χ→0 η→0            2χ ∂zn

where the derivative with respect to zn keeps the aggregate demand sensitivities, the informational
content of the measures and price informativeness constant.

   a) Suppose that investor groups are heterogeneous only in the precision of their private information,
with τsn = τs + ηfn .
                             ∂FF (τsn ; α, τp̂ , Ω)   1 1    (αθn )2 τθ−1 ∂µnA
                                                    =      −                   .
                                   ∂τsn               γ αs       αθ2      ∂τsn
Using Lemma 9 we have
                                                        ∂FF (τsn ; α, τp̂ , Ω)   1 1
                                                lim lim                        =      > 0.
                                                χ→0 η→0       ∂τsn               γ αs
Moreover, from Lemma 10 we have
                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                           τ∆n
                                                                                                            1 ∂ κn
                                                                                                      s
                                    ∂GF (τsn ; α, τp̂ , Ω)
                            lim lim                        = lim lim −2Φ0 (0)                                      ,
                            χ→0 η→0       ∂τsn               χ→0 η→0                                       2χ ∂τsn

which implies                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                        τ∆n
                                                                                                                              
                                 
                                     ∂GF (τsn ; α, τp̂ , Ω)
                                                                                                               ∂        κn
                         sgn lim lim                                          = − sgn  lim lim                                ,
                             χ→0 η→0       ∂τsn                                                  χ→0 η→0            ∂τsn

where                                 q                                                                                               
                                          τ∆n
                                               
                                  ∂        κn        1                                  τs2                    2 −1     2 −1 
              sgn  lim lim                         τs − τθ − 2 −1
                                            = sgn                                                         + τθ τθ̂ + γ τh  ,
                                                                                                           
                    χ→0 η→0           ∂τsn           2          τθ τ
                                                                     θ
                                                                                     N   + γ 2 τδ−1
since
                                           √
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                  1
                                          ∂ τ∆n   1 1           1                        ∂       κn            1
                                                =− √    (τ∆n )2 2 ,                                       =      ,
                                           ∂τsn   2 τ∆n        γ                             ∂τsn              γ
and
                                                    N +1
                                                                                   N 2 τs2
                                                           Λ̃−1
                                                    X
                                            lim              hh = τp̂ =                             .
                                            η→0
                                                    h=1
                                                                          N τθ2 τθ−1 + γ 2 N 2 τδ−1
Then,
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                  ∂µn
                                                           
                         αn
                         s
                                      (αθn )2 µnA ∂χA                     1                                         τs2                 2 −1     2 −1 
sgn  lim lim Covn               −               , n          = − sgn 
                                                                         τs − τθ −                                                 + τθ τθ̂ + γ τh  ,
                                                                                                                                    
          χ→0 η→0           αs            αθ2     µA                            2                         τθ2 τ −1
                                                                                                            N
                                                                                                              θ
                                                                                                                     + γ 2 τδ−1

Note that this condition is exactly the same condition on parameters as the one with linear costs. Hence,
                                                          ? and τ ? such that:
as in the case with linear costs, there exist thresholds τs1     s2


                                                                       A25
                        ?)
   i) for all τs ∈ (0, τs1
                                 S     ? , ∞)
                                     (τs2
                                                                                                    ∂µn
                                                                                                         
                                                   n 2 n −1         −1
                                             αsn (αθ ) µA τ θ + αh τδ     A
                                                                         ∂χ
                                  sgn Covn
                                              −                      , n  > 0
                                             αs            αθ2          µA

and price informativeness increases with fixed trading costs as investors who contribute less to the
information contained in the price are the ones who disproportionately exit the market.
                       ? , τ? )
    ii) for all τs ∈ (τs1   s2
                                                                                                    ∂µn
                                                                                                         
                                                   n 2 n −1         −1
                                             αsn (αθ ) µA τ θ + αh τδ     A
                                                                         ∂χ
                                  sgn Covn
                                              −                      , n  < 0
                                             αs            αθ2          µA

and price informativeness decreases with fixed trading costs as investors who contribute more to the
information contained in the price are the ones who disproportionately exit the market.
    b) Suppose that investor groups are heterogeneous only in the precision of their prior, with
τθn = τθ + ηfn . In this case,

                                     ∂FF (τθn ; α, τp̂ , Ω)   2αn 1 n (αθn )2 −1 ∂µnA
                                                            =− θ      µA −     τ      ,
                                           ∂τθn                αθ2 γn      αθ2 θ ∂τθn
and using Lemma 7
                                               ∂FF (τθn ; α, τp̂ , Ω)    2αn 1
                                        lim lim                       = − θ µnA < 0.
                                       χ→0 η→0       ∂τθn                 αθ2 γ
Moreover, from Lemma 10 we have
                                                                                                  √
                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                          1
               
                                ∂GF (τθn ; α, τp̂ , Ω)
                                                            
                                                                                                 ∂ τ∆n 1         ∂
                                                                                                                 √       κn
         sgn lim lim                                             = − sgn  lim lim                       +       τ∆n  ,
                   χ→0 η→0            ∂τθn                                         χ→0 η→0        ∂τθn κn   ∂τθn

which is the same a
                   q
                       τ∆n
               ∂        κn                1√
                                                
                                                     1     τθn 1
                                                                      
                                                                            2
     lim lim                 = lim lim −     τ∆n − τ∆n            +1 √
    χ→0 η→0        ∂τθn        χ→0 η→0   γ           γ      τε κn           2π
                                                                    N +1
                                                                               !                                 !
                                          1 1                        X
                                                                            −1   τθn           2 −1       2   −1    2
                             = lim lim − 3 √         − τs + τθn +        Λhh          + τs + τθn τθ̂ + γ (τh )     √
                               χ→0 η→0   γ    τ∆n                                 τε                                 2π
                                                                     h=1
                                                                                                     !
                                                                   N 2 τs2
                                                    
                                  1 1             τθ                               τθ             −1    2
                             =− 3√            1−       τs −    2  −1            −1    + γ 2 (τh )      √ ,
                                 γ    τ∆n         τε        N τθ τ + γ N τδ τε
                                                                          2   2                         2π
                                                                               θ

since
    √
                                                                
                                                             1                                   N +1
   ∂ τ∆n      1           1 τθn                     ∂       κn           1                                                        N 2 τs2
                  (τ∆n )2 2                                                                             Λ̃−1
                                                                                                 X
         = −√                   ,                                    =     ,   and      lim               hh = τp̂ =                               .
    ∂τθn      τ∆n        γ τε                       ∂τθn                 γ              η→0
                                                                                                 h=1
                                                                                                                         N τθ2 τθ−1 + γ 2 N 2 τδ−1

                                                                                 ∂G (τθn ;α,τp̂ ,Ω)
Note that the parametric condition that determines the sign of limχ→0 limη→0 F ∂τ       θn
                                                                                                    is the same
                                                                                            ?       ?        ?
as in the case with linear trading costs. Then, generically, there exist three thresholds τθ,1 , τθ,2 , and τθ,3
such that
                                          n
                    ? ) S (τ ? , τ ? ), ∂µA is decreasing in τ
    i) If τθ ∈ [0, τθ1      θ2 θ3        ∂χ                   θn and

                                                                                                    ∂µn
                                                                                                        
                                                  n 2 n −1         −1
                                             αn (αθ ) µA τ θ + αh τδ      A
                                                                        ∂χ 
                                  sgn Covn  s −                     ,       > 0,
                                             αs        (αN )2           µnA

                                                                          A26
which implies price informativeness increases with linear trading costs.
                                          n
                 ? , τ ? ) S (τ ? , ∞), ∂µA is increasing in τ
   ii) If τθ ∈ (τθ1   θ2       θ3        ∂χ                   θn and

                                                                                         ∂µn
                                                                                                
                                             n 2 n −1         −1
                                       αsn (αθ ) µA τ θ + αh τδ      A
                                                                   ∂χ 
                            sgn Covn
                                        −                      ,       < 0,
                                       αs         (αN )2           µnA

which implies price informativeness decreases with linear trading costs.
   c) Suppose that investor groups are heterogeneous only in their risk aversion, with γn = γ + ηfn .
Then,
                   ∂FF (γn ; α, τp̂ , Ω)     1 αsn     1 (αθn )2 µnA −1 (αθn )2 ∂µnA −1
                                         =−        +2               τ −             τ .
                          ∂γn               γn αs     γn (αN )2 θ       (αN )2 ∂γn θ
Taking limits when heterogeneity and the linear trading cost go to zero, we have
                                                                               2 −1       2 2 −1
                ∂FF (γn ; α, τp̂ , Ω)    1 αs    1 (αθ )2 −1   1 − (N − 2) τθ τ θ − γ N τδ
        lim lim                       =−      +2         τ   =                                   < 0,
        χ→0 η→0       ∂γn                γ αs    γ (αN )2 θ    γ     N τθ2 τ −1
                                                                             θ
                                                                                + γ 2 N 2 τ −1
                                                                                           δ


where
    we used Lemma          9 and that limχ→0 limη→0 µnA = 1, limη→0 αsn = αs = αs , and limη→0 (αN )2 =
1
γ2
    N τθ2 τ −1
            θ
               + γ 2 N 2 τδ−1 .
    Moreover, from Lemma 10 we have
                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                              τ∆n
                                                                                                                   
                            
                                  ∂GF (γn ; α, τp̂ , Ω)
                                                                                                     ∂        κn
                      sgn lim lim                                    = − sgn  lim lim                              ,
                          χ→0 η→0       ∂γn                                        χ→0 η→0                ∂γn

where
                                                                    √
                                          q                                                      
                                              τ∆n
                                                                                                              
                                      ∂                                                       1
                                               κn               ∂ τ∆n 1              ∂       κn       √
                        lim lim                     = lim lim          +                                 τ∆n  ,
                        χ→0 η→0           ∂γn         χ→0 η→0    ∂γn κn                  ∂γn

which is the same as
                                                                                                      −1
                                                                                                              √
                                q                               
                                    τ∆n
                            ∂        κn                             τs + τθ2 τθ̂−1 + γn2 τh−1                  τ∆n
                  lim lim                 = lim lim −γn2 τh−1                                                      < 0.
                  χ→0 η→0       ∂γn           χ→0 η→0                           γn                             κn
Therefore,
                                                                                                  ∂µn
                                                                                                        
                                               n 2 n −1         −1
                                         αsn (αθ ) µA τ θ + αh τδ     A
                                                                     ∂χ
                      sgn lim lim Covn
                                          −                      , n  < 0,
                          χ→0 η→0        αs            αθ2          µA

and price informativeness decreases with fixed trading costs.




                                                            A27
                                               Online Appendix
B        Filtering
Before observing any public information, an investor of type n who received a signal sni has a prior
distribution over θ given by
                                          θ ∼ N (xn0 , Σn0 ) ,

where
                                                      τθn θ̂in + τsn sni
                                             xn0 ≡                                    and Σn0 ≡ (τθn + τsn )−1 .
                                                        τθn + τsn
We can define the vector of public signals as
                                                                              h                           iT
                                                                  x1 ≡ p̂, µ̂1B , . . . , µ̂N
                                                                                            B                  ,

where                                                                                                                                                          
                                                       α1θ µ1A            α2θ µ2A                        αN   N                               θ1 − ωθ
                                                                                                          θ µA
                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                            αh
                                                         αs                 αs            ···              αs               αs                θ2 − ωθ
                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                             
                                      (AB)
                                            11                           (AB)12           ···       (AB)1N                (AC)1       
                                                                                                                                                 ..
                                                                                                                                                                
                   x1 = θ1(N +1)×1 +                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                             
                                         ..                                               ..           ..                   ..                  .
                                     
                                          .                                ···               .          .                    .                                
                                                                                                                                        θN − ωθ
                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                
                                                     (AB)N 1             (AB)N 2 · · · (AB)N N                            (AC)N
                                                                                                                                              δ − ωδ
and                                                                                                           
                                                              x1 | θ ∼ N θ1(N +1)×1 , Ω ,
where
                                                                         τ −1
                                                                                                                     
                                                                                    0     ...       ...         0                                                                 T
          α1 µ1      α2 µ2                αN µN                                                                              α1 µ1         α2 µ2                αN µN
                                                                        θ
                                                                                                                        
                                                        αh                                                                                                                 αh
           θ A
           αs
                      θ A
                      αs
                              ···          θ A
                                            αs          αs               0       τ −1      0       ...         0            θ A
                                                                                                                              αs
                                                                                                                                            θ A
                                                                                                                                            αs
                                                                                                                                                    ···          θ A
                                                                                                                                                                  αs       αs
                                                                                    θ
        (AB)11     (AB)12    ···         (AB)1N      (AC)1      
                                                                          .                                     .
                                                                                                                          (AB)11        (AB)12    ···         (AB)1N    (AC)1   
Ω=                                                                     .                ..                   .
                                                                                                                                                                                    .
            .                 .              .          .                 .          0          .    ...        .              .                    .              .        .
            .                     .          .          .                                                                      .                        .          .        .
                                                                                                                                                                             
                      ···             .                                                                                                     ···             .
            .                                .          .                 0         ...     0       τ −1        0              .                                   .        .
                                                                                                                     
         (AB)N 1    (AB)N 2   ···         (AB)N N     (AC)N                                          θ                      (AB)N 1       (AB)N 2   ···         (AB)N N   (AC)N
                                                                          0         0     ...       ...        τ −1
                                                                                                                δ


The N + 1 signals in x1 are correlated. However, we can transform this vector in a vector of N + 1
uncorrelated signals about θ as follows. Let

                                                                                y ≡ ΓT x1 ,

where Γ is the eigenvector matrix in the eigen-decomposition of Ω, i.e., Ω = ΓΛΓT , where Λ is the
diagonal eigenvalue matrix. Let ŷ be a vector whose nth element is yen = yēnn , where ēn is the sum of the
elements in the nth eigenvector. Note that
                                                                                                              
                                                                 ŷ| θ ∼ N θ1(N +1)×1 , Λ̃ ,

where Λ̃−1 = EΛ−1 E, E is the diagonal matrix with element Enn = ēn , and the precision of the public
signals is the same for all investors types.
    Hence, using this transformation, we have that
                                                                                            +1 −1
                                                                    τθn θ̂in + τsn sni + N
                                                                                                         P
                                                                                          h=1 Λ̃hh ŷ h
                                                  En [ θ| Iin ]   =                     PN +1 −1        ,
                                                                         τθn + τsn + h=1 Λ̃hh

                                                                                      A28
and                                                                                         !−1
                                                                              N +1
                                                                                     Λ̃−1
                                                                              X
                                    Varn [ θ| Iin ]   =    τθn + τsn +                 hh         .
                                                                              h=1
Using the definition of ŷ, gives
                                                τθn θ̂in + τsn sni + 11×(N +1) Λ̃−1 ŷ
                              En [ θ| Iin ] =                              PN +1 −1
                                                      τθn + τsn +            h=1Λ̃     hh
                                                τθn θ̂in   +   τsn sni   + 11×(N +1) Λ̃−1 ΓT x
                                                                                             e1
                                            =                                PN +1 −1                 .
                                                           τθn + τsn +            Λ̃
                                                                                 h=1    hh
Hence, matching coefficients from the first order condition of an investor of type n we have
                        τsn          τθn
                 αsn =       , αθn =     , αhn = 1
                         γn          γn
                           n                 α
                 jn
                        K(j+1)           1 − αps K1n
                αµB  =          , αpn =
                          κn                 κn
                                                                                                        
                                                                 N α                          j
                            1                    αθ    αh      X    µB j   ψ
                  ψ n+   =     −κn q0n − φ − K1n  ωθ −    ωδ +        µ̂B + 
                           κn                     αs    αs      j=1
                                                                    αs      αs
                                                                                                        
                                                                 N α                          j
                            1                    αL    αh      X    µB j   ψ
                  ψ n−   =     −κn q0n + φ − K1n  ωθ −    ωδ +        µ̂B +  ,
                           κn                     αs    αs      j=1
                                                                    αs      αs

where κn = γn Varn [θ|Iin ] and Kjn is the jth element of the Kalman K gain for an investor of type n,
which is given by
                                              1           h
                                                                     −1 T
                                                                          i
                             Kn =               PN +1 −1 11×(N +1) Λ̃ Γ .
                                   τθn + τsn + h=1 Λ̃hh

C     Hedging needs
The setup is the same as in the benchmark model with the difference that each investor i is endowed
with n2i units of the consumption good at date 2. To simplify the analysis we set q0i = 0 for all investors.
Then, each investor i solves
                                                                  γ             2
                    max (E [θ|Ii ] − p − γCov [θ, n2i |Ii ]) q1i − Var [θ|Ii ] q1i − T (q1i ) .
                      q1i                                         2
We consider two cases for the correlation between the endowment and the asset payoff.
                                                                                       
                                                                     iid
    1. Learnable endowment: n2i = hi θ + zi , where zi ∼ N 0, τη−1 and zi ⊥ θ. This implies that
                                                Cov [θ, n2i |Ii ] = hi Var [θ|Ii ] ,
      which depends on the equilibrium price.

    2. Unlearnable endowment: Suppose that θ = θl + θu , where θl and θu are learnable and unlearnable
       components of the asset payoff with
                                                              
                                          θl ∼ N θ, τθ               and θu ∼ N (0, 1) .

      In this case, the signal structure is si = θl +εsi . Moreover, suppose n2i = hi θu +zi , where z ⊥ θu , θl .
      Then,
                                          Cov [θ, n2i |Ii ] = hi Var [θu ] = hi ,
      which is independent of the equilibrium price.

                                                                A29
In both cases, we assume hi = δ + ui , where
                                                                                                         
                                           δ ∼ N 0, τδ−1                                 −1
                                                                          and ui ∼ N 0, τhi ,

with ui ⊥ uj for all i 6= j. The aggregate hedging need is random and not observed by the investors.
Hence, investors cannot distinguish whether a high price is due to a high realization of the fundamental
or due to a low realization of δ, and the price is not fully revealing.

C.1    Learnable endowment
Suppose n2i = hi θ + zi where hi = δ + ui with
                                                                                                                    
                               iid                             iid
                           ui ∼ N 0, τh−1 ,                 zi ∼ N 0, τη−1 ,                  and δ ∼ N δ, τδ−1 .

    When costs as quadratic and given by T (∆q1i ) =                                c
                                                                                    2   (∆q1i )2 , the FOC is

                                                           Ei [θ|Ii ] − p − γi Covi [θ, n2i |Ii ]
                                           ∆q1i =                                                 .
                                                                    γi Vari [θ|Ii ] + c

The information set of an investor is given by Ii = {si , hi , p}. Then,

                                                  Ei [θ|si , hi , p] − p − γi hi Vari [θ|si , hi , p]
                                      ∆q1i =                                                          .
                                                              γi Vari [θ|si , hi , p] + c

In an equilibrium in linear strategies,

                                                  ∆q1i = αsi si − αhi hi − αpi p + ψi .

Market clearing implies
                                                                 αs    αh    ψ
                                                            p=      θ−    δ+    .
                                                                 αp    αp    αp
The filtering problem solved by the investor (see the next section in this Online Appendix) implies
                                                                                    
                                                                αh τhi
                               τθ θ + τsi si + τp̂i p̂ +        αs τδ +τhi hi                                                        1
       E [ θ| si , hi , p] =                                                                and Vari [θ|si , hi , p] =                          ,
                                              τθ + τsi + τp̂i                                                                 τθ + τsi + τp̂i

                                                                                  αh 2
                                                                                  
            α                −1
where p̂ = αps p − αψp and τp̂i = Vari [p̂|θ, hi ] =                              αs   (τδ   + τhi )−1 .
   Matching coefficients we have
                                                                                                   
                      τsi Vari [θ|si , hi , p]                           γi − τp̂i ααhs τδτ+τ
                                                                                           hi
                                                                                              hi
                                                                                                 Vari [θ|si , hi , p]
                αsi =                          ,           αhi =                                                          .
                               κi                                                                 κi
                                                                                                                
                                  α
                      1 − τp̂i αps Vari [θ|si , hi , p]                                          τp̂i αψs + γi q0i Vari [θ|si , hi , p]
                αpi =                                   ,            and ψi = −                                                           ,
                                    κi                                                                           κi
where κi = γVar [θ|si , hi , p] + c.

Lemma 11. In any stable equilibrium,
                                                      
                                                   αs
                                              ∂    αh
                                                                          
                                                                             αsi αhi 1
                                                                                       
                                      sgn                   = − sgn Covx      −   ,     .
                                                  ∂c                                         αs         αh κi

                                                                           A30
Proof. External price informativeness is given by
                                                                                    2
                                                                               αs
                                                                           
                                                                τp̂ =                    τδ ,
                                                                               αh
                                      αs
where the equilibrium ratio           αh      is characterized by H (x) = 0, where
                                                        ´                          γ−xτhi
                                                     1                   γi +c(τθ +τsi +x2 (τδ +τhi ))
                                                                                                       di
                                              H (x) ≡ − ´                            τsi                  .
                                                     x                   γi +c(τθ +τsi +x2 (τδ +τhi ))
                                                                                                       di

Taking limits we have limx→0 H (x) = ∞ and limx→∞ H (x) = ∞. Hence, as we know from the
literature, and equilibrium may not always exist (Ganguli and Yang, 2009; Manzano and Vives, 2011); see
also the results in Cespa and Vives (2015), in which multiplicity arises because investors have information
on the two factors driving the equilibrium price. In any stable equilibrium H 0 < 0. Moreover, using the
Implicit Function Theorem we know that
                                         
                                     αs
                             ∂       αh
                                                    ∂H
                                                     ∂c
                                              =−
                                 ∂c                H 0 (x)
                                                   ´   −τsi Vari [θ|si ,hi ,p]             ´ (γi −xτhi )Vari [θ|si ,hi ,p]
                                                                               diαh −αs                                    di
                                                              (κi )2                                   ( κi ) 2
                                                                                      (αs )2
                                              =−
                                                                                     H 0 (x)
                                                   αh
                                                        ´ α             αhi
                                                                               
                                                                                   1
                                                   αs
                                                               si
                                                              αs    −    αh        κi di
                                              =−
                                                              −H 0 (x)
                                                                h                          i
                                                   αs           αsi     αhi 1
                                                   αh Covx      αs − αh , κi
                                              =−                                               ,
                                                               −H 0 (x)

which yields the result since in any stable equilibrium H 0 < 0.

Theorem 8. (Directional results under one-dimensional heterogeneity) When endowments are learnable
and there are quadratic trading costs, if investor differ in only one of the following dimensions a) the
precision of information τsi , b) in the precision of the private hedging, τhi , or c) in risk aversion, γi , an
increase in trading costs decrease price informativeness.
                                                                                                                                     
                                αsi  α                                   1                                  αsi  α                         1
                        ∂       αs
                                    − αhi                           ∂    κi
                                                                                                    ∂       αs
                                                                                                                − αhi                 ∂    κi
                                       h                                                                           h
Proof. Note that a)           ∂τsi                > 0 and               ∂τsi       > 0, b)                   ∂τhi           > 0 and       ∂τhi   > 0, and
                           
        αsi  α               1
∂       αs
            − αhi       ∂    κ
     ∂γi   < 0 and ∂γii < 0. Since the covariance of two monotone increasing functions is positive
               h


(see Schmidt (2003)), if investors only differ in one dimension,
                                                                         αsi αhi 1
                                                                                                 
                                                   sgn Covx                 −   ,                       >0
                                                                         αs   αh κi
and Lemma 11 implies the result.

C.2          Unlearnable correlation
When costs as quadratic and given by T (∆q1i ) =                               c
                                                                               2   (∆q1i )2 , the FOC is then,

                                              Ei [θ|si , hi , p] − p − γi hi − γi Vari [θ|si , hi , p] q0i
                             ∆q1i =                                                                        .
                                                            γi Vari [θl |si , hi , p] + γi + c

                                                                              A31
In an equilibrium in linear strategies,

                                                          ∆q1i = αsi si − αhi hi − αpi p + ψi .

Market clearing implies
                                                                           αs    αh    ψ
                                                                     p=       θ−    δ+    .
                                                                           αp    αp    αp
This implies                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                            αh τhi
                                         h                       i       τθ θ + τsi si + τp̂i p̂ +                          αs τδ +τhi hi
                                     E θl si , hi , p =                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                  τθ + τsi + τp̂i
                                                                                            αh 2
                                                                                            
           α                 −1
where p̂ = αps p − αψp and τp̂i = Var [p̂|θ, hi ] =                                         αs   (τδ          + τhi )−1 .
   Matching coefficients we have
                             h                    i                                                                          h                    i
                   τsi Vari θl |si , hi , p                                    γi − τp̂i ααhs τδτ+τ
                                                                                                 hi
                                                                                                    hi
                                                                                                       Var θl |si , hi , p
         αsi =                                        ,        αhi =                                                                                    .
                                κi                                                                                κi
                                          h                     i                                                                                        h             i
                            α
                   1 − τp̂i αps Var θl |si , hi , p                                                          τp̂i αψs + γq0i            1 + Var θl |si , hi , p
         αpi =                                                       ,   and ψi = −                                                                                            ,
                                     κi                                                                                                  κi
where κi = γVar [θ|si , hi , p] + γ + c.
    The equilibrium hinges on finding the equilibrium value of ααhs . In this case,                                                                             αs
                                                                                                                                                                αh   it is given by the
solution to the following nonlinear equation
                                          ´ 1                 τhi
                                                                            
                                        1   κi γi − x τθ +τsi +x2 (τδ +τhi ) di
                              Ĥ (x) ≡ −      ´ 1          τsi                  = 0.
                                        x       κ τ +τ +x2 (τ +τ ) di               i    θ        si          δ        hi


Taking limits we have limx→0 Ĥ (x) = ∞ and limx→∞ Ĥ (x) = −∞. Hence, since Ĥ (x) is continuous in
(0, ∞), an equilibrium always exists. Moreover, in any stable equilibrium, Ĥ 0 (x) < 0 .

Lemma 12. In any stable equilibrium,
                                                              
                                                           αs
                                                  ∂        αh
                                                                                   
                                                                                      αsi αhi 1
                                                                                                
                                         sgn                         = − sgn Covx      −   ,     .
                                                          ∂c                                                  αs             αh κi

Proof. Using the Implicit Function Theorem we have
                                             
                                         αs
                                 ∂       αh
                                                             ∂ Ĥ
                                                              ∂c
                                                  =−
                                     ∂c                    Ĥ 0 (x)
                                                           ´    −τsi Vari [θ|si ,hi ,p]                       ´   γi −xτhi Vari [θ|si ,hi ,p]
                                                                                        diαh −αs                                              di
                                                                       ( κi ) 2                                            ( κi ) 2
                                                                                                        (αs )2
                                                  =−
                                                                                                       Ĥ 0 (x)
                                                           αh
                                                                 ´ α                   αhi
                                                                                              
                                                                                                  1
                                                           αs
                                                                          si
                                                                         αs     −       αh        κi di
                                                  =−
                                                                         −Ĥ 0 (x)
                                                                          h                               i
                                                           αs                  αsi            αhi 1
                                                           αh Covx             αs       −     αh , κi
                                                  =−                                                          .
                                                                         −Ĥ 0 (x)

which yields the result since in any stable equilibrium H 0 < 0.

                                                                                         A32
Theorem 9. (Directional results under one-dimensional heterogeneity) When endowments are
unlearnable and there are quadratic trading costs, if investor differ in only one of the following dimensions
a) the precision of information τsi , b) in the precision of the private hedging, τhi , or c) in risk aversion,
γi , an increase in trading costs decrease price informativeness.
                                                                                                                                                                
                                                 αsi  α                                       1                             αsi  α                                    1
                                         ∂       αs
                                                     − αhi                               ∂    κi
                                                                                                                    ∂       αs
                                                                                                                                − αhi                            ∂    κi
                                                        h                                                                          h
Proof. Note that a)                            ∂τsi                  > 0 and                 ∂τsi     > 0, b)                   ∂τhi              > 0 and            ∂τhi        > 0, and
                                            
        αsi  α                                1
∂       αs
            − αhi                        ∂    κ
     ∂γi   < 0 and ∂γii < 0. Since the covariance of two monotone increasing functions is positive
               h


(see Schmidt (2003)), if investors only differ in one dimension,
                                                                                              αsi αhi 1
                                                                                                                 
                                                                     sgn Covx                    −   ,                  >0
                                                                                              αs   αh κi
and Lemma 12 implies the result.

C.3          Filtering with hedging needs
Investors observe two pieces of information about the fundamental θ, the private signal si and the
public signal p. Moreover, the realization of their individual hedging need reveals information about
the aggregate hedging need in the economy δ and, thus, about the noise contained in the price. In the
equilibrium in linear strategies, the unbiased signal of the fundamental contained in the price can be
summarized in p̂ = θ − ααhs δ. The linear system that characterizes the unknown fundamentals and the
information observed by an individual investor is the following
                                                                                                                           
                                                      s        1  0           1 0 "
                                                     i  
                                                                       "  #             #
                                                                       θ         εsi
                                                     hi  =  0  1   δ + 0 1  ε
                                                                                 
                                                         
                                                                   αh                hi
                                                      p̂       1 − αs         0 0
where
                                                                                                            τθ−1
                                                                 "           #               "       # "                        #!
                                                                         θ                       θ                0
                                                                                 ∼N                   ,
                                                                         δ                       0            0 τδ−1
and
                                                                                                             −1
                                                             "               #               "       # "                        #!
                                                                     εsi                         0          τsi 0
                                                                                 ∼N                   ,         −1                     .
                                                                     εhi                         0           0 τhi
A standard application of the Kalman filter yields
                            ""       #                  #                                    "                                                                           #
                                 θ                                               1                       τθ θ + τsi si + τp̂i p̂ + ααhs τhi hi
                        E                si , hi , p =
                                 δ                               τθ + τsi + τp̂i                 τhi hi − ααhs (τsi + τθ ) p̂ + ααhs τsi si +                αh
                                                                                                                                                             αs τθ θ
and                                                                                                                                              
                                                        ""           #               #                                                 αs
                                                             θ                                         1                    1
                                                 Var                     si , hi , p =                                               αh2       ,
                                                             δ                                   τθ + τsi + τp̂i        αs            αs
                                                                                                                        αh            αh
where
                                         αs 2
                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                αs
                                                                                                                      
                             τp̂i =             (τδ + τhi )                                               and τp̂ =                        τδ .
                                         αh                                                                                     αh
Note that we can write E [ θ| si , hi , p] as follows
                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                       1      τhi
                                                                                             αs               τθ θ + τsi si + τp̂i p̂ +                αs   τδ +τhi hi
                                                   τθ θ + τsi si + τp̂i p̂ +                 αh τhi hi                                                 αh
                    E [ θ| si , hi , p] =                                                                 =                                                                  ,
                                                                 τθ + τsi + τp̂i                                                 τθ + τsi + τp̂i
                                   τhi
where E [ δ| hi ] =              τδ +τhi hi .


                                                                                                   A33
