                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                COALITION FORMATION IN LEGISLATIVE BARGAINING

                                        Marco Battaglini

                                      Working Paper 25664
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25664


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            March 2019, Revised April 2020




I thank Nageeb Ali, Stephen Coate, Gary Cox, Tommaso Denti, Daniel Diermeier, Wioletta
Dziuda, Faruk Gul, Matias Iaryczower, Martin Osborne, Ariel Rubinstein, Asher Wolinsky and
seminar participants at Bocconi, Boston College, Universita’ Cattolica of Milan, the University of
Toronto, and the 2019 Barcelona Summer Forum for useful comments and discussions. Aviv
Caspi and Neelanjan Datta provided outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Marco Battaglini. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Coalition Formation in Legislative Bargaining
Marco Battaglini
NBER Working Paper No. 25664
March 2019, Revised April 2020
JEL No. D72,D78

                                           ABSTRACT

We propose a new model of legislative bargaining in which coalitions have different values,
reflecting the fact that the policies they can pursue are constrained by the identity of the coalition
members. In the model, a formateur picks a coalition and negotiates for the allocation of the
surplus it is expected to generate. The formateur is free to change coalitions to seek better deals
with other coalitions, but she may lose her status if bargaining breaks down, in which case a new
formateur is chosen. We show that as the delay between offers goes to zero, the equilibrium
allocation converges to a generalized version of a Nash Bargaining Solution in which —in
contrast to the standard solution— the coalition is endogenous and determined by the relative
coalitional values. A form of the hold-up problem specific to these bargaining games may lead to
significant inefficiencies in the selection of the equilibrium coalition. We use the equilibrium
characterization of the distortions to study the role of the head of state in avoiding (or containing)
distortions. We also show that the model helps rationalizing well known empirical facts that are
in conflict with the predictions of standard non-cooperative models of bargaining: the absence of
significant (or even positive) premia in ministerial allocations for formateurs and their parties; the
occurrence of supermajorities; and delays in reaching agreements.


Marco Battaglini
Department of Economics
Uris Hall
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
and EIEF, CEPR
and also NBER
battaglini@cornell.edu




A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25664
1     Introduction
In most parliamentary democracies, public policies are not decided in elections, but are instead
the outcome of elaborate bargaining processes in the Parliament. Elections often do not even
determine the identity of the governing coalition, which may indeed be diﬃcult to predict on the
basis of the electoral outcome alone. After the 2017 German election, a coalition of the Christian
Democrats (CDU/CSU) with the Social Democrats (SPD) on the left was formed only after a failed
attempt to form a coalition between the CDU, the Free Democratic Party (FDP) and the Greens;
in Italy, the 5 Star movement contemplated the formation of a coalition with the Democratic
Party (DP) on the left, before converging to the Northern League on the right. Predicting the
outcome of legislative bargaining is generally hard because it is not just about dividing surplus
within some minimal winning coalition. For the CDU/CSU, forming a government with the SPD
is more than just the number of ministers that need to be conceded to the SPD compared to the
FDP or the Greens: it is also about what can be achieved in each coalition. Understanding how
these two often conflicting goals interact is clearly central in understanding how parliamentary
democracies work.
    In this paper we present a new theory of legislative bargaining in which formateurs need to
reconcile the need to form the most productive coalition with the desire to maximize the share
of output that they capture. The key assumptions underlying our analysis are that coalitions are
heterogeneous in terms of the surplus that they are expected to generate for the legislators; and
that formateurs can search for the optimal coalition, free to change the target coalition if they
can’t reach an agreement. Are there general lessons to learn on which types of coalitions will form?
Will the coalition generating the highest surplus emerge in equilibrium? If this is not the case,
will at least the bargaining process avoid that the worst coalition emerges? Naturally, these are
general questions that do not arise only in legislative bargaining problems, but in all environments
in which the eﬃciency of the coalition formation process is an issue. While we focus on legislative
bargaining, the bargaining model we develop in this paper can be applied to any such situations.
    The traditional literature on legislative bargaining a’ la Baron and Ferejohn [1989] has focused
on purely redistributive environments in which all coalitions generate the same surplus, thus de-
emphasizing the issue of eﬃciency. The theoretical literature on non-cooperative bargaining with
coalitions of heterogeneous values, on the other hand, has followed the tradition in cooperative
games, studying superadditive environments in which the grand coalition including all players is
the most eﬃcient, and focusing on when this grand coalition with all players emerges in equilib-
rium. The environments studied in these papers are best suited to model environmental or peace
negotiations, where inclusive outcomes are desirable; they are less suitable for legislative problems,



                                                  1
where redistributive considerations are important. In the legislative context, the grand coalition
is typically not the most eﬃcient and the more interesting questions are instead how ineﬃcient
the equilibria could be, who is in the majority, and who is out. Besides assuming superadditive
environments and focusing on inclusive equilibria, moreover, these models adopt bargaining pro-
tocols that, while direct extensions of Rubinstein’s iconic approach, are not explicitly designed to
describe legislative work.
      The bargaining model that we propose attempts to fill the missing gap between these two
literatures, extending the basic model of legislative bargaining by allowing for coalitions with
heterogeneous values without superadditivity, and with a simple bargaining protocol designed to
model actual legislative processes.
      In our model, bargaining starts with the appointment of a formateur in charge of selecting a
majority and allocating within its members the surplus it is expected to generate (for example
by selecting ministerial appointments). Coalitions are heterogeneous because their feasible policy
space, and thus the surplus that they generate, depends on their members. Each possible coalition
 generates a value  () to be distributed; once a coalition is selected the formateur negotiates
with their members on how to allocate it with a process of alternating proposals. A distinctive
feature of this process in our model is that, even after the start of internal negotiations, the
formateur is not bound to a coalition, s/he can always turn to a diﬀerent coalition if optimal. This
captures the specific role played by the formateur: s/he is not just bargaining on an allocation
within a coalition, but primarily in search of a coalition, thus free to halt negotiations with a
stubborn coalitional partner and turn to another. We assume that protracting negotiation is costly
because at every round there is a probability of bargaining breakdown as in Binmore, Rubinstein
and Wolinsky [1986]. A bargaining breakdown leads to either a new election or to the nomination
of a new formateur (perhaps after a new election). If a new formateur is selected, the process
restart with the new formateur. Bargaining ends when a coalition reaches an agreement or (if
it is a possibility) there is a bargaining breakdown that leads to a new election with exogenous
status quo. The equilibrium of this game naturally depends on the order of formateurs. The goal
is to generate general lessons that hold for all equilibria and all possible orders when the order is
exogenous, and then to endogenize the order of formateurs by explicitly modeling the role of the
head of state.
      We first characterize the equilibrium of the bargaining game between formateur and the coali-
tions assuming exogenous continuation values in case of breakdown, as traditionally assumed in
the literature.1       We show that bargaining leads to a unique stationary equilibrium in which
an ineﬃcient coalition is generally selected. The equilibrium choice of coalition depends on the

  1   See Osborne and Rubinstein [1990, ch.4] for a survey of models with the possibility of bargaining breakdown.


                                                        2
probability of bargaining breakdowns, the size of the coalition and its associated surplus. The
ineﬃciency is due to a form of the hold-up problem that limits the formateur’s bargaining power,
due to the fact that s/he can not credibly commit to switch to any other coalition. The threat
of being held up does not lead to underinvestment as in the standard hold-up problem, but to an
ineﬃcient choice of coalition (in terms of net total surplus). As the delay between oﬀers goes to
zero, the equilibrium allocation converges to a generalized version of the Nash bargaining solution
in which each coalition member receives its outside option plus an equal share of surplus net of
reservation utilities.2 This is the same allocation as in the classic Nash bargaining solution: the
diﬀerence is that in the -person Nash bargaining solution the coalition is assumed to be com-
prised by all players (or some other exogenous coalition), while in our model it is endogenously
(and ineﬃciently) determined.
    To understand the types of coalitions that may emerge in equilibrium (minimal winning or
super majorities, for example) and how surplus is allocated within them, we fully endogenize the
reservation utilities by assuming that a bargaining breakdown by some formateur is followed by
an attempt by some other formateur. We show that equilibria of this fully recursive version of
the game are very diﬀerent from the equilibria emerging in the existing non cooperative models
a’ la Baron and Ferejohn [1989]. Multiple stationary equilibria with diﬀerent welfare properties
and diﬀerent payoﬀ allocations typically exist, even if the core is empty. This is in conflict with
the finding of Baron and Ferejohn [1989], where multiple stationary equilibria are possible but
they all lead to a unique value for the players. Multiplicity reflects the complexity of the strategic
interaction in the model in which both the identity of the coalition and the allocation are part
of the outcome. We show, however, that multiplicity does not lead to indeterminate behavior,
but to a characterization that is tight enough for welfare and positive analysis. This allows us to
study the condition under which an eﬃcient equilibrium is feasible. Depending on the parameters,
ineﬃcient equilibria can coexist with eﬃcient equilibria or be the unique outcome. Under some
conditions the ineﬃciency can be so bad that the least eﬃcient coalition is chosen in equilibrium:
such ineﬃcient equilibria always exist if the value of the feasible coalitions are suﬃciently similar.
    Besides providing a new perspective on an old problem, our model may provide a unified
framework to explain empirical evidence that has been seen to conflict with standard models of
legislative bargaining. Existing models of legislative bargaining a’ la Baron and Ferejohn [1989]
predict a very large formateur’s premium in terms of the share of captured surplus (i.e. ministerial

   2 As we will show, the exact weights in the Nash baragining solution may depend on the exact internal bargaining

protocol. When bargaining within a coalition is done with random recognitions as in Baron and Ferejohn [1989],
the equilibrium allocation coincides with a generalization of the weighted Nash Bargaining solution with weights
that coincide with the recognition probabilities. In this case too the selected coalition is endogenous and generally
ineﬃcient (with the ineﬃciency depending on the recognition probabilities).




                                                         3
cabinets), in the order of three quarters of surplus.3 Our model may help to explain why we do
not observe such large formateur’s premia and indeed why the real benefit of being a formateur is
not in the share s/he appropriates within a coalition, but in the choice of coalition. Our model also
explains why we might observe delays in bargaining even in the absence of asymmetric information,
or shocks during the bargaining process. Finally, our model explains why we might observe
supermajority even if the supermajorities are not much more eﬃcient than the minimal winning
coalitions. The idea that legislative bargaining leads to minimal winning coalitions has been at
the center of theoretical models since the classic works by Riker [1962]. It is however the case
that, since World War II, European parliamentary democracies have formed more supermajorities
than minimal winning coalitions.4 With our model we show that supermajorities can emerge as
equilibrium phenomena even if they are only marginally superior than minimal winning coalitions.
This is surprising because for any coalition a party needs unanimity of participating parties and
bargaining leads to a classic hold-up problem in which all coalition members capture a fixed share
of net surplus over their reservation values.
    We use our model to study the role of the head of state, a figure generally ignored in formal
models of bargaining, but one who often plays an important role. Many parliamentary democracies
(including Austria, Belgium, Italy, Poland and others) empower their heads of state with significant
discretion in the government formation process, in large part through the choice of formateurs. To
what extent can the head of state influence the selection of the equilibrium coalition? In practice,
we do observe that heads of states’s role diﬀer in quite significant ways both within the same
country over time and between countries with similar constitutional rules. We show that the role
of the head of state critically depends on the relative values of the coalitions; this fact can explain
why the role of the head of state has significantly changed in Italy after the fall of the Berlin Wall
in 1989, despite no change in the constitutional rules.
    The organization of the remainder of the paper is as follows. We discuss related literature in
the next subsection. Section 2 outlines the model. Section 3 presents the characterization of the
equilibrium with exogenous outside options, highlighting the connection with the Nash bargaining
solution. The characterization in Section 3 is used in Section 4 to endogenize the outside options
in a fully recursive model in which a bargaining breakdown is followed by the appointment of a

   3 See for example, Browne and Franklin [1973], Laver and Schoﬃeld [1990], Warwick and Druckman [2001], and

Laver [1998] for a survey. There is indeed evidence of negative formateurs’s premia relative to their size (Warwick
and Druckman [2006]). These findings have been interpreted as major failures of noncooperative models (Laver
[1998]).
   4 Looking at parliamentary democracies in post Ward War II Europe, Druckmand and Thies (2002) note that

there have been over 80 cases of supermajorities and only 74 minimum winning coalitions over the postwar period.
See also Laver and Schoﬃeld (1990) and Volden and Carrubba [2004]. Note that we are referring to supermajorities
that are not unanimous (that are extremely rare).




                                                        4
new formateur. Section 5 presents the positive analysis of the model: the size of the formateur’s
premium, the emergence of super majorities, and strategic delays. Section 6 extends the normative
analysis by studying the role of the head of state. Section 7 presents extensions of the basic analysis
and compares the results of our model with intracoalitional bargaining with a model in which the
formateur makes take-it-or-leave-it oﬀers. Section 8 concludes.

1.1     Related literature
The literature on legislative bargaining has traditionally focused attention on the study of divide
the dollar games in which all winning coalitions divide a “pie” of fixed size. The standard reference
in this body of work is Baron and Ferejohn [1989], one of the first papers to propose an elegant
extension of Rubinstein’s model of bilateral bargaining to the multilateral case. In this model a
legislator is randomly selected to propose a division of one dollar; if the proposal is approved by a
majority of legislators, it is implemented; if it is not approved, then another legislator is randomly
selected with replacement to propose another division of the dollar and the game repeats.5
    Negotiations in which coalitions have heterogeneous values have been studied, in the larger
context of non-cooperative theories of multilateral bargaining, by Chatterjee et al. [1993], Okada
[1996] and Seidmann and Winter [1998] among others.6                    These papers follow the tradition in
cooperative games to focus on superadditive values, i.e. environments in which the coalition of all
players is always more productive than smaller coalitions. They moreover focus on the existence
of equilibria in which the coalition including all players is formed. In terms of bargaining protocol,
Chatterjee et al. [1993] and Seidmann and Winter [1996] assume a first rejector-proposes rule,
according to which the first legislator to reject a proposer’s oﬀer becomes the new proposer.
This procedure is a straightforward extension of Rubinstein’s approach in a bilateral context, but
less natural in a multilateral context and at odds with the practice to give proposal power to a
formateur who is in charge of testing, potentially, more than one possible coalition. Okada [1996]
instead considers a protocol in which, if the selected coalition does not unanimously approve the
formateur’s proposal, the formateur is automatically removed and a new formateur is randomly
selected with replacement from the floor (even if the subset of the coalition approving the proposal
is a proper majority). This again does not capture the role of the formateur after a rejection, who
may decide to continue negotiations, perhaps with a subset of the initial coalition or an altogether

   5 The basic structure of the model has been extended to consider alternative bargaining protocols (Morelli [1999],

Seidman et al. [2007], Ali et al. [2019]) and others; to consider richer policy spaces (Austen Smith and Banks
[1988], Baron [1991]); to allow for imperfect information (Ali [2006], Baliga and Serrano [1995]); and to endogenize
the proposal power (Austen-Smith and Banks [1988], Baron and Diermeier [2001], Yildirim [2007], Ali [2015]).
   6 Gul [1989] and Hart and Mas-Colell [1996] provide microfoundations of the Shapley Value. Ray and Vohra

[2001] and Okada [2010] consider games in which multiple coalitions can simultaneously form and play against each
other in a game.



                                                         5
diﬀerent coalition.
    This literature with heterogeneous coalitions and superadditive environments arrives at the
conclusion that, with patient players, stationary eﬃcient equilibria must be egalitarian, and they
exist for some order of proposers only under conditions that are hard to satisfy in standard en-
vironments of legislative bargaining: that the core of the underlying game is not empty, and the
eﬃcient egalitarian outcome belongs to it.7 Legislative bargaining models have been introduced
precisely to address the classical problem of an empty core in the presence of pressing redistrib-
utive problems. If the eﬃcient equilibrium is not unique and equal to the grand coalition, this
literature does not provide a characterization of equilibrium coalitions, even for simple environ-
ments. With general values (not necessarily superadditive) and the formateur style bargaining
protocol that we consider, on the other hand, we show that eﬃcient equilibria exist even in the
more realistic case in which the core is empty and, indeed, they always exist if the order is opti-
mally selected by a benevolent head of state, thus rationalizing existing bargaining procedures in
Western democracies.8
    To develop our theory with heterogeneous coalitions and endogenous coalition selection, we
build on a model proposed by Osborne and Rubinstein [1990], who consider a simple bargaining
environment with heterogeneous coalitions but without superadditivity.9 These authors consider
an environment with 3 players, one seller and 2 potential buyers with diﬀerent valuations for the
good sold by the seller. In this case, the only feasible coalitions consist of the seller and one of
the buyers. As in our model, the seller can switch partners after an oﬀer is rejected and before
making a new oﬀer. This game has a unique subgame perfect equilibrium in which the eﬃcient
allocation is always reached (i.e. the good is sold to the buyer with the highest valuation). We
instead attempt to model a setting of multilateral bargaining with  players and more general
coalition structures. While it is natural in Osborne and Rubinstein [1990] to assume that the
player who can choose the partner is constant and exogenously given (the seller, in their model),
it is more natural in our model to allow the formateur’s identity to change over the course of the
negotiation if an agreement is not reached. The key diﬀerences with their work, therefore, are that
we allow for more general coalitional structure, and for the formateur to be replaced by another
formateur if s/he fails to form a coalition, thus making reservation utilities endogenous. These
diﬀerences have important implications for the strategic analysis. For example, while Osborne and

   7 Remaining in the context of a superadditive environment, Compte and Jehiel [2010] show a model with random

proposals in which the eﬃcient grand coalition forms in equilibrium even if the allocation is not egalitarian. As in
the literature cited above however, such an equilibrium exists only if the core is not empty.
   8 This is possible because we show that equilibrium allocations generally are not egalitarian and the formateur

can obtain even less than the other coalition members.
   9 See Osborne and Rubinstein [1990, ch. 9.4]. The same bargaining procedure is adopted in an earlier model

by Wilson [1984] and Binmore [1985].



                                                         6
Rubinstein’s [1990] model has a unique equilibrium in which the eﬃcient coalition always forms,
in our model the equilibrium can be ineﬃcient and, with endogenous reservation utilities, multiple
stationary equilibria are possible. Osborne and Rubinstein [1990], moreover, does not study the
relationship between the equilibrium and the Nash bargaining solution.10
   A model of legislative bargaining with heterogeneous coalitions is also presented by Diermeier
et al. [2003]. In this model, a formateur selects a coalition ex ante and then negotiates with its
members in a process a’ la Baron and Ferejohn with unanimity, without the possibility of shifting
coalitions. Coalitions generate levels of surplus that depend on their size and on a stochastic state
variable that is assumed to change during the negotiations and is unknown when the formateur
selects the coalition. The equilibrium coalition depends on the legislators’ patience since patient
legislators are more willing to embrace larger coalitions (that are assumed to be more durable)
even if they are harder to form in the bargaining stage. A feature of this model is that distribution
and eﬃciency considerations are independent of each other. This follows from the fact that in the
bargaining stage unanimity is required and the formateur cannot switch coalition once bargaining
has started, even if the state variable has changed. The authors use data from nine West European
countries over the period 1947-1999 to structurally estimate the legislators discount factor and
the degree to which the size of a coalition increases its durability.
   The way we model the bargaining protocol is an important component of our theory, inti-
mately connected with how coalitions are selected and thus with the equilibrium impact of their
heterogeneity in values. With the exception of Osborne and Rubinstein [1990], the selection of
the coalition and the allocation of the rents are collapsed in one step in the legislative protocols
described above: a take-it-or-leave-it oﬀer made by a proposer; if the oﬀer is not accepted, then
automatically a new proposer is selected or the first rejector becomes proposer. In our model,
we explicitly model the negotiation within the coalition and we allow the formateur to switch
coalitions in the midst of negotiations. As we discuss in greater detail in Section 7.3, where we
compare our bargaining protocol with the standard take-it-or-leave-it protocol, this has important
theoretical implications. In a world in which a take-it-or-leave-it oﬀer is followed by the mechanical
selection of another formateur, reservation utilities depend on the exogenous recognition probabil-
ities, but they do not allow the formateur to react to a no agreement decision. When negotiations
are allowed to continue, reservation utilities depends on whether a threat to switch coalitions is
credible and whether negotiations are expected to lead to an agreement or not. Understanding the
connection between these two elements, the heterogeneity of coalitions and the formateur’s choice

  10 The relationship between the equilibrium and the Nash Bargaining solution is also not studied in Binmore

[1985]. Both Binmore [1985] and Osborne and Rubinstein [1992] assume a regular discount factor  a’ la Rubinstein
[1982], without bargaining breakdowns and an explicit modelling of outside options.




                                                       7
of coalitions, is key to understanding the logic behind our model and our results.11
       As we noted, our model contributes in explaining some empirical “anomalies” from the standard
model whose study has characterized the empirical literature on legislative bargaining. A number
of important works have attempted to provide theories to explain them. In the context of a purely
distributive model, Morelli [1999] has provided a demand theory of legislative bargaining that can
explain why the proposer does not receive large premia. Baron and Diermeier [2001], Seidmann et
al. [2007] have provided bargaining theories with a formateur in which supermajorities can emerge
in equilibrium.12 Ali [2006], Diermeier et al. [2003], among others, provide models with strategic
delay in multilateral bargaining models.13              While all these papers contribute to understanding
diﬀerent specific aspects of strategic bargaining, an advantage of our theory is that it provides a
coherent and unified potential explanation of all these empirical “anomalies.”
       Previous to our work, a welfare analysis of the role of head of state in a model of legislative
bargaining is provided by Morelli [1999], where the head of state selects the first proposer in his
original “demand bargaining” protocol. In his model, the first proposer selects a one-dimensional
policy for which citizens have single peaked preferences, a coalition, and an order for its members,
who then sequentially make demands. The coalition forms if the coalition members accept the
proposer’s policy and their demands for transfers sum to one. Morelli [1999] shows that, in a
version of this model with 3 parties, the head of state selects the party with ideology closest to
the median voter.14


2        Model
We consider a model in which  parties bargain over the formation of a government. The set of
parties is denoted  = {1  }. A government is formed if a qualified majority approves it. The
set of qualified majorities is denoted C. We say that a coalition  is a minimal winning coalition
if  ∈ C and for any  0 ⊂ , then  0 ∈
                                        C. The set of minimal winning coalitions is denoted M,
its complement in C, S, is the set of supermajorities. The set of qualified majorities and minimal

   11 This feature of negotiations is not important only in legislative bargaining. The importance of separating

between intra-coalition bargaining (i.e. how surplus in a coalition is divided) and the competitive pressure from
other coalitions is also highlighted by the experimental evidence presented in Brown, Falk and Fehr [2004]. They
find that markets resemble a collection of bilateral trading islands in which payoﬀs are split equitably between
coalition partners, rather than a competitive market.
  12 Supermajorities can also be explained in the Baron and Ferejohn [1989] model under the assumption of

deliberations under an “open rule.” Even in this case however, the size of the coalition converges to the size of a
minimal winning coalitions as the number of legislators is suﬃciently large.
  13   See Section 5.3 for a more complete description of the literature.
 14 Alternative models in which the head of state plays a role in legislative bargaining are presented by Bloch and

Rottier [2002] and Akirav and Cox [2018]. These models, however, assume purely redistributive environments in
which all coalitions generate the same amount of surplus, in which therefore there is no scope for welfare analysis.



                                                           8
winning coalitions to which party  belongs are denoted, respectively, C and M .
    A government is defined by the supporting winning coalition and an internal allocation of
the surplus generated by the government. Coalitions are not necessarily equivalent in terms of
generated surplus. We assume that the surplus generated by a coalition  is  () ≥ 0 bounded
above by a finite  = max  () and below by nonnegative  = min  (). We assume that
the members of the coalition can share the surplus in any way the want. A feasible allocation in
 is x ∈ (), where:
                                  n          ¯        X                           o
                                             ¯
                           () := x ∈ () ¯ ≥ 0,                    ≤  () .
                                                                  ∈

where () is the number of parties in coalition . Parties evaluate the governments according
to the surplus they receive, so { x} º { 0  x0 } if and only if  ≥ 0 . The parties that are left
outside the coalition receive zero.
    In the baseline model, bargaining is as follows. We assume that there is a set T = {0   } ⊆
 of potential formateurs who are ordered by a priority list. This list may depend on the result of
the election: indeed, typically parties are recognized as formateurs in order of their electoral size.
Since we do not model the electoral stage, we take this order as exogenous. We will endogenize
the order of formateurs in Section 6, where we study the role of the head of state in selecting
them.
    At time  = 0 the first formateur  0 is recognized and makes a proposal x ∈ () to a
coalition  ∈ C with  0 ∈ . If the proposal is accepted by all members of , the game stops and
the government is { x}. If the proposal is not unanimously accepted by the parties in , then
bargaining within the coalition continues. To avoid spurious equilibria in which no party is ever
pivotal, we assume that parties in  vote sequentially in some order.15 At period +∆ a diﬀerent
member  of  is recognized to make an oﬀer to the coalition: again the proposal is accepted by all
members of , the game stops; otherwise the process continues. In the baseline model, we assume
that parties in  are ordered according to some permutation ( ), so the proposer following at
the th stage for  ≤ () − 1 is identified as ( ). The formateur is always the first proposer
((1 ) =  ) and the order is periodic ((() +  ) = ( )), so after all members of the
coalition have a chance to make a proposal, proposal power returns to the formateur. Every time
that the formateur is recognized again, s/he can continue with the same coalition as in the previous
rounds or move to a diﬀerent coalition  0 . This reflects the fact that the formateur is not bound
to a specific coalition and thus can strategically choose to change “partners.” The assumptions on
the order of proposals within a coalition are not especially important for our results, we will relax

  15 If, for example, all parties are expected to vote no in a simultaneous vote, then voting no is always optimal

since no party is pivotal. An alternative solution to this problem, common in voting games, is to assume the mild
refinement requiring that parties vote as if they were pivotal.


                                                        9
them in Section 7.1 where we consider random recognitions.16
   At any point in time after which a proposal is rejected and before a new proposal is made we
have a negotiation breakdown with probability  = 1−−∆ . In case the negotiation is interrupted,
formateur  loses the status of formateur and a new formateur in T is appointed. If bargaining
breaks down when the formateur is   with    , formateur   +1 is selected according to an
exogenous acyclical rule   +1 = Ψ(  ). Allowing for   1 generalizes the assumption in the
existing literature that breakdowns occur with probability one after the formateur’s oﬀer and
allows bargaining within the coalition to go beyond a simple “take-it-or-leave-it” oﬀer.
   In Section 3 we first assume that if the last formateur   fails to form a government, new
elections are held, yielding utilities u = (1    ). In Section 4 we endogenize the reservation
utilities assuming that in case   fails to form a government, the process repeats itself restarting
from  0 , so that  0 = Ψ(  ). The case with exogenous outside options corresponds to a case in
which failure to form the government leads to a new regime: for example a caretaker government
or new elections with an exogenously given outcome. The case in which the process restarts with
 0 corresponds to a situation in which even if there are new elections, the bargaining positions
in congress are not expected to change in a significant way, thus leading to the same strategic
situation at the government formation stage. When the outside option is exogenous, we assume
                                                                       P
that reaching an agreement is better than obtaining u, formally  () ≥ ∈  for at least a 
with  ∩ T 6= ∅. Given this, a coalition  is eﬃcient if and only if  () = max 0 ∈C  ( 0 ).
   An history  is defined in the usual way, as a description of the sequence of formateur and,
for each of them, the sequence of coalition selections, proposals and votes. A (pure) strategy for a
player  assigns a choice of coalition ( ) and a vector of proposals x = {1 ( )  (( )) ( )}
in (( )) to each history  at which the player is formateur and proposer; a vector of proposals
x = {1 ( )  (( )) ( )} ∈ (( )) to each history  at which ( ) is the coalition
and  is proposer but not formateur; and an acceptance thresholds  ( ) to each history  at
which the player is a responder. A (pure) stationary strategy for a player  assigns a choice of
coalition ( ) and proposal x = {1 ( )  ( ) ( )} ∈ ( ) when  is formateur and
proposer; a vector of proposals x = {1 (( ))  () (( ))} ∈ () when the coalition
is  and  is the formateur; and an acceptance threshold  ( ) when the coalition is ,  is
the proposer,  is the responder and  is the formateur. A stationary equilibrium is a Subgame
Perfect Equilibrium in stationary strategies. Following a standard assumption in the literature,
in the following we focus on stationary equilibria in pure strategies and for simplicity we refer to
them simply as equilibria.

  16 Specifically, in Section 7.1 we assume that each coalition member is randomly recognized as proposer with a

probability  as in Baron and Ferejohn [1989].



                                                      10
3     Bargaining with exogenous outside options
To study the equilibrium with finite rounds of formateurs and exogenous outside options, we start
from the simple case in which there is only one formateur, i.e. |T | = 1: in this case if bargaining
breaks down, parties receive their outside options u. The solution of this case will be key for the
characterization of the more complicated cases and it will facilitate understanding of the logic
behind the equilibria.
    Assume an equilibrium exists and, in this equilibrium, a coalition  is chosen by formateur
 with payoﬀs equal to x∗ = {∗1   ∗( ) } with x∗ ∈ ( ). We can now characterize the
payoﬀs that would be achieved if  decides to choose a generic coalition  (that may or may not
coincide with  ).
    To this goal let us extend x∗ to comprise all players by defining ∗ = 0 for  ∈
                                                                                         . We can
now define the acceptance threshold of a player  in  at stage () of bargaining as:

                                (()) (  ) =  + (1 − )∗                          (1)

where we are using here the notation  (  ) to indicate the acceptance threshold of  when
 proposes in coalition  and the expected equilibrium coalition is  to emphasize that the
threshold depends on  . Player  knows that if s/he refuses the oﬀer one of two events occurs:
with probability , there is a bargaining breakdown, in which case the utility is  ; with probability
1 − , formateur  is recognized after the ()th proposer. At this stage, if  is equal to  , then
the game continues recursively; if instead  is diﬀerent than  , then the formateur is expected
to return to  . This implies that party  expects to receive ∗ . At this stage we can also easily
define the proposal by proposer (() ) as follows. If
                             X
                () −                   (()) (  )  (())(()) (  )     (2)
                         ∈\(())

then (() ) can not make a proposal that is acceptable and that guarantees him/her the
reservation utility, so the proposal at the () stage fails and the formateur is recognized again
as proposer if there is not a bargaining breakdown. In this case the expected payoﬀ at the be-
ginning of stage () is  + (1 − )∗ for all players. If (2) is not satisfied, instead, we have
(()) (  ) = (()) (  ) for all  ∈ \(() ) and (())(()) (  ) =
         P
 () − ∈\(()) (()) (  ).
    Proceeding in the same way by backward induction, we can uniquely define the acceptance
threshold for all bargaining stages up to the first, when the formateur makes a proposal for
the first time. At this stage,  proposes  (  ) to all other  ∈ \ , securing a payoﬀ
         P
 () − ∈\  (  ) if this is larger than  (  ), or a payoﬀ  (  ) otherwise.


                                                      11
                                                                             45o




                                                        (1  p) n (C )  1




                        Figure 1: The selection of the equilibrium coalition


The initial coalition  is chosen in equilibrium if and only if it is a fixed-point of the following
correspondence that maps coalitions to coalitions:
                                        ⎧                         ⎫
                                        ⎨          X              ⎬
                         ∈ arg max  () −          (  )                              (3)
                                  ∈C ⎩                          ⎭
                                                       ∈\


When  satisfies (3), then it is indeed optimal for  to select it whenever s/he has proposal power.
In this case, therefore, the expectation that after stage () the payoﬀ will be x∗ is correct. The
following result tells us that a fixed-point of (3) exists and it is generically unique. Let
                                              ( £           P          ¤)
                                                   ()  −   ∈   
                               ∗ = arg max                                                    (4)
                                         ∈C      1 − (1 − )()

Naturally, since the set of coalitions is finite, ∗ is well defined and, except for a non-generic
choice of payoﬀs, unique. We have:

Lemma 1. For a generic choice of payoﬀs, ∗ is the unique fixed-point of (3).

   The idea behind Lemma 1 can be easily illustrated. In the appendix we explicitly solve for the
acceptance thresholds () (;   ) for all stages  = 1  () and all  ∈  and show that



                                                  12
the equilibrium payoﬀ obtained by  can be represented in a recursive way as:
                           ⎧                                                                 ⎫
                           ⎪
                           ⎪                £         P       ¤                              ⎪
                                                                                             ⎪
                           ⎨                () − ∈                                    ⎬
                ∗
                = max       h                     i                                                    (5)
                      ∈C ⎪
                           ⎪         P()−1                                                 ⎪
                                                                                             ⎪
                           ⎩ + 1 + =1       (1 − )  + (1 − )() · ∗              ⎭

From (5) it can be seen that the choice of  has two eﬀects on ∗ . Assume for simplicity, and
only for the sake of this discussion, that the reservation utilities ( )∈ are zero. On the one
hand, the choice of  aﬀects the eﬃciency of the allocation, as represented by the intercept of
(5) with the vertical axis in Figure 1, which is equal to  () when  = 0 for all . Naturally
the formateur would like to choose an eﬃcient coalition, since this guarantees a larger pie to be
divided. On the other hand, the choice of  aﬀects the fraction of surplus that can be extracted
by  : specifically, the larger is the coalition, the lower is the bargaining power of  . This is the
hold-up problem and it is reflected in the slope of (5), that is decreasing in the size of the coalition
(see Figure 1). Naturally the formateur’s ability to extract surplus depends also on the probability
of breakdown. When the probability is high, the formateur’s oﬀer is basically a take-it-or-leave-it
oﬀer, and all surplus can be extracted: in this case the lines are almost flat; and ∗ converges
to the surplus maximizing coalition. As  decreases, however, the formateur’s commitment power
and the share of surplus that s/he can appropriate is reduced.
   Note that for all s, the term in the brackets is a contraction. It follows that the upper contour
is a contraction as well, as illustrated by the thick line in Figure 1. We must therefore have a
unique fixed-point ∗ and associated to it a (generically) unique optimal coalition for  that
balances eﬃciency with bargaining power.
   Given Lemma 1 we can now easily show that generically there is a unique equilibrium and
it must be supported by parties in ∗ . By construction, every time that the formateur has an
opportunity of choosing , s/he will chose ∗ . It follows that in equilibrium ∗ is chosen and we
must satisfy for all  ∈ ∗

                     ∗   =  + (1 − )∗(−1 ()+1) for all  ∈ ∗
                                          X
                     ∗   =  (∗ ) −      ∗ and ∗ = ∗ for all  ∈ C∗ \
                                            ∈C∗ \

In the appendix we show that this system is reduced to a system of (∗ ) × (∗ ) equations in
(∗ )×(∗ ) unknowns that has a unique solution. Using this solution we obtain the equilibrium
payoﬀs as ∗ for all  ∈ ∗ and  for  ∈  \∗ ; and the equilibrium strategies when ∗ is
chosen. Using these equilibrium values we can also uniquely define the strategies in all out of
equilibrium subgames in which some other coalition  are chosen. We therefore have:17
  17 A complete characterization of the equilibrium strategies is presented in the Proof of Proposition 1 in the

appendix.


                                                       13
Proposition 1. The bargaining game has a unique stationary equilibrium in which coalition ∗
is selected and payoﬀs are uniquely defined as:
                                  h          P         i
                                  (∗ ) − ∈ ∗ 
                 ∗ =  +                     ∗
                                                   
                                                                                                   (6)
                                    1 − (1 − )( )
                                         −1    ∗
                                                     h          P       i
                                (1 − ) ( )−1  (∗ ) − ∈ ∗ 
                 ∗ =  +                           (∗ )
                                                                  
                                                                          for  6=                (7)
                                            1 − (1 − )
where ∗ is the payoﬀ of the formateur, ∗ is the payoﬀ of a party  ∈ ∗ diﬀerent from the
formateur who is in position −1 ( ∗ ) in the bargaining queue. All other parties in  \∗ receive
zero.

   To gain insight on the equilibrium allocation, it is useful to consider the case in which the
interaction between the parties is very frequent, that is when ∆ → 0. This is important for
two reasons. First, because it will give us a simple characterization of the payoﬀs that will
be useful in the generalization studied in the next section. Second, because it highlights an
interesting connection between the model of the previous section and the Nash Bargaining Solution
(henceforth NBS). In the special case in which  = 2, the bargaining game considered in the
previous section coincides with Rubinstein’s model with the risk of breakdown (see Binmore,
Rubinstein and Wolinsky [1986]). It is well known that in this case the solution of Rubinstein’s
model coincides with the NBS. While the NBS formula can be extended to  players, there are two
basic reasons why a mechanical extension is not advisable. First, because there is not a unique way
to rationalize the -person NBS as the limit of a noncooperative game. Secondly, because even
if one were to accept the specific bargaining protocol that rationalizes the -person bargaining
solution, then the solution would imply that the coalition of all players is formed and all players
share the surplus. In the political context studied in this paper, such a scenario is highly unlikely.
Ideally, a -person generalization of NBS would provide indication of which coalition is selected
and how surplus is divided in that coalition.
   The following result shows that the equilibrium in Proposition 1 provides an alternative gen-
eralization of the Nash solution to the -person case as the bargaining interval converges to zero.
Define the -Nash Bargaining Solution as:
                                                         Y
                               N ( u) = arg max              [ −  ]                         (8)
                                                x∈()   ∈

where N ( u) = {N1 ( u)  N|| ( u)}. This is the Nash bargaining solution when coalition
 is chosen. Let, moreover,   be the coalition with the largest per capita surplus such that
                              £       P        ¤
 ∈   , i.e. that maximizes  () − ∈  () for  ∈ C and extend N ( u) to the
players outside  by setting N ( u) = 0 for  ∈  \. We have:

                                                  14
Proposition 2. As ∆ → 0, the equilibrium of the bargaining problem converges to ∗ = N (   u).

    Proposition 2 can be seen as a generalization of Binmore, Rubinstein and Wolinsky [1986], who
have provided the first non-cooperative microfoundation of the Nash bargaining solution with 2
players. What sets this result apart from the 2-player case and other microfoundations with 
players is that in Proposition 2 the equilibrium coalition is endogenous, the environment does not
require superadditivity, and the equilibrium is unique in the class of stationary equilibria.18
    A feature of the equilibrium characterized above is that, when ∆ is small, the formateur does
not receive a share of the pie net of the reservation utilities that is much larger than any of the
other members of the winning coalition. Unsurprisingly, payoﬀs depend on the order of proposal
power in the coalition, since ∗ is decreasing in ’s position in the bargaining queue. When the
bargaining process is fast, however, the diﬀerence in payoﬀs net of reservation utilities converges
to zero. Define the formateur advantage with respect to a legislator  in the equilibrium coalition
as A (∆) = ∗ (∆) − ∗ (∆), where we have expressed the equilibrium payoﬀs (∗ (∆))∈ as a
function of ∆. It follows immediately from Proposition 2 that  (∆) →  −  as ∆ → 0, so
lim∆→0  (∆) = 0 if  and  have the same (at this stage, exogenous) reservation utilities. The
presence of a significant payoﬀ advantage for the formateur is one of the key characteristics of
existing non-cooperative models of legislative bargaining and it has been criticized by the empirical
literature, since a formateur advantage has not been detected in many empirical studies. In the
next section where we endogenize u, we will see that indeed we might have lim∆→0  (∆) = 0 or
even lim∆→0  (∆)  0.


4     Endogenizing the outside options
In the previous section we have assumed that if bargaining with the formateur fails, then a
caretaker is appointed or there are new elections and the parties receive exogenously specified
expected utilities ( )∈ . It is however common in legislative processes that if there is a bargaining
breakdown, then a new party is selected as formateur and the process restarts. By explicitly
modelling what happens after a bargaining breakdown, we can endogeneize the outside options.
This is important because it allows us to explain commonly observed phenomena such as low
or negative formateurs’ premia, supermajorities and strategic delays, without making ad hoc

  18 For games in which all the coalitions have the same value, specific bargaining protocols achieving the Nash

Bargaining Solution with the grand coalition  are presented by Chae and Yang [1994] and Krishna and Serrano
[1996], among others. The protocols used in these papers are diﬀerent than that of Baron and Ferejohn [1989]
and the model described above since they rely on the possibility of players to commit to partial agreements. For
games in which coalitions may generate heterogeneous values, specific bargaining protocols achieving the Nash
Bargaining Solution have been presented by Okada [2010], who focuses on stationary equilibria assuming that the
grand coalition  forms; and Gomes [2019], who focuses on Strong Nash Stationary equilibria, in which players
are assumed to be able to coordinate to the most eﬃcient outcome.



                                                      15
assumptions on exogenous outside options.
    To extend the theory of the previous section to environments with multiple formateurs, let
T = {0   } ⊆  be the set of formateurs and let us assume that after breakdown of bargaining
with formateur  ∈ T , formateur  + 1 is called to the job. In a finite horizon extension after
 =  , the players receive exogenous utilities u +1 = {1    } as in the previous section. In an
infinite horizon extension, after  =  , formateur  = 0 is called again to the job and the process
repeats. If no agreement is ever reached, the agents’ payoﬀs are zero.
    In the following we focus on the infinite horizon extension and the case in which ∆ → 0 and
 → 0. A very similar analysis can be done for the case with ∆  0.19 Define  (u ) as party ’s
payoﬀ if coalition  is chosen and the continuation values are u = {1    }. From the previous
analysis we have:                         ⎧
                                          ⎪
                                          ⎪                     P
                                          ⎨ N ( u) if  () − ∈  ≥ 0
                             (u ) =
                                          ⎪
                                          ⎪
                                          ⎩                        

for all  ∈  and  (u ) = {1 (u )   (u )}. Define, moreover, C∗ (u) as the family of
coalitions in C with maximal average surplus when the outside option is u:
                        (                         ("                #       ))
                                                              X
                 ∗         0           0
                C (u) =  ∈ C s.t.  ∈ arg max       () −     ()      
                                                        ∈C
                                                                            ∈

At stage  the coalition either belongs to C∗ (u), or formateur  is unable to form a coalition. We
can now define the following operator. At the last stage when  is formateur:

                          ∗ (u) := {v s.t. v =  (u ) for some  ∈ C∗ (u)} 

The operator ∗ (u) maps the expected reservation utilities u if there is a bargaining breakdown
with the last formateur  , to the equilibrium utilities that are reached with formateur  . For the
previous stages, we define the payoﬀs recursively as:
                          ©                                                              ª
              ∗−1 (u) := v s.t. v = (u  ) for some  ∈ C∗−1 (u ) and u ∈ ∗ (u) 

The operator ∗−1 (u) maps the reservation utilities u to the utilities reached in equilibrium if
formateur  − 1 is reached. For a generic choice of u, C∗−1 (u) is a singleton and thus either
bargaining with  − 1 fails to form a government and we move to  , or there is a unique optimal
coalition for  − 1, thus ∗−1 (u) is a function. It is however convenient to allow ∗−1 (u) to be
a correspondence since when u is endogenous, the formateur may be indiﬀerent among diﬀerent
coalitions.
  19 As another benchmark, in Section 7.2 we also characterize the equilibria for the game as  → 1. In this case

the formateurs make a take-it-or leave-it oﬀer to the coalition partners before being replaced by another formateur.


                                                        16
    In this environment it is very natural to focus the analysis on pure strategy equilibria. As
we mentioned, the optimal choice of coalition at stage  , C∗ (u) and the feasible payoﬀs ∗ (u)
are uniquely defined for a generic choice of u. The same is true in a finitely repeated version of
the game (in which the complete loop of formateurs from 0 to  is repeated for a finite number
of times, after which a generic u is assigned to the players if there is no agreement). Any finite
horizon version of the model, therefore has generically a unique pure strategy equilibrium. When,
after formateur  , the first formateur is reappointed, the game becomes recursive: the reservation
utilities are endogenized and equal to equilibrium values of the continuation game. We define:

Definition 1. An equilibrium outcome in the extended bargaining game is a vector of utilities u∗
and a coalition  ∗ such that u∗ ∈ 0∗ (u∗ ) and  ∗ ∈ C0∗ (u∗ ).

    We can now study the equilibria of the stationary game described above. Given that the
economic environment in which the bargaining takes places is characterized by the set of parties
 and the characteristic function  , the core of the coalitional structure (  ) is a natural
benchmark for the solution of the game. Let F be the set of feasible payoﬀs, defined as:
                                                                P
               F(  ) = { ∈ R s.t.  ≥ 0 for  ∈  and          ∈    ≤ max  ()}.

Any feasible x must be “backed” by some coalition  that generates the surplus to be distributed.
We define the core of a coalition structure (  ) as the subset of F(  ):
                                                   P
                   K(  ) = { ∈ F(  ) s.t.     ∈    ≥  () for any  ⊆  }.

Intuitively, a feasible point x is in the core if it cannot be challenged by some coalition : that
is, there is no coalition of parties  ⊆  that can be formed and reward all of its members  ∈ 
with a payoﬀ    . The following result establishes that, under general conditions, any point
x∗ in the core corresponds to a stationary equilibrium of the extended game. We say that the set
of formateurs T is regular if for any  ∈ C, there is a  ∈ T ∩ C. We have:

Proposition 3. Assume T is regular, then for any ∗ ∈ (  ) there is an equilibrium outcome
( ∗  ∗ ) with ∗ = ∗ .

    Besides establishing a relationship between the equilibria of the extended game and a classic
solution concept, this result provides an easy way to identify an equilibrium in potentially very
complex environments with a large  and a general characteristic function  . This has an immedi-
ate welfare implication. We say that an equilibrium is eﬃcient if the eﬃcient coalition is selected
in equilibrium with probability one. In an eﬃcient equilibrium we might have that first formateur
who manages to form a government chooses an eﬃcient coalition, but some other formateur forms
an ineﬃcient coalition out of the equilibrium path. In this case the welfare properties depend

                                                   17
on the exact identity of the first formateur. We say that an equilibrium is strongly eﬃcient, if
the eﬃcient coalition is selected in equilibrium with probability one starting from any possible
formateur. We have:

Corollary 1. If T is regular and (  ) admits a non empty core, then a strongly eﬃcient
equilibrium exists.

   Intuitively, it is easy to see if ∗ ∈ K(  ) is realized in equilibrium, then it must be supported
                                                                   P          P
by an eﬃcient coalition  ∗ , since otherwise we would have ∈ ∗ ≤ ∈ ∗  max  () =
 ( ∗ ), a contradiction. Proposition 3 and Corollary 1 show that there is an equilibrium in which
all formateurs who are able to form a government select  ∗ .
       Is the set of equilibria fully characterized by the core? If this were the case, all equilibria
would be eﬃcient, but a stationary equilibrium would fail to exist when the core is empty. In
many environments of interest the assumption that the core is not empty is very demanding.
Bargaining problems often include important redistributive components: when the redistributive
motives are suﬃciently important, the core is typically empty.20 Indeed, as we show below, not
all equilibria are associated with payoﬀs in the core and ineﬃcient equilibria may exist. Luckily,
however, a non-empty core is not a necessary condition for existence.
       To study all the equilibria of the extended game with and without an empty core, we now
specialize the model assuming that there are three parties and each party has a chance to be
formateur in some order, so  = {1 2 3} and  = T . Without loss of generality we can
assume that parties are formateurs in order of their index and the value of the coalitions are
 ({1 2}) =  − ,  ({1 3}) =  +  and  ({2 3}) = , where   0; either  and  are
nonnegative, or  and  are non-positive; and, finally,  −  ≥ 0 and  +  ≥ 0.21 We also assume
here that the coalition of all players  = {1 2 3} does not find policy agreements easier to
implement than the best of the minimal winning coalitions, thus  ({1 2 3})  max∈M  ().22
Under this condition, as it can be easily verified, {1 2 3} is never the equilibrium coalition, and
we can focus on minimal winning coalitions. We relax this assumption in Section 5 where we
study supermajorities.

  20 For example, this is always the case when for any two   0 ∈ , | () −  ( 0 )| ≤  for some suﬃciently

small .
  21 To see that there is no loss of generality in this specification, note that, for example, the game with ( ) =

(− −)  0 and order of proposal is 1 3 2 is equivalent to the game with order 1 2 3 and ( ) = (− −). The
game with, say,   0 and   0 with || ≤ || and order 1 → 2 → 3 is equivalent to a game with the same order
and payoﬀs:  ({1 3}) = 0 − 0 ,  ({1 2} = 0 and  ({2 3}) = 0 + 0 with 0 =  − , 0 = − ( + )  0 and
0 =   0. Moreover, since the Markov equilibrium is memoryless, once we have characterized the equilibrium
with some order starting from 1, we have also characterized any game with the same order starting from 2 or 3.
  22
   The idea is that if a winning coalition can agree on a policy that generates a surplus  (), then additional
member who can veto it in a larger coalition  0 can only reduce the attainable value.




                                                         18
                ad                            ae



                                 a
                     A clockwise equilibrium                  A counter‐clockwise equilibrium




                                                                                               1




                  A strongly efficient equilibrium               A mixed equilibrium




                 Figure 2: Classification of the possible equilibria when    0.


   The assumption of three parties is an assumption that has been previously adopted by Austen-
Smith and Banks [1988], Baron [1991], Baron and Diermeier [2001] and many others: it allows us
to keep the key strategic feature of the problem, minimizing the analytical complications. It is
also realistic since many political systems have this feature.
   Our first result characterizes the strategies that are feasible in a pure strategy equilibrium.
Note first that there is essentially only one way to achieve a strongly eﬃcient equilibrium, that
is an equilibrium in which the eﬃcient coalition is reached for any initial formateur: if    0,
coalition {1 3} should form, no matter who is the formateur; if    0, coalition {1 2} should
form, no matter who is the formateur. This happens if the party who is not included in the
eﬃcient coalition is unable to form a coalition and no other party includes it in a coalition.

Definition 2. If    0, an equilibrium is strongly eﬃcient if formateur 1 forms a coalition
with 3, 3 forms a coalition with 1 and 2 is unable to form a coalition. If    0, an equilibrium
is strongly eﬃcient if formateur 1 forms a coalition with 2, 2 forms a coalition with 1 and 3 is
unable to form a coalition.

   On the other hand, strategies that are not strongly eﬃcient come in diﬀerent types and shapes.
Two forms of ineﬃcient strategies are particularly salient.


                                                     19
Definition 3. A clockwise equilibrium is an equilibrium in which, when given a chance, party 1
selects 3, party 3 selects 2 and party 2 selects 1.

Definition 4. A counterclockwise equilibrium is an equilibrium in which, when given a chance,
party 1 selects 2, party 2 selects 3 and party 3 selects 1.

The top left panel of Figure 2 illustrates the clockwise equilibrium, where the choice of coalition
is illustrated by a pointed arrow (from the chooser to the chosen). The top right and bottom
left panels illustrate the counterclockwise and strongly eﬃcient equilibria respectively.23                    This
classification is important because, as the following result shows, it exhausts all the possible cases
that can occur in equilibrium. In the appendix we prove that:

Proposition 4. A pure strategy equilibrium is either clockwise, counterclockwise or strongly
eﬃcient.

       The intuition behind Proposition 4 is simple. Assume, for the sake of the discussion here, that
   0. Suppose that 1 chooses 2 to be in a coalition with her.24 Is it possible that 3 also finds
it optimal to select 2 as her coalition partner if given a chance to be formateur? The problem
with such a scenario is that if this were the case, then 2 would always be in a coalition, thus
making her equilibrium outside option high (and making the equilibrium outside option of 3 very
low); this would reduce the incentive to include 2 in a coalition, and make 3 more appealing. But
then it is natural to expect that 1 will choose 3, since a coalition {1 3} is more valuable and 3 is
“cheap.” Proposition 4 shows that indeed 3 will not find it optimal to include 2, thus leaving only
three other scenarios: either oﬀers are “spread out” following the order of the formateurs (the
counterclockwise equilibrium); or oﬀers are spread out following the opposite order (the clockwise
equilibrium); or only the eﬃcient coalition is feasible in which case 1 would not oﬀer to 2 if    0
and the party that does not belong to the eﬃcient coalition will never be included in the winning
coalition.
       We can now turn to the characterization of the equilibria. Note that the game can be seen as
a classic stochastic game in which the only state variable at any point in time is the identity of
the formateur. Proposal strategies are easily represented by functions  , describing the proposal
that  makes to  when  is the formateur.25
       Assume we are in a counterclockwise equilibrium and consider the problem of formateur 1.
She selects party 2 and makes a payment that depends on 2’s expected reservation utility, that is

  23   The bottom right panel illustrates a mixed equilibrium that will be discussed below.
  24   As we will see, this may occur in equilibrium even if    0.
  25 We adopt the simplified notation here since it will not lead to confusion. In terms of the more general notation
of Section 2, we have  =  ({ } ).


                                                           20
                          Figure 3: The equilibrium characterization for  = 1


the utility that 2 expects to achieve if bargaining with 1 breaks down. The reservation utilities
at this stage correspond to 2 , the payment that formateur 2 in equilibrium oﬀers to . From
Proposition 2, 1 must satisfy as ∆ → 0:26

                                    −  − 21 − 22 1            −  − 21 − 22 1
                    11 = 21 +                     , 2 = 22 +                  , 3 = 0.                    (9)
                                          2                             2
       Compared to the analysis of Section 3, now the parties’ reservation utilities are endogenous
and they themselves depend on what is expected to happen if bargaining with formateur 2 breaks
down. Following the same logic as in (9), we obtain the allocations when 2 and 3 are formateurs:

                                                33 2  33
                             21    = 0, 22 =   − , 3 = +
                                               2   2        2   2
                                          +  11 3            +  11
                             31    =                      3
                                              + , 2 = 0, 3 =      −                                        (10)
                                           2    2                2   2

  26 The formulas look analogous, just a little more complicated when ∆  0. For example, we would have: and
             (1−)                                          (1−)                  
11 = 21 + 1−(1−)2  −  − 21 − 22 , 13 = 0, 12 = 22 + 1−(1−)2  −  − 21 − 22 . Analogous formula can be
derived for the reservation values in (10) below.



                                                        21
      Equations (9)-(10) define a system of nine equations in nine unknowns that gives us the fol-
lowing unique solution:
                                     3 − 4 +  1 6 − 5 −  1
                             11   =             , 2 =               , 3 = 0                             (11)
                                            9                  9
                                              3 −  − 2 2 6 +  + 2
                             21   = 0, 22 =             , 3 =
                                                   9                    9
                                     6 − 2 + 5 3                3 +   2 + 4
                             31   =               , 2 = 0, 33 =                
                                            9                             9
These are the equilibrium allocations under the assumption that we are in a counterclockwise
equilibrium. To complete the characterization we need to make sure that the coalitions chosen
in this type of equilibrium are the players’ best responses. Let  () be the average surplus in
coalition  when  is the formateur, that is
                                                  1h          X            i
                                        () =      () − (       +1 ) 
                                                  2            ∈

For illustration, let us assume here that  and  are negative, so that the most eﬃcient coalition
is {1 2} (the case in which  and  are positive is very similar and presented in the appendix).
Consider first the case in which 2 is the formateur. From Proposition 2, formateur 2 selects
coalition {2 3} if 2 ({2 3}) ≥ 2 ({1 2}). From (11), we have:
                                                   1¡           ¢ 3 − 7 − 5
                               2 ({1 2}) =          −  − 31 =
                                                   2                     18
                                                   1¡       ¢   6 − 2 − 4
                               2 ({2 3}) =          − 33 =               
                                                   2                 18
so 2 ({2 3}) ≥ 2 ({1 2}) if  ≥ − 35  − 15 . Proceeding analogously we can verify that formateur
1 and 3 finds it optimal to select, respectively, coalitions {1 2} and {1 3} if and only if  ≤
3 + 7.27      We conclude that a counterclockwise equilibrium exists only if  ≥ − 35  − 15  and
 ≤ 3 + 7 (the darkly shaded region in the negative orthant in Figure 3). Using a similar logic
we can characterize all the other feasible equilibria and obtain the following full characterization
of equilibrium bargaining:

Proposition 5. We have that:
                                                                        ¡3                   ¢
      • A clock-wise equilibrium exists if and only if  ≤ min            4   + 4  3 − 2 when    0, and
        if  ≥ − 32  − 2 if    0

      • A counterclockwise equilibrium exists if and only if:  ≤ 37 − 57  if    0; and  ≥ − 35 − 15 
        and  ≤ 3 + 7 if    0.

 27   Details on these derivations are presented in the proof of Proposition 5.




                                                         22
       • An eﬃcient equilibrium exists if an only if  ≥  −  when    0, and if  ≥ − ( + )if
            0


       The equilibrium structure is described in Figure 3.28 We conclude this section by comment-
ing on three important aspects of the characterization that make the analysis distinctive from
previous work on legislative bargaining: the possibility of ineﬃcient equilibria; the possibility of
multiple equilibria with diﬀerent welfare properties depending on the parties’ expectations of likely
coalitions; and the possible lack of existence of a pure strategy equilibrium.
       The issue of ineﬃcient equilibria has been studied little in the previous literature on legislative
bargaining because it focused on distributive politics. Noncooperative models a’ la Baron and
Ferejohn [1989] assume that all coalitions generate the same surplus, thus restricting the analysis
to how surplus is allocated and making the choice of coalition irrelevant; cooperative models of
bargaining (such as the Shapley value, for example), on the contrary, eﬀectively assume that
the largest coalition is the most eﬃcient and always selected.29                     In the model studied above,
instead, the focus is on which equilibrium coalition is chosen and how this choice depends on
the associated surplus. Proposition 5 shows that indeed ineﬃcient coalitions can be selected even
if the formateur is a member of the eﬃcient coalition, and the selected coalition may not even
be the one that maximizes average surplus. This happens when the equilibrium “expectation”
of some other member of the eﬃcient coalition is too high, thus making convenient to choose a
less eﬃcient coalition. Surprisingly, this is not just one of the equilibrium outcomes, but under
some condition the unique equilibrium outcome.30                   Note that in the game presented above the
core is empty whenever  and  are suﬃciently small (i.e.  +   ), a natural condition to
assume in a legislative bargaining environment. In strictly superadditive environments with the
first rejector-becomes-proposer bargaining protocol (as in Chatterjee et al. [1993]) or the random
proposer protocol (as in Okada [1996]) eﬃcient equilibria do not exist with an empty core.31
Relaxing the assumption of superadditive values and assuming the formateur protocol, we instead
can have an eﬃcient outcome with pure strategies even with an empty core, thus in environments
that are relevant for legislative bargaining.32 This may explain why formateur-type of bargaining

  28   In Figure 3,  is normalized at  = 1
  29 Welfare in legislative bargaining models has been explicitly studied in models involving public goods (for

instance, Battaglini and Coate [2007], Volden and Wiseman [2007]), endogenous status quo (Dziuda and Loeper
[2016]), and public debt with distortionary taxation (Battaglini and Coate [2008]).
  30 For example, with    0 and   −( + ),   − 35  − 15 , this is the unique equilibrium when 1 is the first
formateur (who selects 3 instead of the eﬃcient 2); with    0 and   37  − 57 ,   min{( − ) 34 + 4 }, this is
the unique equilibrium when 3 is the first formateur (who selects 2 instead of the eﬃcient 1).
  31   For these results see, respectively, Chatterjee et al. [1993] and Okada [1996].
  32                                                                                                      3         5
       For example, for   ≥ 0, there is an eﬃcient equilibrium for any order of formateurs if  ≤      7
                                                                                                               −   7
                                                                                                                         when


                                                           23
protocol are common in Western democracies.
    Consider now the issue of multiplicity. Assume here, for the sake of the discussion,    0. In
the area below the counterclockwise equilibrium threshold (the lower solid line) in Figure 3, both
the counterclockwise and the clockwise equilibria exist (but no eﬃcient equilibrium exists); in the
area above the eﬃcient equilibrium threshold (the dashed line) and below the clockwise equilibrium
threshold (the higher solid line), we have both an eﬃcient and an ineﬃcient equilibrium. Contrary
to what happens in Baron and Ferejohn [1989], this multiplicity of equilibria is payoﬀ relevant.33
 For example in the area in which both the clockwise and the counterclockwise equilibria coexist,
the counterclockwise equilibrium is associated to the payoﬀs in (11); as we show in the proof of
Proposition 5 in the appendix, the payoﬀs with a clockwise equilibrium are:
                                    6 + 5 − 2 1                 3 + 4 + 2
                            11   =                , 2 = 0, 13 =
                                            9                            9
                                    3 +  − 4 2 6 −  − 5 2
                            21   =              , 2 =              , 3 = 0                                    (12)
                                           9                   9
                                              3 − 2 −  3 6 + 2 + 
                            31   = 0, 32 =              , 3 =             
                                                   9                   9
The payoﬀ of party 1 when s/he is the formateur, for example, is much higher in the clockwise
equilibrium than in the counterclockwise equilibrium. The multiplicity of equilibria capture the
complexity of the strategic interaction in this model and is natural in this environment, since it
reflects the fact that reservation utilities depend in a non trivial way on endogenous expectations of
the future. As we will discuss in the following section, this multiplicity has important implications
for understanding the limits of presidential power to control bargaining outcome by just controlling
the order and identity of formateurs. Despite this, the model generates only few equilibria and
thus allows to derive sharp predictions on behavior and welfare.
    The fact that by endogenizing the reserve values  we obtain payoﬀ relevant multiplicity
should not be surprising; what is surprising is that we still obtain useful restrictions on behavior.
To see this, consider the Nash bargaining solution (NBS) in which  players divide a pie of size
. When  = 2 this solution can be seen as the limit of the model in Binmore et al. [1986]
as the frequency of oﬀers increases.34 In the NBS the payoﬀs v = (1    ) are uniquely
                                               P
defined by the  equations  =  + (1)( − =1  ) for  = 1  . If we attempt to
endogenize the reservation utilities by imposing  =  , the system collapses to one equation,
                          P
the feasibility constraint =1  = , thus making the solution indeterminate. The reason why
  ≥ 0, and  ≥ − 35  − 15  and  ≤ 3 + 7 if    0 the core is empty, but there is an eﬃcient equilibrium in
which 1 is the first proposer.
  33 As first proven by Eraslan [2002], in Baron and Ferejohn [1989] we typically have multiple stationary equilibria,

but they all lead to the same equilibrium payoﬀs.
  34 It can also be seen as the limit of the model in Rubinstein [1982], if we interpret the discount factor as the

probability that bargaining is terminated, in which case an impasse payoﬀ u is reached


                                                         24
in our model we obtain meaningful restrictions on the equilibrium outcome lies in an important
feature of legislative bargaining (as well as many other bargaining environments): when there
is a bargaining breakdown, the game does not repeat itself identically; instead, proposal power
moves to a diﬀerent formateur who, typically, may want to select a diﬀerent coalition. This fact
is suﬃcient to break the indeterminacy that was described above. A similar feature is true for the
Baron and Ferejohn’s model where, after an oﬀer is declined, the proposer automatically looses
proposal power and the game restarts with a randomly selected proposer (who also typically selects
a diﬀerent coalition). In Baron and Ferejohn [1989] the assumption of a take-it-or-leave-it oﬀer,
of exogenous separation after a rejection and of coalitions with the same value leads to a unique
stationary equilibrium in which the proposer appropriates most of the surplus if the value of all
coalitions is the same, but it may lead to multiple equilibria if the values of the coalitions are
heterogeneous as in our more general environment.35 In our model, we have multiple stationary
equilibria, but still useful restrictions on equilibrium behavior.
    Finally, we discuss the need to look for mixed equilibria. While it is natural to focus on pure
strategy equilibria when they exist, Proposition 5 shows that a pure strategy equilibrium does not
always exist when the core is empty. When    0, no pure equilibrium exists if   −( + )
and   − 32  − 2, i.e. the triangle defined by the dashed eﬃciency frontier and the solid line
of the clockwise equilibrium in the negative orthant of Figure 3. Similarly, when    0, no
                                            ¡                  ¢
pure strategy equilibrium exists if   min 34  + 4  3 − 2 and    − , i.e. the triangle
defined by the dashed eﬃciency frontier and the solid line of the counterclockwise equilibrium in
the positive orthant of 3. These are situations in which, if we believe in a literally infinite horizon,
the equilibrium can be searched among the mixed equilibria; but if we believe the model has a
finite but perhaps long horizon, then the exact number of stages is important.
    For completeness in the online appendix, we have characterized a mixed equilibrium in these
regions as well. In this equilibrium, party 1 randomizes between forming a coalition with 2 and
3; party 2 forms a coalition with party 1 with probability one, and party 3 forms a coalition with
party 2 with probability one (see the lower right quadrant in Figure 3).
    An interesting qualitative feature of this equilibrium is that it illustrates a point that we will
make in the next section: how using the “formateur premium” as a way of measuring the advantage
of being a formateur may lead to misleading and even puzzling conclusions. Let ∆ =  − 

  35 It is easy to see that the result of a unique stationary payoﬀ vector in Baron and Ferejohn [1989] is no longer

valid when coalitions have heterogenous values. Consider an example in which  = {1 2 3},  {1 3} = 1 ,
 {1 2} = 2 ,  {2 3} = 3 ,  ({1 2 3}) = 0 with   0 for  = 1 2 3,  = 1, and recognition probability  = 12
for all players. In this case it is easy to see that any division of the pie (1  0 3 ) with 1 ≥ 2 , 3 ≥ 3 and
1 + 3 = 1 is an equilibrium if 1 ≥ 2 + 3 . Note that this equilibrium would not be possible if  =  for
some . It is immediate to generalize this example for cases in which   1 and recognition probabilities are
heterogeneous.



                                                           25
be the premium of formateur  when forming a government with . In the case in which    0,
formateur 1 receives a premium ∆12 = − − 2  0 when {1 2} is chosen (with probability );
and a premium ∆13 =  +   0 when {1 3} (with probability ): so the formateur’s premium is
simultaneously positive and negative. Naturally, this is irrelevant, since in both cases the payoﬀ
of the formateur is the same, 11 =  + .


5     Positive analysis
In this section we discuss how the model can help explain a number of empirical facts that have
traditionally been seen as at odds with formal theories of legislative bargaining: the lack of a
formateur’s premium; the prevalence of supermajorities; and the presence of delays in forming the
coalition.

The formateur’s premium. A key prediction of standard noncooperative models a’ la Baron
and Ferejohn [1989] is that the party selecting the coalition receives a very significant premium
in terms of surplus allocation. This reflects the fact that in these models the proposer has, at
least temporary, monopoly power on the choice of the allocation and can exploit this advantage.
A surprising but robust finding in the empirical literature is that not only does such a premium
not exist, but that indeed formateurs suﬀers a proposer’s penalty.36 For instance, Warwick and
Druckman [2001] show that the payoﬀ formateurs receive falls short of their vote contributions to
the coalition by 13.3%.37
    Proposition 5 makes clear that a positive formateur’s premium is not a necessary prediction.
For example, assume that the diﬀerent coalitions generate similar valuations, so there is not an
obviously superior or inferior coalition and we always have a counterclockwise equilibrium (the
area in the dark shadow in Figure (3)). Consider party 1 when it is the formateur: can it extract
a formateur’s premium? It is easy to see that this is not possible and indeed it will be very willing
to concede a bonus to the coalition partner. If negotiation fails 2 becomes proposer: 1 expects
2 to form a coalition with 3, leaving himself marginalized. This makes it rational for 1 to leave
2 more than 50% of the surplus generated in their coalition. Naturally, 1 can try with 3, but 3
would require an even higher surplus since he expects to be in a coalition with 2 in which indeed
2 will be willing to leave him more than 50% of the surplus (again, this because 2 fears that if

  36 This literaure, started by Browne and Franklin [1973], typically relies on ministerial portfolio allocations (often

weighted by the importance of the cabinets) as a measure of surplus allocation. See, among many others, Warwick
and Druckman [2001] and [2006].
  37 This finding does not only rely on the fact that coalitions split surplus equally but the formaterur is system-

atically the largest party. Warwick and Druckman [2001] find that the coeﬃcient of a variable interacting the size
of a political party with a dummy equal to one when the party is formateur has a significantly negative sign.




                                                          26
proposal power movers to 3, then 3 will form a coalition with 1).38                   This is a manifestation of
the hold-up problem in multilateral bargaining. Formateur’s 1 can threaten 2 to switch to 3 while
bargaining, but the threat would not be credible. Party 2 knows that 1 will either return to the
table or fail as formateur. Party 2 then can comfortably hold 1 up and extract more than 50% of
the surplus.39
    In the online appendix we formally characterize when we should expect to observe a formateur’s
premium and when we should not. The characterization of Proposition 5, however, suggests a
more important point regarding how surplus is distributed in government formation. Most of the
discussion has focused on how surplus is divided between parties in the realized coalition. Failure
of the formateur to capture more than 50% has been interpreted as evidence that the formateur
does not benefit from its proposal power. This is natural in a world in which all coalitions have
the same value (as in standard non cooperative models) and in which the “grand coalition” is the
most valuable coalition (as implicitly assumed in all cooperative models, that have little to say on
the choice of coalition). In a model in which coalitions have heterogeneous values and equilibria
may be ineﬃcient, the formateur’s benefit of proposal power mostly comes from the choice of the
coalition, rather than from the share of surplus that is obtained. For example, party 1 obtains less
than 50% of  −  when proposer in a counterclockwise equilibrium leading to a coalition {1 2},
but even less than this if he attempts to form the more eﬃcient coalition {1 3}, and exactly zero
if he loses proposal power (since {2 3} forms in this case). The real benefit of being formateur for
party 1 is in selecting {1 2}.

Supermajorities. In Section 4, we assumed that there is no intrinsic benefit in the size of
a coalition. If  ∗ is the most eﬃcient policy that can be achieved by some minimal winning
coalition, then considering a supermajority can only add veto players, thus reducing the surplus
to be divided.40       Formally, we assumed  ({1 2 3})  max  (). Under this assumption, a
supermajority is never optimal in equilibrium. It is intuitive that the model presented above may
explain the emergence of supermajorities if we drop this assumption and allow supermajorities to

  38 The argument is indeed general and true for any party who may be proposer and indeed for any order of

proposer.
  39 Another natural environment in which the formateur’s premium does not need to occur is the case in which

there is a clearly superior (and a clearly inferior) coalition ( +   ). In this case too party 1 can not credibly
extract a positive proposer’s bonus. Party 3 knows that party 1 really has no choice, since the coalition {1 2} is so
inferior. Parties 1 and 3 are basically stuck with each other, so 1 can expect to receive anything in [ −  ]; and
3 can expect to receive the reminder  +  − 1 . Positive, zero or negative proposer’s bonuses are now possible in
equilibrium. Again, the hold-up problem is at work here: this time one in which 1 and 2 can hold each other up.
  40 In our formalization we have not specified policies, but they are implicit in the value function  (). The

government chooses a policy  in coalition  that generates a surplus  ( ) to party  ∈ . We can link  to
 by letting  () =      ( ). Assuming transferable utilities as in Austen-Smith and Banks [1988]
                                                                                                         and
                                                                                                            Baron
                     each party can now achieve  ( ) =  ( ) +  , where naturally we need
and Diermeier [2001],                                                                                  ≤     ( )
and  ∈ [− ( )  ( )].



                                                         27
be more valuable than smaller coalitions. In a supermajority the formateur needs to compromise
with more parties, but if the surplus is suﬃciently large this may be worthwhile. It would however
not be extremely surprising if we could only explain supermajorities by assuming a very large
surplus advantage for a large coalition. The interesting question is: can we explain supermajorities
even when the supermajorities are only marginally better than minimal winning coalitions? This
would go a long way in explaining why we observe them so often.
       When does an equilibrium in which all formateurs choose the supermajority  = {1 2 3}
emerge? To shorten the notation, let us say that a coalition  is in the core, if there exist
                                                            P
a feasible payoﬀ vector in the core x∗ ∈ K(  ) such that        ∗
                                                             ∈  =  (). If all parties
choose this supermajority, then a player  must receives a payoﬀ ∗ independent from the identity
of the formateur.41          Assume that the set of formateurs T is regular, so that if for any  ∈
C, there is a  ∈ T ∩ C. It follows that a supermajority  ∗ is selected in equilibrium by all
formateurs by all formateurs who are able to form a government only if it is in the core, else
there would be some formateur and coalition that would defeat it. But by Proposition 3 we
                                                 P
know that the associated payoﬀ x∗ ∈ K(  ) with ∈ ∗ ∗ =  ( ∗ ) can be supported as an
equilibrium. So a supermajority  ∗ is selected in equilibrium by all formateurs who are able to
form a government if and only it is in the core. In the three party case with    0, if we assume
that  ({1 2 3}) =  +  +  with  ≥ 0, the supermajority  is selected by all formateurs if and
only if  ≥ ( −  − ) 2.42 We have:

Proposition 6. If T is regular, then we have an equilibrium in which all parties who can form
a government choose a supermajority  ∗ if and only if  ∗ is in the core. In the three party case,
this occurs if and only if  ≥ ( −  − ) 2.

       The most important implication of this result is that the grand coalition can emerge in equi-
librium even if its welfare advantage on the minimal winning coalition is minimal; or indeed even
zero, when  −  −  is small or negative. Note that for   ( −  − ) 2 there is indeed an
equilibrium in which all parties strictly prefer the grand coalition to a minimal winning coalition.
This is surprising because it implies that, for example, even when  is arbitrarily small party 1
prefers to propose a grand coalition including 2 and 3 rather than a minimal winning coalition
with 2 only, despite the fact that in bargaining with a grand coalition he will have to leave surplus

  41   To see this, assume  is the proposer who is followed by  + 1 in case of bargaining breakdown, then  receives:
                                                                                                 
   = +1
            + 1
               3
                    () −  +1    = +1
                                            , where the second equality follows from the fact that  +1
                                                                                                            =  ().
                                                                            
  42   Party 1 chooses  if the average surplus 1 () =          () −  ∗ 3 in equilibrium is larger than the
surplus in the other two alternatives: 1 ({1 2}) 1 ({1 3}). This implies two conditions on payoﬀs must be verified:
∗1 + ∗2 ≥ −  and ∗1 + ∗3 ≥  + . When considering the constraints implied by 2 and 3 optimal response and
the budget          ∗                                                                                       ∗
               =1  =  +  + , we obtain that a supermajority equilibrium emerges if and only if: 1 ≤  + ,
∗2 ≤ , ∗2 ≥  −  − ∗1


                                                           28
to two other parties, while in a minimal coalition with 3 he can generate most of the surplus and
safely ignore 2’s demands. The general lesson is that the hold-up problem in legislative bargaining
may be mitigated when reservation utilities are endogenous. It is also interesting to note that
the possibility of a supermajority critically depends on the heterogeneity of coalitional values. As
 and  converges to zero, the lowerbound on the bonus value required by the grand coalition
to sustain a grand coalition equilibrium converges to 50% of the value of the minimal winning
coalitions, a very high threshold.
    The finding that a supermajority can exist even if it is not significantly more eﬃcient than
minimal winning coalitions is not a general feature of bargaining models even if we assume coali-
tions with heterogeneous values in which the most eﬃcient coalition is a supermajority. Con-
sider for example the first rejector-becomes-proposer bargaining protocol as the discount factor
converges to one (Chatterjee et al. [1993]). Even allowing for a non empty core, a necessary
condition to obtain that there is an eﬃcient equilibrium in which the coalition of all  forms
is that  ( ) | | ≥  () || for  ⊆  .43           This condition is obviously never satisfied when
 ( ) −  () is suﬃciently small for some . With the formateur bargaining protocol studied
in this paper, however, these strong conditions are not necessary because an eﬃcient equilib-
rium is not necessarily egalitarian as in these models, so supermajorities are easier to occur in
equilibrium.44

Strategic delays. Proposition 2 and 5 show that we may have strategic delay in equilibrium.
An equilibrium with strategic delay occurs when the eﬃcient coalition is possible, say {1 3} with
   0, and 2 has a chance to be formateur; delay is inevitable when the equilibrium with the
eﬃcient coalition is the unique equilibrium. An interesting observation is that delays in our model
are not due to the fact that there is an expected opportunity in the future that, by assumption,
is too large not to be waited for (in terms of expected surplus). In the case with    0, for
                         ¡                ¢
example, when  ≤ min 34  + 4  3 − 2 and  ≥  −  (the area marked “” in Figure 3),
both an eﬃcient equilibrium with delay and an ineﬃcient clockwise equilibrium coexist: party 2
is unable to form a government because of the players’ (self-fulfilling) equilibrium beliefs. The
delays in reaching an agreement, therefore, is a strategic phenomenon. Our model is not the first to
show the possibility of strategic delays in a model of bargaining. Previous stories about strategic
delays extended the basic model to identify important economic factors that may cause them.

  43 The condition  () || ≥  ( 0 ) | 0 | for  ⊆  0 is necessary for a subgame eﬃcient equilibrium to exist

with the random proposer protocol as the discount factor converges to one (Okada [1996]). A subgame eﬃcient
equilibrium is an equilibrium that is eﬃcient in all subgames.
  44 To see this assume  = ( −  −  + )2 , for     0. By Proposition 6, the eﬃcient grand coalition  is an

equilibrium for any order of proposers, still,  ( ) ||  (12) ({1 3} for  suﬃciently small. This is a subgame
eﬃcient equilibrium in which the eﬃcient grand coalition forms for any order of formateurs.



                                                         29
Avery and Zemsky [1994] and Diermeier et al. [2003] consider models in which the size of the
pie to divide changes stochastically during the negotiations.45 Ali [2006] considers environments
without common priors in which players may be optimistic about their recognition probabilities.
Jehiel and Molduvanu [1995] and Iaryczower and Oliveros [2019] consider principal agent models in
which the principal negotiates bilaterally with each agent. The results presented above contribute
to this literature showing that strategic delays can arise in a model without any of these features
and that can also explain negative formateur benefits and supermajorities.


6       Welfare and the role of the head of state in legislative
        bargaining
The characterization of the bargaining equilibrium presented in the previous section allows us to
study the role of the head of state in aﬀecting legislative bargaining and thus shaping governing
coalitions by exerting his/her prerogatives in selecting the formateurs. Among the prerogative
of a head of state in a parliamentary democracy, that of choosing the government formateur is
one of the most important.46          Many European constitutions empower their heads of state with
significant discretion in the government formation process, including Austria, Croatia, the Czeck
Republic, France, Iceland, Italy, Poland and constitutional monarchies such as Belgium, Denmark,
Luxemburg, Norway, and the United Kingdom. The role of the head of state in this process is
not generally formally regulated and it may change over time. Italy, for example, used to have
relatively weak heads of state; but this tradition ended with President Scalfaro (1992-1999) who
leveraged his prerogatives in the face of a weakened party system after the corruption scandals of
the 90s and the fall of the Berlin wall (Italy had the largest communist party in Western Europe
at the time). In the United Kingdom the monarch has repeatedly showed its influence in the
presence of a “hung parliament.” In some cases the power of the head of state is so strong that
legislatures proceeded to curb it, as in the case of Sweden and the Netherlands in 1975 and 2012
respectively.
      The equilibrium characterization of the previous section suggests three questions. As we have
seen, the legislative process does not generally arrive to an eﬃcient equilibrium in which the
coalition that generates the most surplus is chosen (even when the cost of delay is small). Indeed,
we have seen that it is even possible that the worst equilibrium, in which the least eﬃcient of the
coalitions forms in equilibrium, is achieved. First, is there room for a head of state to improve the

 45   See also Acharia and Ortner [2013], Ortner [2017] for models with a related approach.
 46  See Amorim Neto and Strom [2006], Tavits [2009], Carroll and Cox [2011] among others for a discussion of
the role of the head of state. Other important prerogatives of the president include the timing of dissolution and
the vetoing of legislation which are less relevant to our discussion.



                                                        30
outcome of the bargaining process, just by controlling the order of formateurs?47 Second, if this
is the case, what are the limits of this power? Ideally the head of state would want to induce an
eﬃcient equilibrium; under what conditions is this possible?
    In the online appendix we prove that:48

Proposition 7. If the order of formateurs is chosen by a benevolent head of state, then there is
always an eﬃcient equilibrium, though it may be in mixed strategies.

    This result is interesting because it is in sharp contrast with the finding in the literature
assuming superadditive values and the first rejector-proposer protocol (as in Chatterjee et al.
[1993]) or random proposer protocol (as in Okada [1996]) in which, for high discount factors, there
exists no order of proposers that achieves an eﬃcient outcome if the core is empty. The presence
of multiple equilibria, however, creates other challenges to a benevolent head of state. Does the
order selected by the head of state matter at all? When can the head of state implement the
eﬃcient outcome in the unique equilibrium? Finally, if full control of the outcome is impossible,
can at least the head of state avoid that the worst equilibrium is achieved?
    To address these questions, it is useful to normalize  to 1 and use the notation according to
which  =  ·  and  =  · , where  and  are generic coeﬃcients in (0 1) and  can be positive
or negative with ||  min {1 1}. It is easy to see that when || is suﬃciently large (the
area in the light shade in Figure 3), the choice of the formateurs’ order is irrelevant: no matter
what the order of formateur is, the eﬃcient coalition is so much better than the others, that it
will form anyway.49         In this case we say that the head of state is irrelevant. When, instead,
|| is suﬃciently small, the head of state is faced with multiple ineﬃcient equilibria, no matter
the order of formateurs. Consider point  in Figure 3. Here the head of state can achieve an
eﬃcient equilibrium by choosing an order 1 → 2 → 3 and aim at a clockwise equilibrium. If
this happens, then 1 forms a coalition with 3 and an eﬃcient outcome is achieved. If however,
the parties play a counterclockwise equilibrium, the result is the opposite: 1 oﬀers to 2 and the
least eﬃcient coalition forms in equilibrium. The head of state can attempt to achieve an eﬃcient
equilibrium by choosing an order 1 → 2 → 3, letting 3 to go first and aim at a counterclockwise
equilibrium: in this case 3 proposes to 1, and again we have an eﬃcient outcome. If however
the players play a clockwise equilibrium, the outcome is again ineﬃcient, though not the least
  47 As a starting point, we assume here that the head of state aims at maximizing aggregate surplus. A similar

analysis can be done for the case in which the head of state maximizes any other type of social welfare function.
  48 For the most part, this result follows immediately from Proposition 5. In the region   3  +  and    − ,
                                                                                              4     4
however, a pure strategy equilibrium does not exist, so we prove that there is a mixed equilibrium in which the
eﬃcient coalition is selected with probability one.
   49 Assume for example that    0. If 1 or 3 are selected, then {1 3} forms; if 2 is selected, then 2’s attempt

is destined to fail and {1 3} forms again. A similar phenomenon is true for    0, in which case {1 2} always
forms if || is suﬃciently large.


                                                         31
Figure 4: Dynamically consistent and inconsistent selections of formateurs by the head of state
for  = 1

eﬃcient coalition. The natural choice for the head of state is to go for this second scenario since
it makes sure that the least eﬃcient equilibrium is not achieved: but it is impossible to guarantee
an eﬃcient equilibrium. In this case, we say the head of state has incomplete control. The head
of state can make sure the outcome is eﬃcient in any possible equilibrium of the bargaining game
only for intermediate values of || and specific value of   (for example points  or  in Figure
4) In these cases, we say that the head of state has full control.
   In the online appendix we present a precise characterization of when the head of state is ir-
relevant, s/he has incomplete control, or full control. An implicit assumption in this discussion,
however, is that the head of state can commit to an order of formateurs. This is however prob-
lematic. Consider point  in Figure 3, where    0. If the head of state selects and order
1 → 2 → 3 and this is credible, then 1 forms with 3 and the eﬃcient equilibrium forms. But what
if, out of equilibrium, 1 fails to form and the head of state needs to select a diﬀerent formateur?
In this case it would not be optimal to select 2, who would form a coalition {1 2}, the least eﬃ-
cient. The choice of an order 1 → 2 → 3 would not be credible absent some form of commitment
device. It turns out that the head of state can still implement an eﬃcient equilibrium by inducing
a clockwise equilibrium an order 1 → 3 → 2, but in a much smaller region. We have:

Proposition 8. The head of state can implement the eﬃcient outcome without commitment as




                                                 32
the unique equilibrium iﬀ:

                 ≤ 3 (4 + 2) and either  ≥ 3 ( + 5) or  ≤ 3 (7 − ) if   0
                 ≤ 3 · max {1( − 7) −1(2 + 4)} and  ≥ −3 (5 + ) if   0

Following the formateurs’ order, the equilibrium is in pure strategies without loss of generality.

      Figure 4 illustrates the region in which the head of state can implement an eﬃcient equilibrium
committing to a specific order of formateurs (the colored area between the dark lines). The region
defined by the inequalities in Proposition 8 in which commitment is not required is defined by the
darker section delimited by the dashed lines in Figure 4.50
      Proposition 8 presents two general lessons. First, the head of state can aﬀect legislative bar-
gaining even without commitment, although his/her power is severely limited when, realistically,
s/he cannot commit to an order of formateurs. The second lesson is that the influence of the head
of state depends on the relative coalitional values of the potential coalitions. This dependency
of the head of state’s power on relative values of coalitions can explain why heads of states may
play dramatically diﬀerent roles over time in the same institutional context. We have mentioned
the case of President Scalfaro in Italy (1992-1999) who played a key role in shaping the Italian
governments compared to previous presidents. Here the change in the environment was the fall
of the Berlin wall and the end of the cold war, that made the traditional coalition formed by the
Christian Democrats (CD) less compelling, and a coalition led by Democratic Party (DP, former
Communist party) less of a taboo. The pre-1992 period corresponded to a period in which a
coalition {1 3} (led by the CD) was the most viable coalition ( +   ): with the end of the cold
war, the stigma of a leftist coalition led by the DP decreased (fall in ), moving the equilibrium
to the region with presidential full control.


7       Extensions
7.1      Discounting
As in the model by Binmore et al. [1986], in the previous analysis we assumed a positive probability
of bargaining breakdown and a discount factor of one. While it is plausible and standard to assume
patient players, we certainly do not want to rule out situations in which the parties discount the
payoﬀs obtained after a bargaining breakdown at a rate   1.51 The model presented above can
be easily extended to allow for these situations: the analysis remains qualitatively the same, just

 50   In the proof of Proposition 9 we present the formulas also in terms of  and .
 51   For example, it may be that after a breakdown there is a temporary suspension in negotiations.



                                                         33
with an additional parameter. Consider for example the counterclockwise equilibrium with  = 3
characterized in (9)-(10). If the players discount the payoﬀs following a bargaining breakdown at
a rate   1, then the equilibrium conditions become:

                           ¡            ¢         ¡            ¢
                      11 =  −  − 22 2 12 =  −  + 22 2 13 = 0
                                    ¡        ¢         ¡        ¢
                      21 = 0, 22 =  − 33 2, 23 =  + 33 2
                           ¡            ¢                  ¡            ¢
                      31 =  +  + 11 2, 32 = 0, 33 =  +  − 11 2

which has a unique solution, continuous in , converging to the solution of (9)-(10) as  → 1.
The same is true for the other two possibilities, the clockwise and strongly eﬃcient equilibria.
The important observation is that in the interior of the parameter space for existence of these
equilibria, the formateurs have strict preferences for the coalitions they select. This implies that
all the equilibria of Proposition 5 can be seen as limit of equilibria in games with   1 as  → 1.
When this is the case, we say that an equilibrium is robust. While this definition is not especially
discriminating for the equilibria of the game studied above, we will see in the next section that it
has a bite when we consider environments as  → 1, that is situations in which the formateur can
make a take-it-or-leave-it oﬀer.

7.2    Take-it-or-leave-it oﬀers and intra-coalitional bargaining
An interesting special case of the model presented in Section 2 is the case in which the formateur
makes a take-it-or leave-it oﬀer (TIOLI) to the coalition partners and, if the oﬀer is not accepted
by the coalition, the formateur is replaced with probability one, as in Baron and Ferejohn [1989].
This case can be seen as a special case of our model in which  converges to 1.
   When we have exogenous reservation utilities as in Section 3, Proposition 1 tells us that the
                                                          P
formateur selects the coalition ∗ that maximizes  () − ∈  ; and s/he appropriates all the
surplus net of the reservation utilities of the coalition partners. When instead, as in Section 4,
we endogenize the reservation utilities, as  → 1 the extended model becomes a version of Baron
and Ferejohn [1989] with a deterministic rotating order of proposers/formateurs. The analysis in
this case can be done as in Section 4. Consider the coalition formation process that we have in
a “clockwise equilibrium” under the assumption that    0: that is, an equilibrium in which
there is immediate agreement and 1 forms a coalition {1 3}, 2 forms {1 2}, and 3 forms {2 3}.
In this scenario, party 1 makes a TIOLI equal to 23 to 3 and takes 11 =  +  − 23 for itself: the
oﬀer is 23 since this is the payoﬀ 3 would receive from 2 if there is a bargaining breakdown with
1. Similarly, party 2 makes a TIOLI equal to 31 to 1; and party 3 makes a TIOLI equal to 12 to



                                                 34
2. If such an equilibrium exists, the payoﬀs are uniquely characterized by the system:

                                11   =  +  − 23 , 12 = 0, 13 = 23                         (13)
                                21   = 31 , 22 =  −  − 31 , 23 = 0
                                31   = 0, 32 = 12 , 33 =  − 12

This system has a unique solution in which each formateur fully expropriates the coalition partner:
11 =  + , 22 =  − , 33 = . Moreover, given these payoﬀs, it can be verified that the clockwise
coalition formation process is indeed an equilibrium for any feasible  .
   As in the previous analysis, this equilibrium is not generally unique. In the proof of Proposition
9 we show that there is also a counterclockwise equilibrium in which the formateur is forced to
share the surplus with the coalition member; and, when the core is not empty, we can also have
a strongly eﬃcient equilibria in which the eﬃcient coalition is formed and the remaining party is
unable to form a government. In the counterclockwise equilibrium the payoﬀs are:

                        11   = ( +  − )2, 12 = ( −  − )2, 13 = 0                      (14)
                        21   = 0, 22 = ( −  − )2, 23 = ( +  + )2
                        31   = ( +  − )2, 32 = 0, 33 = ( +  + )2

Note that as   → 0, this equilibrium is such that in all coalitions both members receive 2.
This is surprising, since Ali et al. [2019] showed that when   = 0 there is a unique stationary
equilibrium in which the proposer extracts all surplus (as in the clockwise equilibrium described
in (13)). This discrepancy is explained by the fact that the construction behind (14) is fragile.
Indeed, it can be verified that with the payoﬀs in (14), all formateurs are exactly indiﬀerent
between coalitions (remarkably, for any  ). Recall that in Section 7.1 we defined an equilibrium
to be robust if it is the limit of equilibria as  → 1, where  is the rate at which the players
discount the payoﬀs following a bargaining breakdown. While all the equilibria characterized in
Section 4 along with the clockwise equilibrium and the strong eﬃcient equilibrium of this section
are robust, the counterclockwise equilibrium in (14) exists only in the limit when  = 1. We have:

Proposition 9. As  → 1, in the game with three parties we have:

   • If   || + || (i.e. the core is empty), then there is only one robust equilibrium: a clockwise
      equilibrium in which the formateur forms the government with a party that is not next in line
      as formateur and fully extracts all the surplus. There is also a counterclockwise equilibrium
      with payoﬀs as in (14), but this equilibrium is not robust.

   • If   || + ||, then in addition to the clockwise equilibrium, there is a set of robust
      strongly eﬃcient equilibria in which the most eﬃcient coalition is formed, and the payoﬀs

                                                   35
      are (1  2  3 ) with 1 + 3 =  + , 1 ≥  − , 3 ≥  and 2 = 0 if   ≥ 0, and with
      1 + 2 =  − , 1   + , 2   and 3 = 0 if    0.


   Comparing this result with Proposition 5, we can learn two important lessons on the determi-
nants of eﬃciency in coalitional bargaining: how eﬃciency depends on the negotiating environment
and why it is important to model intra-coalitional bargaining with   1. Assume first that the
core is empty, a condition that is always satisfied when the value of the coalitions are suﬃciently
close and probably the most plausible scenario in legislative negotiations. In the unique robust
equilibrium with TIOLI oﬀers, the formateurs follow a simple strategy that allows them to fully
extract all the surplus: they make an oﬀer to the party with the weakest bargaining position (that
is, the party who is not next in line to be appointed as formateur), regardless of its contribution
to the surplus of the coalition. In this case, whether we have an eﬃcient equilibrium or not, does
not at all depend on the values of the coalitions, but only on the order of the formateurs: the
equilibrium is eﬃcient if 1 is the first formateur; but it is ineﬃcient otherwise. In the case in
which 3 is the formateur, for example, the ineﬃcient coalition {2 3} is formed despite the fact
that 3 could form a coalition with 1. This happens because 3 knows that 1 is next in line as
formateur, thus (because of the the assumption of take-it-or-leave-it-oﬀers) in a strong bargaining
position. In this process, the holdup problem is completely absent since the formateur extracts all
the surplus net of the reservation utilities. What makes this description of the strategic interaction
between the parties unsatisfactory is the fact that, when party 1 is the formateur, party 3 knows
that its participation is necessary to form an eﬃcient coalition; and, importantly, that if 1 fails,
both itself and 1 are left with zero utility by 2. Still, party 1 is able to capture the entire surplus
of the partnership. Indeed, party 1’s formateur’s premium is independent of its reservation value
and the reservation value of its partner. In such a situation it would instead be natural to allow
1 and 3 to negotiate some more beyond the TIOLI before proposal power passes to 2: it is in the
interest of both of them. This is however made impossible by the assumption that party 1’s oﬀer
is take-it-or-leave-it.
   The holdup problem plays a role only when we allow for meaningful intra-coalitional bargain-
ing. In this case, the holdup problem forces the formateur to share surplus with the coalition
partners. This changes the coalitional calculus considerably. On the one hand, now, even if 1 is
the formateur, there are multiple robust equilibria: only one of which (the clockwise equilibrium)
leads to an eﬃcient equilibrium; the other (the counterclockwise) leads to the least eﬃcient equi-
librium. On the other hand, however, an eﬃcient equilibrium is feasible even if 3 is the formateur:
no matter who is the formateur, however, we have multiple robust equilibria.
   It is important to stress that there is not an a priori “correct” way to model the bargaining


                                                  36
procedure: the cases as  → 1 (TIOLI) and  → 0 (intra-coalitional negotiations) capture two
diﬀerent strategic environments, both of which may be relevant in diﬀerent contexts. This dis-
cussion however shows that the assumptions matter for positive and welfare results. If we believe
that a formateur/proposer can credibly make take-it-or-leave-it oﬀers, then assuming  → 1 is the
correct option. In this case, we have a model that predicts an extreme version of the formateur’s
premium in which the formateur receives all the surplus. If instead we believe that a formateur
needs to engage in meaningful negotiations with the coalition partners, then we have to solve for
the general model with   1 and the natural case to consider is with  → 0, as we have done in
Propositions 1, 3 and 4. As seen in the previous analysis, the model with intra-coalitional bargain-
ing can explain why we do not observe extreme allocations of “surplus” favoring the formateur in
government formation processes, even if the order of formateurs is predictable.
   The second lesson from Proposition 10 is that multiple robust equilibria can exist even with
TIOLI oﬀers when the value of the coalitions are heterogeneous. When || + ||  , we can have
robust equilibria in which the formateur is forced to share the surplus with the coalition partner,
indeed it may be forced to leave more than half of the surplus to the coalition partner: if 1 is the
formateur, then we may have 1 3 = 1 −   1. This happens because coalition {1 3} is so
eﬃcient that 2 is unable to form a government, thus forcing 1 to commit to 3 (and vice versa).
Again this phenomenon is impossible with coalitions with the same value where the unique robust
equilibrium is an equilibrium in which the formateur extracts all surplus. We should finally note
that, when || + ||  , even the non robust counterclockwise equilibrium is interesting. When
the players are patient, an allocation in which the formateur does not extract all the surplus is
almost an equilibrium. Given that there may be powerful behavioral and social forces pushing
toward an equitable solution, the players may choose it even when it is not exactly an equilibrium.

7.3    Random recognition of proposers
Proposition 2 shows that as the interaction between parties become frequent (∆ → 0), the order
is irrelevant and the allocation within the coalition converges to the C-Nash solution (8). An
alternative specification of the bargaining inside the coalition is to assume that each member of
the coalition  ∈  has a probability  () of being recognized and thus make a proposal. As in the
previous analysis, whenever the formateur is recognized, s/he can choose to continue bargaining
in  or move to an alternative coalition. The analysis in this variant is qualitatively similar to
the analysis presented above, but as it adds an additional source of information (the recognition
probabilities  ()).
   In this case a stationary equilibrium in pure strategies is defined as follows. For a non formateur
party  when the formateur is  and  selects coalition  with  ∈ , a strategy is a function


                                                 37
 ( ) → () × [0  ()] that maps the identity  of the formateur and the coalition  chosen
by  to a proposal x ( ) = {1 ( )  () ( )} ∈ () when  is selected as proposer
in , and an acceptance threshold a ( ) = { ( )} when  has to vote.52                   For formateur 
a strategy is similarly defined by an allocation strategy  ( ) → () × [0  ()] defined as
above; and by a government proposal   (), that selects the coalition in C chosen by  whenever
 becomes formateur and when, during coalitional bargaining s/he is recognized as proposer.
      As in the analysis of Section 3, the equilibrium coalition must be optimal for the formateur
given the requests of the coalition members, who expect the same coalition to be chosen by the
formateur, thus being a fixed-point in (3). Similarly as in (5), the formateur’s payoﬀ can be
characterized recursively as the fixed-point of a contraction that now takes the form:53
                       ⎧ ⎡                   ⎤                                                    ⎫
                       ⎨             X                   ∙         ∗                             ¸⎬
                                                            ()  (  ) + (1 −  ()) 
   ∗ (  ) = max  ⎣ () −           ⎦ + (1 − )
                  ∈ ⎩                                         1 − (1 − )(1 −  ())          ⎭
                                           ∈\
                                                                                                             (15)

where we use the notation ∗ (  ) to indicate the formateur’s payoﬀ when  is selected and the
equilibrium coalition is  , to emphasize how it depends on  . Naturally, now (15) depends on
the recognition probabilities associated to each coalition . In the appendix, we show that there
is (generically) a unique coalition that the formateur chooses in equilibrium and it is:
                                   (                        "                 #)
                                                                       X
                     ∗
                     = arg max (1 − (1 − )(1 −  ()))  () −                                        (16)
                                  ∈
                                                                                       ∈

Given this, it is immediate to derive equilibrium payoﬀs for all players as in Proposition 1. It is
however useful to see what happens as ∆ → 0. Define the  -Nash Bargaining Solution as:
                                                            Y                  ()
                                  Q( u) = arg max                  [ −  ]                              (17)
                                                   x∈()      ∈


where Q( u) = {Q1 ( u)  Q ( u)}. This is the weighted Nash Bargaining solution when
coalition  is chosen and legislators have weights q(C) = {1 ()   ()}. We have:

Proposition 10. As ∆ → 0, the equilibrium of the bargaining problem in the model with recogni-
tion probabilities q(C) converges to ∗ = Q ( () u) for  ∈  () where
                                            (           "                #)
                                                                  X
                           () = arg max  () ·  () −           
                                              ∈
                                                                            ∈

and ∗ =   ∈
                 ().

  52 Proposal  ( ) is the surplus allocated to  when  is the proposer in a coalition  chosen by . The
                 
threshold  ( ) is the minimal level of surplus acceptable by  in coalition  chosen by .
 53   Details of the derivation of (15) are presented in the proof of Proposition 9 in the appendix.


                                                         38
      As Proposition 2, Proposition 10 can be seen as an institutionally based extension of the Nash
bargaining solution, specifically the weighted Nash bargaining solution in which the weights are
given by the recognition probabilities in the bargaining protocol.
      Given Proposition 10, it is straightforward to extend the analysis of Section 4 with endogenous
reservation values. The analysis of Section 4 remains completely unchanged if we assume that all
parties have the same recognition probabilities, as generally assumed in the analysis of the Baron
and Ferejohn’s [1989] model. If we allow for heterogenous recognition probabilities, however, the
thresholds for the existence of the diﬀerent types of equilibria become dependent on the weights
q(C), thus providing an additional channel through which the details of the environment may
aﬀect the allocation of resources.

7.4      Externalities
In the previous analysis we considered an abstract environment in which the coalition forming
the government, say , generates a surplus  () that is shared among its members, leaving the
others at their reservation utilities (normalized at zero). This is a straightforward extension of
the environment in Baron and Ferejohn [1989], where the winning coalition shares a pie of size
one among its members, leaving the others at zero. If we think that the surplus generated by 
depends on some policy , it is natural to allow it to have externalities on the other parties as
well. In this section we first show that, in our environment with transferable utilities, this more
complex scenario is in line with the model presented above. In the online appendix we show that
the bargaining model easily extends to the case with externalities even if we assume imperfectly
transferable utilities (or not transferable at all).
      Consider an environment in which party  ∈  has utility  (  ) =  () +  , where  is
a policy from some space  ,  is a transfer and  (·) is a concave function. For example, the
policy space  could be a subspace of  for some integer  (the dimensionality of the policy)
                                                                   P
and  () could be the usual quadratic distance  () =  +   ( −  )2 with   0 and   0,
     ¡ ¢
 =  =1 is ’s ideal point and  = ( )
                                             =1 is a policy in  .
                                                                   54
                                                                      To each party , we associate a
subset  ⊆  of policies that are acceptable to its constituency (for example, abortion is not a
policy feasible for Republicans in the U.S.; and a flat tax is not a policy feasible to Democrats).
Let  = ∩∈  . This is the set of policies feasible to a coalition .
      A coalition  can select any policy in  and a vector of transfers/taxes  for  = 1  .
A policy  now does not only aﬀect the members of , but all parties in  . Note, however,
that a winning coalition, i.e. a legitimate government, can tax or subsidize all parties, including

 54   For a model with preferences like this see, for example, Baron and Diermeier [2001].




                                                        39
those outside the coalition.55 We assume that no party can be left with less then its reservation
utility that we set at zero. This level reflects the fact that there are checks on governmental power.
                                                P
Formally, we assume that  ≥ − () and           ≤ 0, the latter inequality being a budget balance
condition.
   Given this, we have that any coalition  sets  = − () for all  ∈
                                                                          and allocates a surplus
                  P
 () = max∈ ∈  () to all members of . As in the model described in Section 2, all
parties outside the coalition are left with zero. The allocation in the coalition will be a vector of
                              P
utilities  such that  ≥ 0,   ≤  (), exactly as the set () defined in Section 2. In this
context, when the outside options  are exogenous simply corresponds to a policy   and feasible
vector or transfers that would be taken by a caretaker:  =  (  )+ . When the outside options
are endogenous, they are endogenously defined in the game.


8     Conclusions
In this paper we have proposed a new model of multilateral bargaining to study how majorities are
formed in legislatures when coalitions are heterogeneous in terms of the surplus they are expected
to generate. In our model, a formateur picks a coalition and negotiates for the allocation of the
surplus. The formateur is free to change coalition to seek better deals with other coalitions, but
s/he may lose her status if bargaining breaks down, in which case a new formateur is chosen.
In this context, a formateur needs to reconcile the need to form the most productive coalition
with the desire to maximize the share of output that s/he captures. This seems an important
feature that has characterized most legislative negotiations in parliamentary democracies in the
post World War II period.
    The model provides a new perspective on legislative bargaining and helps explain a number
of well established empirical facts at odds with existing noncooperative models of multilateral
bargaining. From a theoretical point of view, we have shown that, as the delay between oﬀers
goes to zero, the equilibrium allocation converges to a generalized version of the Nash bargaining
solution in which each coalition member receives its outside option plus a share of surplus net of
reservation utilities. The diﬀerence with respect to the Nash’s solution is that in the -person
Nash bargaining solution the coalition is assumed to be comprised by all players (or chosen exoge-
nously), while in our model it is endogenously determined. A form of the hold-up problem specific
to these bargaining games may lead to significant ineﬃciencies in the selection of the equilibrium
coalition. When reservation utilities are endogeneized in a fully recursive model in which a bar-
gaining breakdown is followed by the appointment of a new formateur, moreover, we may have

  55 The parties in our game represent diﬀerent social classes, they are not individuals. It is therefore legitimate

to allow the government to target them diﬀerentially with tax/subsidies.


                                                        40
multiple stationary equilibria with diﬀerent welfare implications. The equilibrium characterization
is however suﬃciently tight for positive and normative analysis.
   In terms of positive analysis, the model helps explaining three well known empirical facts that
have been hard to reconcile with non-cooperative models of multilateral bargaining: the absence of
significant (or even positive) premia in ministerial allocations for formateurs and their parties; the
occurrence of supermajorities; and delays in reaching agreements. While a number of important
previous works have attempted to explain these facts individually, our theory has the advantage of
providing a unified and intuitive explanation for all them. Finally, in terms of normative analysis,
the model provides a framework to study the role of the head of state in legislative bargaining
processes, helping to understands the limits of its prerogatives in selecting the formateurs.




                                                 41
9     Appendix
9.1     Proof of Lemma 1
Let ∗ (  ) be the formateur’s payoﬀ when  is proposed, but the equilibrium coalition is
                                               P
 . We must have that ∗ (  ) =  () − ∈\  (  ) where, as we did in Section 3,
we are using the notation  (  ) to indicate the acceptance threshold of  when  proposes in
coalition  and the expected equilibrium coalition is  to emphasize that the threshold depends
on  . It follows that:
                                                           ⎡                                                     ⎤
                                                                   P
                                   X                    ⎢             ∈\{(2)}   (2) (  )        ⎥
    ∗ (  ) =  () −               − (1 − ) ⎢
                                                        ⎣
                                                                                                                 ⎥
                                                                                                                 ⎦
                                                                           P
                                   ∈\                        + () −    ∈\{(2)}    (2) (  )
                           ⎡                    ⎤
                                      X                     £                  ¤
                   =  ⎣ () −                ⎦ + (1 − ) (2) (  )                                 (18)
                                      ∈\

Note now that we must have: (2) (  ) =  + (1 − )(3) (  ). Iterating this
formula () − 2 times we have:
                                           ()−2
                                            X
                 (2) (  ) =              (1 − )  + (1 − )()−1 ∗ (   )                (19)
                                            =0

Substituting this expression in (18), we conclude that in equilibrium we must have:
                                 ⎧                                                                     ⎫
                                 ⎪  £       P        ¤    h      P()−1             i                 ⎪
                                 ⎪
                                 ⎨   () − ∈  +  1 + =1              (1 − )                ⎪
                                                                                                       ⎬
         ∗ (   ) = max                                                                                 (20)
                            ∈C ⎪
                                 ⎪                                                                     ⎪
                                                                                                       ⎪
                                 ⎩            +(1 − )() · ∗ (   )                          ⎭

Recalling that  is a coalition that solves (20), from (20) we immediately have that:
                                                    h          P        i
                                                     ( ) − ∈ 
                           ∗ (   ) =  +                        .                                      (21)
                                                      1 − (1 − )( )
Assume now that we have an equilibrium in which a  6= ∗ , as defined in (4). Then can write:
                      ⎡                ⎤     ⎡ ∗               ⎤
                                              ( )−1
                                  X             X                               ∗
∗ (∗   ) =  ⎣ (∗ ) −    ⎦ +  ⎣        (1 − ) ⎦  + (1 − )( ) · ∗ (   )
                                   ∈∗                  =0
                                                         ⎡ h            P           i     h           P           i⎤
                                    h                 i           ∗
                                                   ∗
                                                             (  ) −  ∈∗            ( ) −    ∈  
                = ∗ (   ) + 1 − (1 − )( ) · ⎣               (∗ )
                                                                                      −                 ( )
                                                                                                                   ⎦
                                                             1 − (1 − )                    1 −  (1 − )
                 ∗ (   )

Implying that indeed  does not solve the problem in (20) if it does not solve (3), a contradiction.
Similarly we have that ∗ (  ∗ ) ≤ ∗ (∗  ∗ ) for any  ∈ C  : we conclude that the unique
fixed-point of (3) is ∗ .    ¥


                                                          42
9.2      Proof of Proposition 1
From Lemma 1 we know that one and only one coalition is chosen by the formateur, ∗ that is
the unique fixed-point of (3). We now show that there is a unique distribution of surplus and we
characterize it. Let ( + ∗ )( ∗ ) (∗ ) be the acceptance threshold of the party who proposes
                                       

at stage  when the proposer is the party proposing at stage  +. Moreover, ( + ∗ )( ∗ ) (∗ )
                                                                                                                             

is the payoﬀ of  when  +  is the proposer. Following the same steps as in the derivation of (19)
we have:
                                                                                h          P         i
                                                                                 (∗ ) − ∈ ∗ 
                               ∗( ∗ )( ∗ ) = ( ∗ ) +                                 
                                                                                              (∗ )
                                                                                                                                 (22)
                                                                    
                                                                                  1 − (1 − )

Moreover, we must have:

                        ∗( + ∗ )( ∗ ) = ( ∗ ) + (1 − )( ++1 ∗ )( ∗ ) (∗ )                         (23)
                                                                                                    



Iterating over (23), we can then write:
                                              (∗ )−−1
                                                     X                                              ∗
            ∗( + ∗ )( ∗ )    =                    (1 − ) ( ∗ ) + (1 − )( )− ∗( ∗ )( ∗ )         (24)
                                                                                                                     
                                                     =0

for all  = 1  (∗ ) −  . Similarly we have:

                                                          −1
                                                          X
                      ∗( − ∗ )( ∗ ) =             (1 − ) ( ∗ ) + (1 − ) ∗( ∗ )( ∗ )                (25)
                                                                                                            
                                                          =0

for all  = 1   −1. The system of equations (22), (24) and (25) gives a complete characterization
of the optimal strategy for the agent proposing at stage  in ∗ (that is party ( ∗ )).
   Clearly, we must have ∗  + ∗   ∗ (∗ ) = ∗  + ∗   ∗ (∗ ). The strategies and
                              (    ) (     )             (      ) (     )
equilibrium payoﬀs are fully characterized by the system of (∗ ) × (∗ ) equations:
                                                           h          P         i
                                                            (∗ ) − ∈ ∗ 
      ∗( ∗ )( ∗ )   = ( ∗ ) +                        
                                                              (∗ )
                                    
                                                1 − (1 − )
                                ⎡                                                             ⎤
                                         P(∗ )−−1
                                ⎢      =0            (1 − ) ( ∗ )                    ⎥
  ∗( + ∗ )( ∗ )      ⎢
                              = ⎣                                                            ⎥ for  = 1  (∗ ) −        (26)
                       
                                                                                              ⎦
                                             (∗ )−
                                   +(1 − )            ( ∗ )( ∗ ) (∗ )
                                                                      

                                        −1
                                        X
  ∗( − ∗ )( ∗ )    =            (1 − ) ( ∗ ) + (1 − ) ( ∗ )( ∗ ) (∗ ) for  = 1   − 1
                                                                                                
                                        =0

for all  ∈ {1  (∗ )}. It is immediate to verify that ∗ and the strategies described in (26)



                                                                          43
are an equilibrium. To characterize the equilibrium payoﬀs for the players note that:
                                                
                                                X −2
        ∗( ∗ )       = ∗( ∗ ) =      (1 − ) ( ∗ ) + (1 − ) −1 ( ∗ )( ∗ ) (∗ )   (27)
                                                                                                  
                                                =0
                              £                   ¤
                            = 1 − (1 −  −1 ) ( ∗ ) + (1 − ) −1 ( ∗ )( ∗ ) (∗ )
                                                                                        
                                                               ⎡                    ⎤
                                               (1 − ) −1 ⎣                 X
                            = ( ∗ ) +                  ∗     (   ∗
                                                                         ) −     ⎦
                                      
                                             1 − (1 − )( )                 ∈∗


for all  ≥ 2.          ¥

9.3    Proof of Proposition 2
From Proposition 1, the limit of the formateur’s payoﬀ as ∆ → 0 can be written as:
                                         ⎡       ³          P         ´⎤
                                                  (∗ ) − ∈ ∗ 
                       lim ∗ = lim ⎣ +                      
                                                              (∗ )
                                                                       ⎦
                       ∆→0          ∆→0            1 − (1 − )

Applying l’Hospital rule, we obtain:
                                                 ⎡                         ⎛                     ⎞⎤
                                                              1−   −∆                   X
                      lim ∗       =     lim ⎣ +                  ∗
                                                                           ⎝ (∗ ) −        ⎠⎦
                      ∆→0                  ∆→0              1 − −( )∆             ∈∗
                                                            ⎡                  ⎤
                                                    1                    X
                                      =  +                ⎣ (∗ ) −      ⎦ 
                                                  (∗ )
                                                                       ∈∗


It follows immediately from (26) and (27) that:
                           Ã              !
                             ∗ (∆) −          h                       i
                                                           −1 (∗ )−1
                       lim                  = lim  (1 − )                  = 1
                      ∆→0    ∗ (∆) −      ∆→0

                      ³               ´        ³               ´
It follows that lim∆→0 ∗ (∗ ) −  = lim∆→0 ∗ (∗ ) −  , proving the result.                          ¥

9.4    Proof of Proposition 3
Since x∗ = (∗1   ∗ ) is in the core, there must be some  ∗ ∈ arg max  () such that
P        ∗        ∗            ∗                    ∗
  ∈ ∗  =  ( ) and  = 0 for all  ∈  \ . Consider the following strategies. With re-
spect to the proposal strategies, we have: if party  is the proposer in  ∗ , then is oﬀers ∗ to all
members of  ∗ and zero to the remaining parties; if  is the proposer in  6=  ∗ , then it oﬀers
 () to itself and zero to all parties in  \{}; if party  is the formateur, then  selects  ∗ if
 ∗ ∈ C and  0 = arg max∈C  () otherwise. With respect to the acceptance thresholds, we
require that any party  accepts an oﬀer  if and only if  ≥ ∗ .


                                                               44
   To verify that this is an equilibrium, consider first a formateur  ∈  \ ∗ . In equilibrium
the formateur’s oﬀer is rejected and  obtains ∗ = 0 as soon as a member of  ∗ is recognized
as formateur (an event that for any ∆, even if arbitrarily small, occurs with probability one
since T is regular). This formateur can strictly improve his/her payoﬀ only if there is a coalition
 ∈ C that would accept his/her oﬀer. In this case,  can not secure more than 0 , where:
                P              P           P
0 ≤  ( 0 ) − ∈ 0 \ ∗ ≤ ∈ 0 ∗ − ∈ 0 \ ∗ = ∗ , where in the second equality we used
                P
the fact that ∈ 0 ∗ ≥  ( 0 ) since x∗ ∈ K(  ). There is therefore no deviation by  that
is strictly profitable. Consider now a formateur  ∈  ∗ . By Proposition 1 and 2, the formateur
finds it strictly optimal to deviate to a diﬀerent coalition if there is a coalition  0 such that
          P
 ( 0 ) − ∈ 0 ∗  0, but then x∗ ∈
                                       K(  ), a contradiction. Again, there is no deviation by
 that is strictly profitable. Regarding the acceptance strategies, it is immediate to verify that a
party finds it optimal to accept any oﬀer  ≥ ∗ .       ¥

9.5      Proof of Corollary 1
Proposition 3 and the argument in the text shows that there is an equilibrium in which the payoﬀ
x∗ is eﬃcient. The property that the equilibrium is strongly eﬃcient follows from the fact that, in
the equilibrium constructed in the proof of Proposition 3, x∗ and the associated eﬃcient coalition
 ∗ form for any initial formateur.

9.6      Proof of Proposition 4
The proofs is presented in the online appendix.        ¥

9.7      Proof of Proposition 5
We now characterize the set of equilibria. We start from the eﬃcient equilibrium. Lemma A.5.1.
deals with the case in which  and  are nonnegative.

Lemma A.5.1. Assume    0. If    − , then 2 forms a coalition with 1 or 3, when given
proposal power. If  ≥  −  then there is an eﬃcient equilibrium in which 2 is excluded from any
coalition; and 1 and 3 receive a share 1  3 for any 1  3 such that 1 ≥  −  3 ≥  1 + 3 ≤
 + .

Proof. We have two cases to consider:

Case 1. We first consider the case    − . Assume that when given proposal power, 2 fails
to form a government. Then we must have:  −  − 32 − 31 ≤ 0 and  − 32 − 33 ≤ 0, else two
would be able and find it profitable to form a government with either 1 or 3. By Lemma A.4.1 in
Proposition 4 if 2 is unable to form a coalition, then no other party chooses to forms a government


                                                  45
with 2, so 12 = 0 32 = 0. It follows from the inequalities above that 31 ≥  −  and 33 ≥ . Note
that 31 + 33 ≤  + . We conclude that an equilibrium in which 2 is never in a coalition can occur
only if  ≥  − .

Case 2. Consider now the case  ≥  − . Let  ∗ = {1  3 |1 ≥  −  3 ≥  1 + 3 ≤  +  }.
It is easy to verify that there is an equilibrium in which 2 is unable to form a coalition and never
included in any coalition by others; 1 proposes to 3 and 3 proposes to 1; 1 = 3 =  for  = 1 3
and 1  3 ∈  ∗ ; and 2 = 0  = 1 3.         ¥

   Lemma A.5.2. deals with the case in which  and  are nonpositive.

Lemma A.5.2. Assume  and  are nonpositive. If   − ( + ), then 3 forms a coalition
with 1 or 2, when given proposal power. If  ≤ − ( + ) then there is an eﬃcient equilibrium in
which 3 is excluded from any coalition; and 1 and 2 receive a share 1  2 for any 1  2 such that
1 ≥  +  2 ≥  1 + 2 ≤  − .

Proof. The proof of this result is analogous to the proof of Lemma A.5.1. It is presented for
completeness in the online appendix.              ¥

   We now turn to the ineﬃcient equilibria.

Lemma A.5.3 An equilibrium in which 1 forms a coalition with 3, 3 with 2 and 2 with 1 (clockwise
                                           ©                    ª
equilibrium) exists if and only if:  ≤ min 3 − 2 34  + 14  if    0; and  ≥ − 32  − 2 if
   0.

Proof. We proceed in three steps. We first characterize the value functions assuming a clockwise
equilibrium exists; we then prove that the strategies are optimal responses of the players first
assuming   ≥ 0, and finally    0.

Step 1. Let  be the equilibrium surplus captured by  if  is the formateur. Starting with
formateur 1, we must have:

                                    +  − 21 − 23 1                     +  − 21 − 23
                     11 = 21 +                    , 2 = 0, 13 = 23 +                   .    (28)
                                          2                                      2
These formula follows from (8) using as outside options the equilibrium values received if the
attempt of 1 fails, so formateur 2 is selected (or analogously (6) and (7) as ∆ → 0). Similarly as
in (28) we have:

                                  −  − 31 − 32 2             −  − 31 − 32 2
                 21    = 31 +                    , 2 = 32 +                   , 3 = 0
                                         2                             2
                                           − 12 − 13 3            − 12 − 13
                 31    = 0, 32 = 12 +               , 3 = 13 +               
                                               2                         2



                                                        46
Equations (28) and (29) give us a system of 3 equations in 3 unknowns with solutions:
                                 6 + 5 − 2 1                 3 + 4 + 2
                         11   =                , 2 = 0, 13 =
                                         9                            9
                                 3 +  − 4 2 6 −  − 5 2
                         21   =              , 2 =              , 3 = 0                          (29)
                                        9                   9
                                           3 − 2 −  3 6 + 2 + 
                         31   = 0, 32 =              , 3 =             
                                                9                   9
Step 2. We now verify that they constitute an equilibrium if    0. When 1 is the for-
mateur, by Proposition 2, we have that {1 3} is formed if it maximizes the average surplus of
the coalition when 1 is the formateur. Let 1 () be the average surplus in coalition  when
                                                  ¡          ¢
1 is the formateur. We have that: 1 ({1 3}) =  +  − 21 2 = (6 + 4 + 8) 18  0 and
                           ¡           ¢
1 ({1 2}) = 1 ({1 3}) −  +  + 22 2 ≤ 1 ({1 3}). Thus we have 1 ({1 3})  1 ({1 2})
and 1 ({1 3})  0, implying that {1 3} is formed in equilibrium. When 2 is the formateur,
                                                                            ³    P           ´
{1 2} is formed if 2 ({1 2}) ≥ 2 ({2 3}). Since have: 2 ({2 3}) = 12  − =23 3 = 0 and
                ³    P          ´
2 ({1 2}) = 12  − =12 3 = 6−8+2
                                        18     . We therefore have 2 ({1 2})  2 ({2 3}) if and only
if  ≤ 34  + 4 . When 3 is the formateur, {2 3} is formed if 3 ({2 3}) ≥ 3 ({1 3}). Since have:
                    P                                            P
3 ({2 3}) =  − =23 1 = 6−4−2
                                     9    and 3 ({1 3}) =  − =13 1 = 0. It follows that the
condition is satisfied if and only if  ≤ 3 − 2. We conclude that a clockwise equilibrium exists
                                       ©                 ª
when   ≥ 0 if and only if  ≤ min 3 − 2 34  + 14  .

Step 3. We now check when the payoﬀs in (29) describe an equilibrium if    0. Consider first
                                                            ¡           ¢
the case in which 1 is the formateur. We have: 1 ({1 3}) =  +  − 21 2 = (6 + 8 + 4) 18
and 1 ({1 2}) = 0. It follows that 1 ({1 3}) ≥ 1 ({1 2}) if and only if  ≥ − 32  − 2. Consider
                                              ¡           ¢
now Formateur 2. We have 2 ({1 2}) = 12  −  − 32 = (6 − 8 + 2) 18 and 2 ({2 3}) = 0,
so 2 ({1 2})  2 ({2 3}) if 6 − 8 + 2 ≥ 0. Note that if the condition for formateur 1 is verified,
i.e.  ≥ − 32  − 2, then 2 ≥ − 32  − , so 6 − 8 + 2 ≥ 92  − 9  0, implying that formateur
2 always finds it optimal to follow the strategies of the clockwise equilibrium. Finally consider
                                    ¡            ¢
formateur 3. We have: 3 ({2 3}) =  − 12 − 13 2 = (6 − 4 − 2) 18  0 and 3 ({1 3}) = 0,
so 3 ({2 3})  3 ({1 3}) is always true. We conclude that a clockwise equilibrium exists when
   0 if and only if and only if  ≥ − 32  − 2.    ¥

   We now prove the existence of a counterclockwise equilibrium.

Lemma A.5.4. An equilibrium in which 1 forms a coalition with 2, 2 with 3 and 3 with 1
(counterclockwise equilibrium) exists if and only if:  ≤ 37  − 57  if    0; and  ≥ − 35  − 15 
and  ≤ 3 + 7 if    0.

Proof. The proof of this result is presented in the online appendix.          ¥

Lemmata A.5.1-A.5.4 define the thresholds presented in Proposition 5.             ¥

                                                   47
9.8     Proof of Proposition 6-9
The proofs of these results are presented in the online appendix.                      ¥

9.9     Proof of Proposition 10
                                                    P
We must have that ∗ (  ) =  () −             ∈\      (  ) where, as in Section 7.1.2, we use the
notation ∗ (  ) to indicate the formateur’s payoﬀ when  is selected and the equilibrium
coalition is  , to emphasize how it depends on  . Note that
                                                 ⎡       ⎡                                          ⎤             ⎤
                              X                         X ⎢       ⎢                 ()            ⎥              ⎥
   ∗ (  ) =  () −             − (1 − )        ⎢ () ⎢                                 ⎥ +  (  )⎥
                                                          ⎣       ⎣            P                    ⎦              ⎦
                              ∈\                  ∈\                 −    ∈    (  )

So we have:
                                                           ⎡                                  ⎤
                                                                £          P                ¤
                                X                 ⎢ (1 −  ()  () − ∈  (  ) ⎥
      ∗ (  ) =  () −         − (1 − ) ⎢
                                                  ⎣
                                                                                              ⎥
                                                                                              ⎦
                                                                          ∗
                               ∈\                         + () −  (  )
                       ⎡                 ⎤
                                 X                  £                                            ¤
                   =  ⎣ () −        ⎦ + (1 − )  ()∗ (  ) + (1 −  () (  )
                                      ∈\

                                                      P
where the first equality follows from the fact that ∈\  () =  () (with the expression
        P                                                                    P
 () − ∈\  (  ) independent of ), and ∗ (  ) =  () − ∈\  (  ). Note
                                                           h                                          i
that by definition, we must have  (  ) =  + (1 − )  ()∗ (  ) + (1 −  () (  ) .
Thus,
                                                 + (1 − ) ()∗ (  )
                                (  ) =                                     
                                                   1 − (1 − )(1 −  ())
It follows that:
                        ⎡                       ⎤
                                      X                        ∙                                           ¸
                                                                    ()∗ (  ) + (1 −  ()) · 
        ∗ (  ) =  ⎣ () −              ⎦ + (1 − )                                                 
                                                                         1 − (1 − )(1 −  ())
                                      ∈\
                                                                                                                   (30)
                                                                          £       P      ¤
After some algebra, we have: ∗ (  ) =  + (1 − (1 − )(1 −  ()))  () − ∈  or
∗ (  ) =  + Ω() where we define Ω to shorten the notation. As  → 0, we obtain:
                          £       P      ¤
∗ (  ) =  +  ()  () − ∈  . We now show that the equilibrium coalition is ∗ as
defined in (16). Assume by contradiction that we have an equilibrium in which a  6= ∗ . From
                                                 £                ¤
(30), we have: ∗ (∗   ) = ∗ (   ) + Ω(∗ ) − Ω( )  ∗ (   ). Implying that indeed
 is not optimal for  , a contradiction. Similarly we have that ∗ (  ∗ ) ≤ ∗ (∗  ∗ ) for any
 ∈ C . We conclude that in equilibrium ∗ is chosen.                    ¥

                                                          48
References
   Acharia A and J. Ortner (2013), “Delays and Partial Agreements in Multi-issue Bargaining,”
   Journal of Economic Theory, 148(5): 2150-2163.
   Akirav O. and G. Cox (2018), “The Formateur’s Bonus in European Constitutional Monar-
   chies, 1901-99,” Legislative Studies Quarterly, 43(4): 681-703.
   Ali, N. (2006), “Waiting to settle: Multilateral bargaining with subjective biases,” Journal
   of Economic Theory, 130(1):109-137.
   Ali, N. (2015) “Recognition for Sale,” Journal of Economic Theory, 155:16-29.
   Ali, N., D. Bernheim, and X. Fan (2019), “Predictability and Power in Legislative Bargain-
   ing.” The Review of Economic Studies, 86 (2):500—525.
   Amorim Neto, O. and K. Strøm (2006), “Breaking the parliamentary chain of delegation:
   Presidents and non-partisan cabinet members in European democracies,” British Journal of
   Political Science, 36(4):619-43.
   Austen-Smith, D., and J. Banks (1988), “Elections, Coalitions, and Legislative Outcomes,”
   American Political Science Review, 82: 405-422.
   Avery C. and P. Zemsky (1994), “Option Values and Bargaining Delays,” Games and Eco-
   nomic Behavior, 7: 139-153.
   Baliga S. and R. Serrano (1995), “Multilateral Bargaining with Imperfect Information,”
   Journal of Economic Theory, 67:578-589.
   Baron, D. (1991), “A Spatial Bargaining Theory of Government Formation in Parliamentary
   Systems.” American Political Science Review, 85: 137—64.
   Baron,D. and Ferejohn, J. (1989), “Bargaining in legislatures,” American Political Science
   Review, 83: 1181—1206.
   Baron D. and D. Diermeier (2001), “Elections, Governments, and Parliaments in Propor-
   tional Representation Systems,” Quartely Journal of Economics, 116(3):933-967.
   Battaglini, M. and S. Coate, (2007), “Ineﬃciency in Legislative Policy-Making: A Dynamic
   Analysis,” American Economic Review, 97(1), 118-149.
   Battaglini, M. and S. Coate, (2008), “A Dynamic Theory of Public Spending, Taxation and
   Debt,” American Economic Review, 98(1): 201-36.
   Binmore K. (1985), “Bargaining and Coalitions,” In A. Roth, editor, Game Theoretic Models
   of Bargaining, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
   Binmore K., A. Rubinstein and A. Wolinsky (1986), “The Nash Bargaining Solution in
   Economic Modelling,” The RAND Journal of Economics, 17(2): 176-188.
   Bloch F. and S. Rottier (2002), “Agenda control in coalition formation,” Social Choice and
   Welfare, 19: 769-788.
   Brown M., A. Falk and E. Fehr (2004), “Relational Contracts and the Nature of Market
   Interactions,” Econometrica, 72(3): 747-780.


                                            49
Browne, E. & Franklin, M. (1973), “Aspects of coalition payoﬀs in European parliamentary
democracies,” American Political Science Review, 67: 453—469.
Chae S. and J. Yang (1994), “A N-Person Pure Bargaining Game,” Journal of Economic
Theory, 62:86-102.
Chatterjee, K., Dutta, B., Ray, D., & Sengupta, K. (1993), “A Noncooperative Theory of
Coalitional Bargaining,” Review of Economic Studies, 60(2), 463-477.
Compte O. and P. Jehiel (2010), “The Coalitional Nash Bargaining Solution,” Econometrica,
78(5):1593-1623.
Cox G. and R. Carroll (2011), “Presidents and their Formateurs,” mimeo, Stanford Univer-
sity.
Diermeier D, Eraslan H, Merlo A. (2003), “A Structural Model of Government Formation,”
Econometrica, 71:27-70.
Druckman J. and M. Thies (2002), “The Importance of Concurrence: The impact of Bicam-
eralism on Government Duration,” American Journal of Political Science, 46(4): 760-771.
Dziuda and Loeper (2016), “Dynamic Collective Choice with Endogenous Status Quo,”
Journal of Political Economy, 124(4): 1148-1186.
Eraslan H. (2002), “Uniqueness of Stationary Equilibrium Payoﬀs in the Baron Ferejohn
Model,” Journal of Economic Theory, 103: 11-30.
Gamson, W. (1961), “A theory of coalition formation,”American Sociological Review, 26:
373—382.
Gomes A. (2017), “Coalitional Bargaining Games: A New Concept of Value and Coalition
Formation,” mimeo
Gul, F. (1989), “Bargaining Foundations of Shapley Value.” Econometrica, 57(1): 81—95.
Hart, S., and A. Mas-Colell (1996), “Bargaining and Value,” Econometrica, 64(2), 357-380.
Herrero M. (1985), “n-player bargaining and Involintary Unemployment,” Ph.D. Disserta-
tion, London School of Economics.
Iaryczower M. and S. Oliveros (2019), “Collective Hold-Up in Sequential Contracting,”
mimeo.
Jehiel P. and B. Moldovanu (1995), “Negative Externalities May Cause Delay in Negotia-
tions.” Econometrica, 63:1321-1335.
Krishna V. and R. Serrano [1996], “Multilateral Bargaining,” Review of Economic Studies,
63: 61-80.
Laver, M. (1998),“Models of Government Formation,” Annual Review of Political Science,
1: 1—25.
Laver, M. & Schofield, N. (1990). Multiparty government: The politics of coalition in Europe.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.



                                          50
Morelli M. (1999), “Demand Competition and Policy Compromise in Legislative Bargain-
ing,” American Political Science Review, 93(4):809-820.
Okada A. (1996), “A Noncooperative Coalitional Bargaining Game with Random Pro-
posers,” Games and Economic Behavior, 16:97-108.
Okada A. (2010), “The Nash Bargaining Solution in General n-person Cooperative Games,”
Journal of Economic Theory, 145 (6): 2356-2379.
Ortner J. (2017), “A Theory of Political Gridlock,” Theoretical Economics, 12: 555—586.
Osborne M. and A. Rubinstein (1990), Bargaining and Markets, Academic Press.
Ray D. and R. Vohra (2001), “Coalition Power and Public Goods,” Journal of Political
Economy, 109(6): 1355-1384.
Riker, W (1962), The Theory of Political Coalitions, New Haven: Yale University Press.
Rubinstein, Ariel (1982). “Perfect Equilibrium in a Bargaining Model,” Econometrica. 50
(1): 97—109.
Rubinstein A. and A. Wolinsky (1990), “Decentralized Trading, Strategic Behaviour and the
Walrasian Outcome,” Review of Economic Studies, 57: 63-78.
Seidmann DJ and Winter E. (1998), “A Theory of Gradual Coalition Formation,” The
Review of Economic Studies, 65:793-815.
Seidmann D., E, Winter and E. Pavlov (2007), “The Formateurs’ Role in Government For-
mation,” Economic Theory, 31: 427-445.
Tavits, M. (2008), Presidents with prime ministers: do direct elections matter?, Oxford, New
York: Oxford University Press
Volden C. and C. Carrubba (2004), “The Formation of Oversized Coalitions in Parliamentary
Democracies,” American Journal of Political Science, 48(3): 521-537.
Volden C. and A. Wiseman (2007), “Bargaining in Legislatures over Particularistic and
Collective Goods,” American Political Science Review, 101(1):79-92
Warwick, P. and J. Druckman, J.N. (2001), “Portfolio salience and the proportionality of
payoﬀs in coalition governments,” British Journal of Political Science, 38: 627—649.
Warwick P. and J. Druckman (2006), “The Portfolio Allocation paradox: An Investigation
into the Nature of a Very Strong but Puzzling Reationship,” European Journal of Political
Research, 45: 635-665.
Wilson R. (1984), “Notes on Market Games with Complete Information,” mimeo, Stanford
University.
Yildirim H. (2007), “Proposal Power and Majority Rule in Multilateral Bargaining with
Costly Recognition.” Journal of Economic Theory, 136:167-196.




                                         51
