NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXPLOITATION OF LABOR? CLASSICAL MONOPSONY POWER AND LABOR'S SHARE
Wyatt J. Brooks
Joseph P. Kaboski
Yao Amber Li
Wei Qian
Working Paper 25660
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25660

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2019

We have benefitted from comments received at seminars at the Federal Reserve Board of
Governors and the University of Rochester. We are thankful to Jack Bao for providing excellent
research assistance and to the International Growth Centre (Grant No. 89318) and the HKUST
IEMS (Grant No. IEMS16BM02) for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Wyatt J. Brooks, Joseph P. Kaboski, Yao Amber Li, and Wei Qian. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Exploitation of Labor? Classical Monopsony Power and Labor's Share
Wyatt J. Brooks, Joseph P. Kaboski, Yao Amber Li, and Wei Qian
NBER Working Paper No. 25660
March 2019
JEL No. E25,J42,O1,O15
ABSTRACT
How important is the exercise of classical monopsony power against labor for the level of wages
and labor's share? We examine this in the context of China and India – two large, rapidlygrowing developing economies. Using theory, we develop a novel screen to quantify how wages
are affected by market power exerted in labor markets, either by a single firm or a group of
cooperating firms. The theory guides the measurement of labor “markdowns”, i.e., the gap
between wage and the value of the marginal product of labor, and the screen examines how they
comove with local labor market share and the share of cooperating firms. Applying this test, we
find that markdowns substantially lower the labor share: by up to 10 percentage points in China
and 15 percentage points in India. This impact has fallen over time in both countries as firm
concentration in these labor markets has decreased.
Wyatt J. Brooks
University of Notre Dame
wyattjbrooks@gmail.com
Joseph P. Kaboski
Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame
434 Flanner Hall
Notre Dame, IN 46556
and NBER
jkaboski@nd.edu

Yao Amber Li
Department of Economics
1 University Road
Clear Water Bay, Kowloon
Hong Kong
yaoli@ust.hk
Wei Qian
University of Notre Dame
Departments of Economics
wqian@nd.edu

Exploitation of Labor?
Classical Monopsony Power and Labor’s Share∗
By Wyatt J. Brooks†, Joseph P. Kaboski‡,
Yao Amber Li §, and Wei Qian¶

Draft: February 22, 2019

How important is the exercise of classical monopsony power against labor
for the level of wages and labor’s share? We examine this in the context of
China and India – two large, rapidly-growing developing economies. Using
theory, we develop a novel screen to quantify how wages are affected by
market power exerted in labor markets, either by a single firm or a group
of cooperating firms. The theory guides the measurement of labor “markdowns”, i.e., the gap between wage and the value of the marginal product
of labor, and the screen examines how they comove with local labor market share and the share of cooperating firms. Applying this test, we find
that markdowns substantially lower the labor share: by up to 10 percentage
points in China and 15 percentage points in India. This impact has fallen
over time in both countries as firm concentration in these labor markets
has decreased.
Policies affecting labor and wages have increasingly become an important policy concern
around the world as the labor share of aggregate income has fallen. The decline has
been observed in many countries and across industries, but manufacturing has been hit
†

University of Notre Dame. Email: wbrooks@nd.edu
University of Notre Dame and NBER. Email: jkaboski@nd.edu
§ Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. Email: yaoli@ust.hk
¶ University of Notre Dame, Email: Wei.Qian.11@nd.edu
∗ We have benefitted from comments received at seminars at the Federal Reserve Board of Governors and the University of Rochester. We are thankful to Jack Bao for providing excellent research assistance and to the International
Growth Centre and the HKUST IEMS (Grant No. IEMS16BM02) for financial support.
‡

1

disproportionately hard (Karabarbounis and Neiman (2013)). The decline in labor’s share
over time has been linked to an increase in market power, and measures of market power are
closely linked to market share (de Loecker and Eeckhout (2017)). This increase in market
power can decrease labor’s share through a direct increase in markups, but also through
an exercise of monopsonistic market power against labor. Both of these possibilities are
of keen policy interest.1 The consequences are potentially even higher when firms have
greater incentives to cooperate in lowering wages, as alleged in the lawsuit against the
major technology firms in Silicon Valley.2 Apart from these isolated cases, however, there
has not yet been a way to measure the aggregate importance of increasing market shares
and the overall prevalence of employer cooperation on the wages of workers.
This paper develops such a method and applies it to local labor markets in Chinese and
Indian manufacturing. Developing countries such as China and India are natural cases
to consider; monopsony could be important for several reasons. The geographic mobility of labor is low in India, and China has the well-known houkou system, hence labor
may be more inelastically supplied. Labor in Chinese and Indian manufacturing is also
typically low skilled and less differentiated. Therefore, workers may have less ability to
protect themselves against employers.3 In addition, both micro and macro data attribute
relatively small shares of income paid to labor in both countries. Related, Chinese and
Indian manufacturing workers are also low paid, so that the consequences of lower wages
are particularly severe. Finally, cooperation may also be present in local labor markets.
Brooks, Kaboski and Li (2017) (BKL) find evidence in Chinese industrial clusters, especially within officially designated Special Economic Zones (SEZs), of cooperative behavior
in the product markets. Thus, for all these reasons, we may be likely to find quantitatively
important effects of labor market power in local Chinese and Indian labor markets.
1 See, for example, the U.S. Council of Economic Advisers (2016), which focused on the trends and consequences
of labor market monopsony
2 The labor literature has identified other such cases of cooperative behavior. Boal and Ransom (1997) provide
a nice literature review of labor research on monopsony, and Ashenfelter, Farber and Ransom (2010) provide a
somewhat more recent summary. Among others, the cases studied include school teachers and, most of interest to
researchers, the academic labor market.
3 Unions, which are admittedly prevalent in India, especially in certain states like Bengal or Kerala may play a
counteracting force on wages. Their impact on labor’s share is less obvious.

2

We develop a method to quantify the levels of monopsony power, including monopsonistic cooperation among firms, in the labor market. For the case of the output market
(developed in BKL), the comovement of markups with a firm’s market share is interpreted
as the exercise of market power, and the comovement of markups with the total market
share of the cooperating firms is a collaborative exercise of market power. For the case of
cooperation in the input market, the pattern is analogous: markdowns that comove with
the firm’s own share of the local labor market reflect the exercise of the firm’s market
power, whereas markdowns that comove with the total market share of the cooperating
firms in labor market reflect collaborative exploitation of labor market power. The coefficients on a joint regression summarize the quantitative importance of this relationship
and identify the key parameters needed for aggregation in the explicit structural model we
develop. Using this method, we show that monopsony power substantially lowers labor’s
share and the level of wages in Chinese and Indian manufacturing.
Our approach requires a way of identifying the markdown against labor. Markdowns
are typically defined as the gap between the wage and the value of the marginal product
of labor. However, in a case where firms also markup their output, markups themselves
lead to deviations between wages and the value of a workers’ marginal product. This is
true even for wage-taking firms because the price of output exceeds marginal revenue. The
model shows that we can effectively distinguish between a markup and a markdown by
comparing the ratios of the value of marginal product and the input price across inputs.
Specifically, we utilize the materials as the input where firms have no monopsony power.4
We measure markups and markdowns using various approaches that rely on different
assumptions. The most common approach to estimate markups is to apply the methods
of de Loecker and Warzynski (2012), who in turn utilize the methods of Ackerberg, Caves
and Frazer (2015) to estimate the elasticity the production function. Although increasingly
common, this approach has identification issues and requires an assumption of neutral
technological progress. Alternative approaches can solve identification problems, and even
4 Any

monopsony power in materials would lead us to understate the levels of markdowns on labor.
3

allow for factor augmenting technological change, but they require alternative assumptions.
However, we find that estimates using alternative methods are all highly correlated, and
our results are broadly robust to differences in measures. Thus, a secondary contribution
of this paper is to validate the robustness of these different measures.
We utilize plant level data for each country, focusing on manufacturing industries. For
India, we use the panel version of the Annual Survey of Industry (ASI), a plant-level representative panel covering all large and a sample of smaller plants. These data have the
advantage of having plant location, as well as covering the full cross section of manufacturing plants. They have information on output, capital, labor compensation, and materials,
data necessary to estimate markups and markdowns. In China, we use the Annual Survey
of Chinese Industrial Enterprises (CIE).
Applying our methods, we find evidence of firms exercising market power against labor
in both China and India, and in China we find cooperation amongst firms. The impact on
labor’s share is sizable amounting to nearly 15 percentage points in India and 10 percentage
points in China at the beginning of our samples (1999). Cooperative exercise of market
power has no impact on labor’s share in India and decreases labor’s share by only 0.5
percentage point in China. Finally, market shares somewhat declined on average in both
countries, so the importance of monopsony power for market shares is about half as large
by the end of the samples, 2007 in China and 2011 in India. When we add in the impact
of market power in the output market and setting of markups, the total impact on labor’s
share in India was as large as 17 percentage points. For comparison, these impacts are
much larger than the reported time series 5 percent decline in the global labor’s share over
35 years in Karabarbounis and Neiman (2013).
The overall impacts on wages are also quantitatively important. In India, the impact of
cooperative monopsony is negligible, but the exercise of monopsony power by individual
firms in general lowers wages by about 5 percent. In China, the total effect of monopsony
power is to lower wages by about 4 percent, with about 1.5 percentage points coming
from cooperative monopsony power. The burden of monopsony power is not distributed
4

uniformly, however. For example, the median impact in India is just 3.5 percent, but 10
percent of labor markets have wages lowered by at least 10 percent. In environments where
manufacturing wages are already low, these impacts are therefore substantial.
This study contributes to several existing literatures. The paper is most closely related to
BKL, who also study the cooperation of firms in industrial clusters in China. BKL focus on
product market competition, finding strong results of cooperation, especially within SEZs.
We develop analogous empirical methods to quantify the effects of labor monopsony. The
further validation exercises and null results that we find for India only strengthen the
Chinese results, since it shows the ability of the screen to distinguish between cooperation
and noncooperation empirically. Moreover, we show that the results are robust to different
measures of markups. We also show that the product market screen is robust to the
inclusion of labor market power.
The idea that firms might use market power and even collaborate to lower wages is
quite old, dating most famously to Marx (1867) but also the earlier work of Smith (1776)
and Malthus (1798), who wrote of guilds suppressing the wages of apprentices and landlords against agricultural workers. The case of monopsony in the market for agricultural
labor has been well-studied in the development literature, although much of it is theory
(Binswanger and Mark R. Rosenzweig, 1984; Braverman and Stiglitz, 1982, 1986). As
mentioned, an existing empirical literature in the United States (Lambson and Ransom,
2011; Ransom, 1993) again focuses on identifying monopsony in particular industries. We
contribute to this literature on both the theoretical and empirical side, by developing a
more macroeconomic measure of monopsony power and applying it to an entire new sector
(manufacturing) of a large economy.
In the recent macro literature, monopsony power is the focus of several concurrent studies focusing on the United States, including Card et al. (2018), Gouin-Bonenfant (2018)
,Lamadon, Mogstad and Setzler (2017), and Berger, Herkenhoff and Mongey (2018). The
first three examine the sharing of rents in matching or search labor markets. We study
the exertion of classical market power in a classical labor market, where workers have no
5

market power of their own. Berger, Herkenhoff and Mongey (2018) study a similar labor
market, but they use mergers as their identifying approach. Relative to this literature, our
focus on developing countries is unique.
Several recent studies have focused on estimating the impact of competition on firm’s
market power using the same plant-level manufacturing data in India. Asturias, Manuel
Garcia-Santana and Ramos (2015) show that the the highway system in India led to increased competition among manufacturing firms, lower markups, and welfare gains. In
contrast, Galle (2016) shows that pro-competitive reforms in India led to a decrease in
convergence because capital constraints were binding for firms. In related theoretical work,
Itskhoki and Moll (2017) show that the suppression of wages can be welfare improving,
when firms face financial constraints. Empirically, we are the first to estimate the suppression of wages in a developing country, but our analysis is purely positive. We cannot
evaluate the welfare implications of the wage markdowns we estimate.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section I presents the model, reviews
the derivation of the markup screen, and derives a generalized formula for testing for
monopsonistic power and cooperation in the hiring of labor. Section II discusses our data
and the various markup estimations we consider. Section III discusses our results for the
exercise of monopsony power against labor in Chinese and Indian manufacturing, while
Section IV concludes.
I.

Model

In this section, we present the model of the exercise of independent and cooperative firm
market power in the output and factor markets.
A.

Environment

Consider a large number of industries i = 1, 2, 3, ... and a finite number of locations
k = 1, ..., K, each containing a finite number, Nki , of firms. Firm n in industry i and
location k produces output ynki . Output can be costlessly traded across locations, so firm
n in industry i and location k faces an inverse demand function that is independent of its
6

location k. The price a firm can sell at depends on its own output and the output of other
firms. Following BKL, we assume the following functional form for this inverse demand:

(1)

pnki = P

ynki
Yi

−1/σ 

Yi
Di

−1/γ

where P is the aggregate price level, and Di is an exogenous, industry-level demand parameter. Industry output Yi is given by:

(2)

Yi =

Nki
K X
X

σ−1
σ

σ
! σ−1

ynki

.

k=1 n=1

This demand system can be derived from nested constant elasticity of substitution (CES)
preferences where goods within sectors and across sectors have different elasticities of substitution. A critical assumption is σ > γ, which amounts to assuming that goods are closer
substitutes to other goods within their industry than they are to goods in other industries.

Our strong assumptions on demand allow us to be relatively flexible in specifying production technologies. Production uses inputs {xmnki }, where m = 1...M according to a
production function:
(3)

ynki = Fi (x1nki , ..., xM nki ; Znki )

where Znki is a set of firm-level characteristics, including productivity but also any other
potential firm or location-specific factors that might affect the level or shape of technology.

Factor markets are segmented by industry and location, and factor prices are therefore
given by an exogenous inverse supply function such that the market supply Xmki and price
qmki of factor m are both location k and industry i-specific:
(4)

qmki = Gmi (Xmki ) ,
7

where the aggregate quantity is the sum across all Nki firms in the industry and location:

(5)

Xmki =

Nki
X

xmnki .

n=1

B.

Cooperative Behavior

The objective of each firm is to maximize the sum of its own profit and (potentially)
the weighted costs and revenues of other firms in a group Snki .5 In particular, κ ∈ [0, 1]
measures the weight put on the other firms’ revenues, while κm ∈ [0, 1] is the weight put
on the costs paid by those firms in factor market m. Specifically, each firm maximizes:

(6)

max

{ynki ,{xmnki }}

pnki ynki + κ

X

pnki ylki −

M
X


qmki xmnki + κm

m=1

l∈Snki


X

xmlki 

l∈Snki

subject to:
ynki = Fi (x1nki , ..., xM nki ; Znki )

 

ynki −1/σ Yi −1/γ
pnki = P
Yi
Di
qmki = Gmi (Xmki ) .
At the extremes, this objective function could describe firms operating independently
(κ = 0 and ∀m, κm = 0), or as members of perfect cartels (κ = 1 and ∀m, κm = 1), who
cooperate on output and all input markets. In general, the parameters κ and κm stand
in for all parameters capturing effective cooperation between a firm and the members of
Snki in the output (κ) and factor markets (κm ). We do not interpret these weights as
necessarily reflecting the preferences of the firm owners. They may represent the outcome
of a more complex system to maintain cooperation among a set of firms, which may differ
for output and the various factor markets. That is, firms may effectively weight revenues
and costs differently because they have different incentives or ability to cooperate in either
5 Firm

n is not a member of Snki .
8

increasing revenues or reducing costs or different abilities to redistribute the overall gains
from these activities. Some groups of firms may only cooperate on output markets. Others
may only cooperate on input markets, and only for certain inputs.
The fact that pnki and qmnki are both functions in the constraints emphasizes that firms
internalize their effect on both output prices and input prices. In particular, by producing
more output, they reduce the price of their own output, but they also reduce the price
of the other firms in their industry, including the members of Snki that appear in their
objective function. Similarly, by choosing to use more of an input m, firms internalize the
effect of higher input prices on themselves, and, with a weight κm , on firms in Snki .
If λnki is the Lagrange multiplier on the production function, the first-order conditions
of the firm’s problem are:
(7)

pnki +

X ∂plki
∂pnki
ynki + κ
ylki = λnki
∂ynki
∂ynki
l∈Snki

(8)

qmki +

X ∂qmki
∂qmki
∂Fi
xmnki + κm
xmlki = λnki
∂xmnki
∂xmnki
∂xmnki
l∈Snki

Notice that equations (7) and (8) can be rewritten, respectively, as:
X ∂ log(plki ) plki ylki
∂ log(pnki )
λnki
=1+
+κ
pnki
∂ log(ynki )
∂ log(ynki ) pnki ynki

(9)

l∈Snki

(10)

λnki

∂ log(Fi )
ynki ∂ log(x
mnki )

qmki xmnki


=1+

∂ log(qmki ) 
1 + κm
∂ log(xmnki )


X xmlki

xmnki

l∈Snki

We assume the existence of a factor for which all firms are price takers.6 We denote this
6 Empirically,

we will use materials.
9

input with the index 0. That is, we assume:
∀n,

(11)

∂ log(q0ki )
=0
∂ log(x0nki )

We define a markup µ0nki as the ratio of output price to marginal cost. Manipulating the
equations above, we can solve for the markup making use of the price-taking input as
follows:
(12)

q0ki x0nki
pnki ynki
∂ log(Fi )
∂ log(x0nki )

=

1
µ0nki

=1+

X ∂ log(plki ) plki ylki
∂ log(pnki )
+κ
∂ log(ynki )
∂ log(ynki ) pnki ynki
l∈Snki

The left hand term is (the reciprocal of) the familiar expression derived in de Loecker
and Warzynski (2012). For the elastically supplied input 0, dividing the output elasticity
with respect to input 0 by the expenditure share of revenues of input 0 gives the markup,
which we denote µ0nki . The assumption of one price-taking, flexibly chosen input provides
a way of measuring markups in output prices without being confounded by the presence
of monopsonistic market power on other inputs.
Moreover, comparing this same measure across inputs provides a way of inferring monopsony power in those other inputs. Combining equations (9) and (10) for any input m
implies:


(13)

µm
nki ≡

∂ log(Fi )
∂ log(xmnki )
qmki xmnki
pnki ynki

1+

∂ log(qmki )
∂ log(xmnki )

1 + κm


X xmlki

xmnki

l∈Snki

=
1+

∂ log(pnki )
∂ log(ynki )

X ∂ log(plki ) plki ylki
+κ
∂ log(ynki ) pnki ynki
l∈Snki

The term µm
nki is the markup as measured with the de Loecker and Warzynski (2012)
method when applying the elasticity and factor share of the input m. This now has two
components. The distortion to firm production choices appears in the denominator of the
right hand side, and is the same for all inputs. The distortion due to monopsony power in
input market m is in the numerator of the right hand side, and varies by input. Making
10

use of the special case of input 0, where we assume that monopsony power is absent, we
note that we can isolate the monopsony power of input m by writing:

(14)

∀m,

µm
nki
µ0nki


=1+

∂ log(qmki ) 
1 + κm
∂ log(xmnki )


X xmlki

xmnki

l∈Snki

Because, in general, the firm may not be price-taking for input m, µm
nki could exceed one for
multiple reasons: market power in the output market, monopsonistic market power in the
input market, or some combination. To isolate the latter factor, we can measure monopsony
power in the market for input m by comparing the de Loecker and Warzynski (2012)
markup measure across inputs. In the absence of monopsony power, using any input implies
the same measured markup. Therefore, when one input is known to exhibit no market
power that allows us to measure monopsony power in the other inputs. The left-hand side
is therefore a properly normalized measure of the exercise of classical monopsonistic market
power. Following the literature, we refer to it as the “markdown”.

Next we make a functional form assumption of the input supply function Gmi :
(15)

1

Gmi (Xmki ) = Amki (Xmki ) φm

where Amki is an exogenous constant and φm measures the elasticity of supply. Then:
(16)

∂ log(qmki )
1 m
=
s
∂ log(xmnki )
φm nki

which we can substitute into equation (14) to yield:
(17)

µm
(1 − κm ) m
κm
nki
=1+
snki +
φm
φm
µ0nki

X

sm
lki

l∈Snki ∪{n}

where we have defined sm
lki as the input share of firm n in the location k- and industry
11

i-segmented market for input m:
qmki xmnki
sm
.
nki = X
qmki xmlki

(18)

l

This generates a linear equation that will become the basis for our estimation and will
be used to quantify of the exercise of market power. We note an important implication
that is common to both markups and markdowns. If firms are behaving independently,
whether in their markups (i.e., κ = 0) or their markdowns (i.e., κm = 0), the measured
markups and markdowns will depend on the relevant share of their own firm. However, if
they are perfectly cooperating, they will depend on the total relevant share of all the firms
they internalize. Thus, if the firms are perfectly jointly cooperating, they will charge either
the same markup (in the case of product market cooperation) or the same markdown (in
the case of factor market cooperation), and partial cooperation will lower the variation in
markups and markdowns.
Likewise, we can use the functional form of output demand to generate a corresponding
equation to estimate monopoly power. In particular, using (1) and aggregate industry-level
output in equation (2), we can write the equations for markups in terms of market shares
as:
(19)

1
µ0nki

=1−

1
− (1 − κ)
σ



1
1
−
γ σ




snki − κ

1
1
−
γ σ



X

slki

l∈Snki ∪{n}

where snki are the firms’ shares in output markets. As in BKL, this gives a linear equation
to evaluate monopoly power that firms exert in output markets.

C.

Calculating Aggregate Labor’s Share

We have defined things generally in terms of inputs indexed by m, but we focus here
on labor, which we denote with script L. Moreover, we denote intermediates with the
12

superscript M . The labor share as a fraction of value added in this economy is defined as:
Nki
K X
XX

(20)

ηL =

qLnki xLnki

i k=1 n=1
N
K
ki
XXX

(pnki ynki − qM nki xM nki )

i

k=1 n=1

Define the labor share of a given firm in the national labor pool as:
L
ωnki
=

(21)

qLnki xLnki
Nki
K
XXX

qLnki xLnki

i

k=1 n=1

Then notice by taking the reciprocal of the labor share, we can derive an expression that
depends on firm-level labor shares of the national labor pool, and ratios of input expenditure
to revenue:
K N

K N

(22)

ki
ki
XXX
XXX
1
qM ki xM nki L
pnki ynki L
=
ω −
ω
ηL
qLki xLnki nki
qLki xLnki nki

i

k=1 n=1

i

k=1 n=1

Finally, notice that the ratios of input expenditure to revenue appear in the definitions of
the markups. That is:
µL
nki ≡

(23)

L
θnki

µM
nki ≡

qLki xLnki ,
pnki ynki

M
θnki

qM ki xM nki
pnki ynki

where for any input m,
m
θnki
≡

(24)

∂ log(Fi )
.
∂ log(xmnki )

These imply that:
(25)

µL
pnki ynki
= Lnki ,
qLki xLnki
θnki

M
µM
µL
pnki ynki
qM ki xM nki
nki
nki θnki
= M
=⇒
= M
L
qM ki xM nki
qLki xLnki
θnki
µnki θnki
13

Finally, this can be substituted into equation (22) to get:

(26)


Nki  L
K X
M
XX
µnki µM
1
nki − θnki L
=
ω
nki
L
ηL
µM
θnki
nki
i k=1 n=1

Notice that this equation is only rearranging definitions, and does not require any assumptions on functional forms or market structure. We can use this to perform various
counterfactuals. In particular, setting

µL
nki
µM
nki

= 1 gives labor’s share when monopsony power

has been eliminated. Keeping this ratio constant, but adjusting µM
nki = 1 yields the impact
of market power in the product market on labor’s share.
II.

Empirical Approach

This section discusses our empirical implementation, including data, several alternative
methods for estimating markups, and our model-derived estimation of the exercise of market power.
A.

Data

Our empirical applications are in China and India. The data for China come from the
Annual Survey of Chinese Industrial Enterprises (CIE), while the data for India come
from the Annual Survey of Industries (ASI). All data sources satisfy the requirements to
construct markups, including those that utilize production function estimation following
the standard methods of Ackerberg, Caves and Frazer (2015). Specifically, they are panel
data containing information on revenue, labor, and capital. They also contain data on
industry and location, which is necessary to construct labor market variables.
The CIE is conducted by the National Bureau of Statistics of China (NBSC). The
database covers all state-owned enterprises (SOEs), and non-state-owned enterprises with
annual sales of at least 5 million RMB (about $750,000 in 2008).7 It contains the most
7 We drop firms with less than ten employees, and firms with incomplete data or unusual patterns/discrepancies
(e.g., negative input usage). The omission of smaller firms precludes us from speaking to their behavior, but the
impact on our proposed screen would only operate through our estimates of market share and should therefore be
minimal.

14

comprehensive information on firms in China. These data have been previously used in
many influential development studies (e.g., Hsieh and Klenow (2009), Song, Storesletten
and Zilibotti (2011)) Between 1999 and 2009, the approximate number of firms covered in
the NBSC database varied from 162,000 to 411,000. The number of firms increased over
time, mainly because manufacturing firms in China have been growing rapidly, and over
the sample period, more firms reached the threshold for inclusion in the survey. Since
there is a great variation in the number of firms contained in the database, we used an
unbalanced panel to conduct our empirical analysis.8 For industry, we use the adjusted
4-digit industrial classification from Brandt, Van Biesebroeck and Zhang (2012). We construct real capital stocks by deflating fixed assets using investment deflators from China’s
National Bureau of Statistics and a 1998 base year. The “parent id code”, which we use to
identify affiliated firms, is only available for the year 2004, but we assume that ownership
is time invariant.
For India, we do not include useful location and ownership in a single dataset. Instead, we
use the ASI as our primary source because it contains a measure of plant location. India’s
Annual Survey of Industries is collected by their Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation and has recently been made available in a panel format. Although it lacks
information on ownership, it has the advantage of being plant level data, so we have some
information on the actual location of production. It also has somewhat broader coverage.
The data contains all large firms (greater than 50 employees) and a sample of smaller
firms that depends on the industry and the number of firms within that industry and
state. Between 1999 and 2011, the approximate number of establishments contained in the
sample varies from 23,000 to 44,000. Instead of sales, we have the value of gross output,
while we replace material expenditures with the total value of indigenous and imported
items consumed. Labor payments include the sum of wage, bonus, and contribution to
provident and other funds, while for the capital stock, we use the value of fixed assets, net
8 The Chinese growth experience necessitates that we use the unbalanced panel. Using a balanced panel would
require dropping the bulk of our firms (from 1,470,892 to 60,291 observations), or shortening the panel length
substantially.

15

of depreciation. As with China, we focus only on the manufacturing sector and focus on
4-digit manufacturing industries.
B.

Measuring Markups and Markdowns

In order to implement our tests in Section I, we need measures of markups. These
markups will be used directly in our product market screen, and as part of our measurement
of labor markdowns in our labor market screen. We estimate markups using three different
approaches, which we detail here. We then discuss the additional steps needed to estimate
the markdown.
The first two approaches to estimate markups utilize the insight of de Loecker and
Warzynski (2012), who extend Hall (1987) to show that one can use the first-order condition
for any flexibly-chosen, price-taking input to derive the firm-specific markup as the ratio
M to its firm-specific factor payment share αM :
of the factor’s output elasticity θi,t
i,t

(27)

µM
i,t

=

M
θi,t
M
αi,t

.

The flexibly chosen input that we use is materials, and the superscript M signifies this. The
factor payment share comes directly from the data, but the output elasticity of materials
M needs to be estimated.
θi,t
M from the production function estimation
Our first method derives the output elasticity θi,t

of Ackerberg, Caves and Frazer (2015) as in de Loecker and Warzynski (2012). They
estimate translog production functions which can then be used to easily solve for elasticities.
This approach is most standard, but it has some important shortcomings, especially when
used in conjunction with DLW to estimate markups. The first limitation is that it assumes
a production function that is constant across firms (within an industry) and only differs
by a factor-neutral productivity parameter. The second limitation is that the production
is only identified for the case of either a value-added production function or a gross output
production function in which materials are Leontieff (see Ackerberg, Caves and Frazer
16

(2015) and also Gandhi, Navarro and Rivers (2016) for a full explanation). Either of these
special cases preclude the estimation of the elasticity of output with respect to materials,
the precise parameter necessary to apply the de Loecker and Warzynski (2012) formula.
Since this is the standard way of estimating markups (e.g., de Loecker and Warzynski
(2012), Edmond, Midrigan and Xu (2015), de Loecker et al. (2016), and BKL), we present
this as one measure, but we allow for several alternatives. We label this markup method
“DLW”, since it most closely follows their implementation.
Our second method uses the markup formula in equation (27), but rather than using
M , it simply assumes that the production function is Cobban estimate of the elasticity, θi,t
M = θ M . We make a strong assumption on
Douglas with respect to materials, i.e., θi,t

functional form, and we lose some interpretation, but the lack of identification of the
production function poses no problem for us. Indeed, for some purposes, we can allow this
elasticity to remain an unknown.9 However, we instead choose θ so that our markups equal
a reasonable average value of 1.2. We refer to this second markup measure as “CD”, which
stands for Cobb-Douglas.
Our third method uses a completely different approach to estimate markups. Rather
than using the DLW approach, we try to estimate the gross profit margin. The gross profit
margin is a valid estimate of the markup as long as the production function is constant
returns to scale and the firm is price-taking in its inputs (i.e., there is monopsony power).
While this constant returns to scale production function is a strong assumption along one
dimension – it assumes that it is downward sloping demand that fully determines the size of
the firm – it is less restrictive along other dimensions. It allows for firm-specific production
functions that are time-varying, for example. In this sense, it also allows for more general
forms of technological change, including factor augmenting technical change. The precise
formula we use is:

9 In this case, our measure of the inverse markup in equation (29) of the next section would simply be the share
of materials normalized by a scalar. Omitting the unknown scalar, we lose estimates of demand elasticities in our
demand system, but we retain our estimates of κ.

17

(28)

µM
i,t =

sales
py
.
=
costs
qK x K + qL x L + qM x M

We can measure sales (py), labor payments (qL xL ), and materials expenditures (qM xM )
directly from the data, but for capital, we have the stock of capital (xK ) rather than the
payments to capital (qK xK ). The key therefore is to differentiate payments to capital from
profits that stem from markups/market power. Notice that this measure of markups is
less appropriate in the presence of markdowns because it attributes all profits (in excess of
returns to capital) to markups (higher revenues per unit of output), while some actually
would come from markdowns (lower costs per unit of output).
As in the CD case, we have an average markup of 1.2 in mind as a target and assign a
value of qK = 0.12. We view this as reasonable rental rate on capital, since it includes both
depreciation and a reasonably high return to capital-poor, but rapidly-growing, countries
like China and India.. This yields an average markup of 1.16 in China and 1.22 in India.
We label this third markup measure as “CRS”, which stands for the constant returns to
scale assumption.
In each case, markups are clearly measured with substantial error. We therefore trim 3
percent in both sides of the tails of each industry.
Table 1 presents summary statistics for the Chinese and Indian data, and the resulting
markup and market share estimates. As can be seen, there is substantial variation in the
markup estimates.10 Market shares are constructed at the national level for 4-digit industries for most of our analyses. The narrow industry classification best reflects the horizontal
model of competition, and the ownership validation results confirm this.11 Nevertheless,
the market shares tend to be quite small at the firm level, especially in the Indian ASI.
Again, it is clear that the typical firm in Prowess is substantially larger than the typical
plant in ASI. Since we use Prowess to test for cooperation among jointly owned firms and
10 Because the markups are positively skewed, trimming the outliers lowers the average means of the actual data
used, and the amount of the decline depends on the variance in the data.
11 We also find similar results in China for the narrowest industry classification. See BKL.

18

ASI to test for local cluster level cooperation we present the average market shares at
these levels in each respective data set. Moreover, the data are positively skewed for every
variable, so that medians are much less than means.
Table 2 presents a cross-correlation matrix for the data across the three markup estimates. All three markups are highly correlated with each other, with no correlation falling
below 0.5. The fact that the correlation is highest between CD and DLW indicates that
independent variation in the elasticity parameter in DLW is relatively small.
The fact that the measures are highly correlated is comforting for the DLW estimates,
since it means that the lack of clean identification of the production function does not
prevent the estimates from carrying a strong signal. Although they are not perfectly
correlated, the estimation results for CD and DLW are almost always the same in terms
of their qualitative pattern and statistical significance, and very similar in terms of their
magnitude. Given this, we consider the CD results as our primary benchmark. Much of
the results are also robust to the CRS approach as well, which is again comforting. In most
cases, the precise variant of markups that we use is relatively unimportant.
To measure monopsonistic cooperation, we also need to measure markdowns and labor
market shares. We measure markdowns by taking the ratio of the labor-based markup (i.e.,
µL
i,t =

L
θi,t
.
αL
i,t

to the materials-based markup in equation (27). We measure the labor-based

markup again using the CD approach, assuming a constant θL . However, since we lack a
solid target for markdowns (analogous to our the markup target used to assign θL ), we
instead calibrate this elasticity by using the fact that absent market power in the factor
market, the markdown should be one.12 This requires trimming the outliers in the sample
in terms of markdown, and we trim the 3% tails based on the overall markdown. Notice
in the CD case, that the markdown becomes materials payments over labor payments
multiplied by a constant equaling the ratio θL /θM .

12 Again, this normalization is only necessary for interpreting the quantitative impact of markdowns on wages, but
not for the estimate of κL .

19

C.

Empirical Estimation of Market Power

Our empirical tests draw directly from the optimization relationships derived in Section I.
We operationalize these conditions using panel data on firms, using the following equation
for firm n, a member of (potential) syndicate S, in industry i at time t. We can estimate monopoly power of firms using the relationship derived in equation (19), empirically
implemented as:
(29)

X
1
=
Γ
+
α
+
β
s
+
β
smit + εnit
t
ni
1
nit
2
µM
nit
m∈S

Comparing, we see that the estimation adds time dummies Γt , firm-specific fixed effects,
αni (which can partially account for firm-specific demand elasticities, see BKL), and an
error term εnit that stems from either measurement error or unanticipated shocks. Note
that we can easily solve for the extent of product market cooperation using the formula,
κ = β2 / (β1 + β2 ). In principle, using these coefficients together with the average level of
markups, we can also solve easily for the values of σ and γ as well. This is precisely the
test proposed and applied by BKL, so there is nothing new here except to show that it is
robust to the possible presence of monopsony power and even monopsonistic cooperation,
provided the markup is not measured using an input with monopsonistic power.
Similarly, we can estimate the excercise of monopsonistic cooperation in the labor market
using:
(30)

µL
nkit
= Γt + αni + β1,L sL
nkit + β2,L
µM
nkit

X

sL
lkit + εnkit

l∈Snkit ∪{n}

and the extent of monopsonistic cooperation in the labor market can analogously be solved
as κL = β2,L / (β1,L + β2,L ).13 A more direct equation would utilize the fact that the
markdown equals unity in the absence of any market power (i.e., labor market share of zero
13 Again, in principle we could solve for the values of the input supply elasticity φ , but this will not be practically
L
feasible, as we explain below.

20

and no labor market cooperation). However, in practice there is considerable measurement
error in the estimation of markups themselves. Since these markups are in the denominator,
the convex relationship of 1/µnit leads to markdowns measures that are much larger than
one on average. Thus, the level of markdowns (captured by the intercepts and fixed
effects) will be less informative than the increase in markdowns coming from market power
(captured by the estimates of β1,L and β2,L ).
For the monopsonistic regression, notice that the firm’s labor payments are in the denominator of markdowns and also the numerator of market shares. Measurement error in
labor payments, which certainly exists, will bias our estimates downward. We therefore
instrument for labor market share by instead using the revenue share of a firm within the
pnki ynki
.
labor market, s∗nki = X
plki ylki
l

Comparing the two regression equations, (29) and (30), the precise regressions clearly
differ, but notice that the identification and intuition behind both the product market
and factor market screens are analogous. If firms’ markups comove with their own market
share over time, then this looks like independent exercise of market power. If, however,
firms’ markups comove together and in synchrony with the total market share of a set of
firms, we infer that they are effectively using this combined market power to manipulate
markups. Similarly, if we see markdowns moving independently with the firm’s share in the
labor market over time, we attribute this to the independent exercise of monopsony power.
Alternatively, if we see it comoving together with the total importance of the firms in
the factor market, we infer that they are cooperating to utilize their combined purchasing
power to manipulate markdowns, at least effectively.
To develop further intuition for our estimation of monopsony power, consider the markdown measure in the case of a Cobb-Douglas-measured markups, our preferred benchmark.
Notice that our markdown measure is nothing more than the ratio of the factor share going
to materials over that going to labor (appropriate scaled by the ratio of output elasticities). In research on misallocation (e.g., Hsieh and Klenow (2009)), this ratio measures
any unnamed distortion on labor relative to materials. Our assumption that materials is
21

undistorted (flexibly chosen and price-taking), allows us to identify this as a distortion to
labor. In general, variation in this ratio, especially cross-sectional variation, could reflect
other distortions to the use of labor (e.g., union premia) or firm-specific variation in the
importance of labor in technology (e.g., firm-specific Cobb-Douglas exponents on labor).
This underscores a strong reason for adding firm-specific fixed effects in our regression
equation (30). Again, examining equation (30) further, that we will only attribute the
component of this markdown that covaries with labor market share as an exercise of labor
market power.
Another possible interpretation of this “wedge” might be that it reflects labor adjustment
costs. Labor adjustment costs themselves are typically a blackbox way of capturing a
wedge, but a wedge with particular dynamics. Notice there are (at least) two interpretations
of labor adjustment costs. The first is that new labor is less productive in the short-run,
i.e., the output elasticity of labor is lower in the short-run than in the long run. The
ACF formula uses short-run variation to estimate the labor elasticity, however, so the fact
that our results are robust to both measures is comforting on this front. A second is
that it is easier to hire labor in the short run than in the long run at a particular wage,
so firms need to spend more resources the more additional labor they hire at that wage.
Since the alternative to spending these resources would be to increase the wage, this latter
interpretation reflects the exercise of monopsony power, i.e., keeping wages low, when an
increase in wages would be needed to hire more workers.14
Nevertheless, to distinguish between short-run impacts like labor adjustment costs and
the long-run impacts of the exercise of monopsony power, we time difference equation
(30) using a longer four-year difference. Changes over four years are less likely to reflect
short-term adjustments costs.
A final task is to define the appropriate labor market. We consider labor markets to be
segmented both geographically and by type of work. Geographically, we view provinces
14 As noted, adjustment costs are assumptions of labor wedges with particular dynamic properties. In principle,
these properties have testable implications: the wedge of additional workers is temporary with adjustment costs,
while it is permanent in the case of the static monopsony wedges we assume. In practice, it is difficult to distinguish
the two.

22

as the natural choice for China and states as the natural choice in India. In China, crossprovince migration is regulated by the Houkou system, while in India cross-state migration
is quite low ((Munshi and Rosenzweig, 2016)). Regarding type of work, we assume that
workers have a degree of specialization and therefore cannot perfectly move across industries. Of course, the assumption of labor supply elasticity can be interpreted as allowing
some movement of workers across sectors, rather than workers merely increasing their own
individual labor supply. We consider 2- , 3-, and 4-digit industries as boundaries, and
our results are fairly robust to this choice. Table 3 presents summary statistics for these
markdown and labor market shares in the Chinese CIE and Indian ASI data.
III.

Results

We present the results in three steps. First, we examine the evidence for exertion of
monopsony power in the labor market using the CIE and ASI data. Throughout our
regression analysis, we report robust standard errors, clustered at the firm level. We derive
standard errors on κ and κL using the delta method. Next, we consider the exertion
of market power in the product market, which can also affect labor’s share. Finally, we
present the aggregate results for labor’s share implied by our estimates.
A.

Monopsony in the Local Labor Market

We present the results for exertion of monopsony power in labor markets using the
estimation in equation (30). We run the tests using all three markdown measures, and
the full set of manufacturing firms. These results are presented in Table 4. The top panel
presents the results for China, while the bottom presents the results for India. Going across
the columns, the regressions vary in their measurement of markups (and markdowns) and
in their industry definition of the local labor market.
In all the columns, the significant coefficients on labor market share are all correctly
signed, regardless of the measure for markups or the level of labor market segmentation
along different lines. Nevertheless, the magnitudes of the estimates are robust to the way
23

in which markups (and markdowns) are measured, but they vary considerably over the
assumed level of labor market segmentation.
In China, both the coefficients on own labor market share and cluster labor market share
are significant, while in India only the own labor market share coefficients are significant.
In both countries, however, the coefficients on the firm’s labor market share are many times
larger than the coefficient on the cluster’s labor market share.
For China, this yields a relatively small, though statistically significant, measure of κL ,
ranging from about 0.020 to 0.130 depending on the definition of markups and labor markets. Again, these levels are reasonably robust across the different specifications although
somewhat weaker the more broadly we define labor markets. For India, the estimates for
κL are statistically insignificant and negligible in magnitude. Thus, we see no evidence of
cooperative monopsony in the Indian labor market, and evidence of only mild cooperation
in China.
Focusing on the implied elasticity of supply parameter, φ, all estimates are significant
and range between 0.4 to 2.5, within the range of standard estimates for long run labor
supply. Nevertheless, they are larger, the narrower the definition of the labor market. One
interpretation of the upward sloping supply of labor is that none of these labor markets
is strictly segmented. The pattern in estimates are thus consistent with easier movement
across narrow industries than across broader industries, and hence a higher elasticity of
labor supply in narrowly defined industries. These patterns give us confidence that the
regressions are picking up the mechanism at play.
In sum, we find evidence that firms exert monopsony power against labor. In addition,
there is mild cooperation among firms in China in the exercise of this monopsony power.
Finally, the implied labor supply elasticities are reasonable.
As discussed in Section II.C, one possible interpretation of these results is that the
measures reflect adjustment costs on labor. To evaluate this, we look at four-year differences
in the data, and these results are presented in Table 5. Naturally, this involves dropping
much more data, so the sample sizes are substantially smaller. Nevertheless, the results
24

are extremely robust to this differencing. The significance of the coefficients shows a
very similar pattern, with own share being strongly significant in both China and India,
while the cluster’s labor market share is only significant in China. The magnitudes of
the coefficients are also quite similar. The implied estimates of κL are also quite similar:
small and statistically insignificant in India, while significant and ranging from 0.028 to
0.118 in China. Moreover, the implied labor supply elasticities are similar. Finally, the
robustness of the results to the way that markups and markdowns are measured holds in
the differenced sample as well, as does the larger labor supply elasticity and somewhat
larger κL estimates for narrower industries. In sum, it does not appear that our results are
driven by short run labor adjustment costs.
B.

Market Power in Product Markets

Another way that firm concentration can impact labor’s share is through its effect on
markups. We turn now to the evidence of how market share impacts markups using the
estimation in equation (29). We also look for the cooperative exercise of market power in
the product market among firms in the same location and 4-digit industry.
BKL run these regressions for China using the CIE data. They found that firms exercise
market power both individually, and to a substantial degree they cooperate with other
firms in their county and 4-digit industry. Their estimates of β1 and β2 were 0.099 and
0.040, and were both highly significant. These implied a significant value of κ = 0.29 for
China, which was again significant.
We present similar results for India. BKL also validated the cooperative aspect of the
test, using plants that are affiliates of the same parent corporation. Although our ASI data
for India do not contain information on owernship, we present a similar validation exercise
for India which is presented in the Appendix.15 The robustness of these results also acts as
a validation of our various markup measures. While we find evidence that market share is
15 The ASI data for India do not have data on ownership, but the appendix presents results using an alternative
firm data source, Prowess. Moreover, this acts as a Prowess does not allow us to do local labor market cooperation
because the data are at the level of the firm and do not contain data on the location of plants.

25

important for markups in India, we find no evidence of product market cooperation among
plants in India.
Table 6 presents the overall results using 4-digit industries as a product market definition
for India. For all three markup measures, the coefficients on own share are large and statistically significant at a one percent level. In contrast, the coefficient on local cluster (i.e.,
4-digit industry by district) market share is relatively small and insignificant, indicating
no local cooperation among firms. Moreover, the κ estimates are small and significant.16
We note, however, that relative to China, the estimates of β1 are substantially larger.
This indicates that Indian firms can exercise substantial market power on their own, independent of cooperation. This may be the result of lower demand elasticities (compare the
coefficient on market share with Equation (19) in India) or simply that competition is not
truly national among Indian manufacturers, as we have assumed. In that case, we have
underestimated the relevant market shares of our firms, and correspondingly overestimated
the coefficients.
In either case, however, the net effect, i.e., the product of β1 and market share, is what
drives the additional markup, and those are quite similar regardless of how we define
markets.17
In sum, while BKL found evidence of some market power exertion in product markets in
China, and even cooperative market power exertion, in India we find no evidence of cooperative market power exertion but much stronger evidence of the ability to independently
16 The fact that we find both null results for local cooperation in the overall sample, but positive results in the
validation exercise, and intermediate results for China in BKL is further evidence that the test is able to discern
cooperation from noncooperation.
17 An element of systematic measurement error in market shares, however, might in principle also distort our
measures of cooperation, however, so we examined this more closely. We did so in several ways. First, we note that
the coefficients in the appendix for Prowess, which is disproportionately large public firms, are much smaller and
comparable to those in China. These firms are more likely to have national markets. Second, we defined product
markets at the state level for the ASI data. This leads to smaller coefficients, on the order of those in Prowess,
but does not lead to any significance of the cluster market share or to any significant κ estimates. Second, we try
to isolate this effect by dividing the sample of industries into three terciles of tradability: high tradable, medium
tradable, and less tradable. We measure tradability using the Hirschmann-Herfindahl index, and also some measure
of trade’s importance using global international trade flows as a proxy. In both cases, the estimated β1 coefficients
themselves are more similar to the smaller coefficients found in Prowess for the highly tradable industries, but the
estimates of β2 and κ remain insignificant. This last result is even more striking since one might surmise that a
higher level of industrial concentration enables easier cooperation among firms. Indeed, BKL found evidence of this
pattern in China. In sum, we find little to no evidence of cooperation in India.

26

exert market power.
C.

Aggregate Impact of Monopsony on Labor’s Share

In this section we present the results for the impact of monopoly and monopsony power
on wage levels and conclude with aggregate impact of concentration on the level and trends
in labor’s share.
The estimates in Tables 4-6 imply estimates for wages across all years.18 We then look
at the implications for market concentration on wage levels themselves. We run three
counterfactuals: (i) no cooperative monopsony in labor market (κL = 0), (ii) no monopsony
power at all in the labor market (κL = sL = 0), (iii) no monopsony power in the labor
market and no exercise of market power in the product market (κL = sL = s = 0). (For
India, κL was estimated to be small and statistically insignificant, so we omit the first
counterfactual.)
Table 7 presents the average relative wage gains from these counterfactuals as a fraction
of actual wages. We see that in both countries, the labor market power drives the results.
In China, wages would be up to 4.1 percentage points higher, while in India, they would up
to 5.3 percentage points higher. The product market is relatively small in both countries:
negligible in China, while contributing up to 0.6 percentage points in India. Going across
the columns, the results are remarkably robust, regardless of which formula we use to
estimate markups.
Table 8 examines the variability of these wage gains across labor markets. Wage gains in
the median labor market are small, roughly 2.5 percent in China and 3.5 percent in India,
but they are substantial in the 10 percent of markets where labor market concentration
is highest, about 9 percent of wages in China and 10 percent in India. Thus, these wage
gains can be substantial. We turn now to their impact on aggregate labor’s share.
We start by examining the patterns for concentration over time in China (1999-2007)
18 We have ignored the scale of markups measures in our markdown equation, since markdowns only use the ratio,
but we need to scale them for these estimates. We again normalize the benchmark markup to 1.20, consistent with
our estimation assumption for the CD and CRS markups.

27

and India (1999-2011). Figure 1 presents Herfindahl indexes for local labor markets and
national product markets in China and India over time. Both countries have a high level of
concentration in the local labor market, but very little national concentration in product
markets. However, the time patterns are different with India showing a substantial decline
before 2004, and an increase afterwards, while China is relatively flat until 2004, when it
begins to decline.
Given the estimates above, we follow the approach into Section I.C in order to estimate
the quantitative importance of our monopsony and monopoly power estimates for labor’s
share. We focus on the Cobb-Douglas estimates which are both identified and internally
consistent with the presence of monopsony power. The results are presented in Figure 2.
China is presented on the left and India on the right. The solid lines present the actual
pattern of labor’s share, which declined about 4 percentage points in China, and oscillated
in India over the relevant periods.
In China, although we find evidence of cooperation in the product market, the coefficient
and market shares together are too small to make any visual impact on the the labor’s
share. We therefore only present labor market monopsony counterfactuals. The dashed
line sets κL = 0, and therefore asks what would labor’s share be if firms did not cooperate
in the labor market. It leads to a small gain in labor’s share of about 0.5 percentage
point throughout the period. If, however, firms had no market power at all in the labor
market, i.e., sL = 0, akin to price takers in wages, labor’s share would have been about 10
percentage points higher in the beginning of the period but only 5 percentage points higher
at the end of the period. This is consistent with the falling labor market concentration in
Figure 1.
In India, we found no evidence of cooperative firm behavior. We therefore omit those
separate counterfactuals from the figure. We did, however, find strong market power in
product markets so the India panel instead breaks out the results by monopsony and
monopoly power. The dashed line counterfactual shows that without any monopsony
power, labor’s share in India would have been as much 13 percentage points higher at
28

the beginning of the sample, although the impacts falls to about 6 percentage points by
the end of the sample. Comparing this dashed line counterfactual to the dashed-dot line
counterfactual shows the additional impact of product market power on labor’s share. The
impact of product market power on labor’s share is as high as 4 percentage point in 2000
and falls to just below 2 percentage points by 2011. Without either source of concentration
driven market power, labor’s share would have been as high as 17 percentage points higher
(in 2000), and falling to about 8 percentage points higher by 2011.
These impacts are substantial and swamp the overall time series patterns of labor’s
share for both these countries, and for other advanced economies as in Karabarbounis and
Neiman (2013) that have garnered much attention.

IV.

Conclusion

We have developed a simple empirical screen for quantifying the impact of market power
in the labor market, including that resulting from cooperative markdown behavior among
subsets of firms. In both India and China, we find strong evidence of monopsony power in
the labor market. These have substantial impacts on the levels of wages and labor’s share,
although the impacts have declined over time.
The results are important in validating previous work as well. First, we showed that the
both the product market and labor market screens are robust to various ways of measuring
markups. Second, the product market test has now been validated in two countries. In
contrast to China, India exhibited no local cooperation in the product markup, however.
This is further evidence that the labor market screen is nuanced in finding results of firm
cooperation.

REFERENCES

Ackerberg, Daniel, Kevin Caves, and Garth Frazer. 2015. “Structural identification
of production functions.” Econometrica, 83(6): 2411–2415.
29

Ashenfelter, Orley, Henry Farber, and Michael Ransom. 2010. “Labor Market
Monopsony.” Journal of Labor Economics, 28(2): 203–210.
Asturias, Jose, Manuel Garcia-Santana, and Roberto Ramos. 2015. “Competition
and the Welfare Gains from Transportation Infrastructure: Evidence from the Golden
Quadrilateral in India.” Working Paper.
Berger, David, Kyle Herkenhoff, and Simon Mongey. 2018. “Labor Market Power.”
Society for Economic Dynamics. Meeting Papers 170.
Binswanger, Hans P., and eds. Mark R. Rosenzweig. 1984. Contractual Arrangements, Employment, and Wages in Rural Labor Markets in Asia. New Haven: Yale
University Press.
Boal, William M., and Michael R. Ransom. 1997. “Monopsony in the Labor Market.”
Journal of Economic Literature, 35(2): 86–112.
Brandt, Loren, Johannes Van Biesebroeck, and Yifan Zhang. 2012. “Creative
Accounting or Creative Destruction? Firm-level Productivity Growth in Chinese Manufacturing.” Journal of Development Economics, 97(2): 339–351.
Braverman, Avishay, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1982. “Sharecropping and the Interlinking of Agrarian Markets.” American Economic Review, 72(4): 695–715.
Braverman, Avishay, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1986. “Landlords, Tenants, and Technological Innovations.” Journal of Development Economics, 23: 313–332.
Brooks, Wyatt, Joseph P. Kaboski, and Amber Yao Li. 2017. “Growth Policy,
Agglomeration, and (the Lack of) Competition.” working paper.
Card, David, Ana Rute Cardoso, Joerg Heining, and Patrick Kline. 2018. “Firms
and Labor Market Inequality: Evidence and Some Theory.” Journal of Labor Economics,
36(S1): S13–S70.
30

de Loecker, Jan, and Frederic Warzynski. 2012. “Markups and Firm-Level Export
Status.” American Economic Review, 102(6): 2437–71.
de Loecker, Jan, and Jan Eeckhout. 2017. “The Rise of Market Power and the Macroeconomic Implications.” Working Paper.
de Loecker, Jan, Pinelopi K. Goldberg, Amit K. Khandelwal, and Nina Pavcnik. 2016. “Prices, Markups and Trade Reform.” Econometrica, 84(10): 445–510.
Edmond, Chris, Virgiliu Midrigan, and Daniel Xu. 2015. “Competition, Markups
and the Gains from International Trade.” American Economic Review, 105(10): 3183–
3221.
Galle, Simon. 2016. “Competition, Financial Constraints and Misallocation: Plant-Level
Evidence from Indian Manufacturing.” Working Paper.
Gandhi, Amit, Salvador Navarro, and David Rivers. 2016. “On the Identification
of Production Functions: How Heterogeneous is Productivity?” working paper.
Gouin-Bonenfant, Emilien. 2018. “Productivity Dispersion, Between-firm Competition
and the Labor Share.” Society for Economic Dynamics. Meeting Papers 1171.
Hall, Robert. 1987. “Productivity and the Business Cycle.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 27: 421–444.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Peter Klenow. 2009. “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP
in China and India.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4): 1403–1448.
Itskhoki, Oleg, and Benjamin Moll. 2017. “Optimal Development Policies with Financial Frictions.” Working Paper.
Karabarbounis, Loukas, and Brent Neiman. 2013. “The Global Decline of the Labor
Share.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1): 61–103.
31

Lamadon, Thibaut, Magne Mogstad, and Bradley Setzler. 2017. “Earnings Dynamics, Mobility Costs, and Transmission of Market-Level Shocks.” Society for Economic
Dynamics. Meeting Papers 1483.
Lambson, Val E., and Michael R. Ransom. 2011. “Monopsony, Mobility, and Sex
Differences in Pay: Missouri School Teachers,.” American Economic Review, 101(3): 454–
459.
Malthus, Thomas. 1798. An Essay on the Principle of Population. Oxford Publishing:
Oxford.
Marx, Karl. 1867. Capital. Wordsworth, London.
Munshi,

Kaivan,

and Mark Rosenzweig. 2016. “Networks and Misalloca-

tion:Insurance, Migration, and the Rural-Urban Wage Gap.” American Economic Review, 106(1): 46–98.
Ransom, Michael R. 1993. “Seniority and Monopsony in the Academic Labor Market.”
American Economic Review, 83(2): 221–233.
Smith, Adam. 1776. The Wealth of Nations. W. Strahan and T. Cadell, London.
Song, Zheng, Kjetil Storesletten, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2011. “Growing Like
China.” American Economic Review, 101(1): 202–241.

32

Figure 1. Concentration measured using the Herfindahl Index

Labor Market
.2
.05

.2

.3

.1

.4

.5

.15

.6

.7

Product Market

.1

India

0

0

China

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

Figure 2. Labor Share Counterfactuals

.5
.4
.3
.2
.1

.1

.2

.3

.4

.5

.6

India

.6

China

L

Counterfactual: κL = 0

Counterfactual: κL = s = 0

1999

2001

L

Counterfactual: κL = s = s = 0

Original

Original

2003

0

0

L

Counterfactual: κL = s = 0

2005

2007

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

Notes: Computation is based on Markup(CD). The industry is defined at the 4-digit level.

33

Table 1—Key Summary Statistics of Data

Panel A: China CIE
Markup (DLW)
Markup (CD)
Markup (CRS)
Firm Share
Cluster Share (Province)
Cluster Share (City)
Real Capital per Firm (000s Rs)
Real Materials per Firm (000s Rs)
Real Output per Firm (000s Rs)
Workers per Firm
No. of firm-year obs
Panel B: India ASI
Markup (DLW)
Markup (CD)
Markup (CRS)
Firm Share
Cluster Share (State)
Cluster Share (District)
Real Capital per Firm (000s Rs)
Real Materials per Firm (000s Rs)
Real Output per Firm (000s Rs)
Workers per Firm
No. of firm-year obs
Panel C: India Prowess
Markup (DLW)
Markup (CD)
Markup (CRS)
Firm Share
Ownership Share
Real Capital per Firm (000s Rs)
Real Materials per Firm (000s Rs)
Real Output per Firm (000s Rs)
No. of firm-year obs

Mean

Median

SD

Min

Max

1.26
1.19
1.15

1.24
1.17
1.14

0.19
0.19
0.17

0.64
0.89
0.01

4
33
4

0.003
0.14
0.04
303.4
647.8
881.2
295

0.0006
0.10
0.01
46
158
223
120

0.02
0.14
0.06
3368
5176
6879
1031
1168944

0
0
0
0.01
0.01
0.02
10

1
1
1
753064
849709
1230552
166857

1.44
1.08
1.19

1.29
0.96
1.16

2.90
1.60
0.33

0
0.14
0

1380
729
6

0.005
0.10
0.03
1353
3072
4209
191

0.0004
0.06
0.01
43
225
292
42

0.02
0.12
0.08
18357
48572
65108
805
340499

0
0
0
0
0
0.01
1

1
1
1
3402507
12858844
18601728
61869

1.70
1.17
1.26

1.49
1.06
1.24

0.90
0.86
0.37

0
0.18
0

75
67
4

0.05
0.07
896365
833477
1283072

0.01
0.02
149455
155148
247960

0.11
0.13
8898485
9440649
12052021
27693

0
0
53
22
26

1
1
531795725
670275497
781928311

Notes: Market shares are computed using 4-digit industries. Capital, materials, and output are in thousand
Rupees/RMB (in real value). The table trims the observations with all markup measures that are above and
below the 3rd and 97th percentiles.

34

Table 2—Cross-correlation Matrix across Three Markup Estimates

Markup (DLW)

Markup (CD)

Panel A: China CIE
Markup (CD)
Markup (CRS)

0.76
0.62

0.59

Panel B: India ASI
Markup (CD)
Markup (CRS)

0.78
0.56

0.68

Panel C: India Prowess
Markup (CD)
Markup (CRS)

0.71
0.54

0.73

Notes: The table trims the observations with all markup measures that are above and below
the 3rd and 97th percentiles.

Table 3—Summary Statistics of Markdown and Labor Share

Variable
Panel A: China CIE
Markdown (DLW)
Markdown (CD)
Markdown (CRS)
Labor market share (2 digit)
Labor market share (3 digit)
Labor market share (4 digit)
No. of firm-year obs
Panel B: India ASI
Markdown (DLW)
Markdown (CD)
Markdown (CRS)
Labor market share (2 digit)
Labor market share (3 digit)
Labor market share (4 digit)
No. of firm-year obs

Mean

Median

SD

Min

Max

6.14
6.65
6.47

4.04
4.34
4.38

5.87
6.45
5.87

0.03
0.01
0.45

49
64
136

0.007
0.031
0.064

0.001
0.004
0.008

0.037
0.104
0.167
1120028

0
0
0

1
1
1

6.84
6.49
5.00

2.87
3.74
3.05

386.82
7.88
5.79

0.001
0.001
0.32

200612
84
743

0.024
0.053
0.093

0.002
0.004
0.010

0.089
0.151
0.207
334476

0
0
0

1
1
1

Notes: The table trims the observations with all markdown measures that are above and below the 3rd
and 97th percentiles.

35

Table 4—Baseline Results about Monopsony Power

(2)
(3)
(1)
2-digit
3-digit
4-digit
Markdown (DLW)
Panel A: China CIE Trimmed Sample, 1999-2007
2.190*** 0.706*** 0.383***
Firm’s Share
(0.142)
(0.025)
(0.014)
Cluster’s Share 0.046*** 0.048*** 0.053***
(0.013)
(0.010)
(0.009)
Year FE
Firm FE

(4)
2-digit

(5)
(6)
3-digit
4-digit
Markdown (CD)

(7)
2-digit

(8)
(9)
3-digit
4-digit
Markdown (CRS)

2.327***
(0.147)
0.052***
(0.013)

0.734***
(0.026)
0.058***
(0.011)

0.396***
(0.015)
0.059***
(0.009)

2.073***
(0.132)
0.043***
(0.012)

0.658***
(0.024)
0.047***
(0.010)

0.356***
(0.013)
0.052***
(0.009)

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Observations
Adjusted R2

1,005,218
0.640

1,005,218
0.639

1,005,218
0.639

1,005,422
0.638

1,005,422
0.637

1,005,422
0.637

1,005,267
0.638

1,005,267
0.637

1,005,267
0.637

κL

0.021***
(0.006)
0.447***
(0.028)

0.064***
(0.014)
1.325***
(0.044)

0.121***
(0.02)
2.295***
(0.072)

0.022***
(0.005)
0.420***
(0.026)

0.074***
(0.013)
1.261***
(0.041)

0.130***
(0.02)
2.195***
(0.068)

0.020***
(0.006)
0.473***
(0.030)

0.067***
(0.014)
1.418***
(0.047)

0.127***
(0.021)
2.454***
(0.077)

Panel B: India ASI Trimmed Sample, 1999-2011
Firm’s Share
1.584*** 0.931*** 0.641***
(0.100)
(0.048)
(0.030)
Cluster’s Share
-0.010
0.004
-0.012
(0.032)
(0.026)
(0.019)

1.654***
(0.104)
-0.014
(0.031)

0.995***
(0.048)
0.009
(0.025)

0.704***
(0.030)
-0.012
(0.019)

1.476***
(0.093)
-0.013
(0.028)

0.878***
(0.043)
0.001
(0.022)

0.616***
(0.027)
-0.015
(0.017)

φ

Year FE
Firm FE

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Observations
Adjusted R2

287,359
0.729

287,359
0.729

287,359
0.729

297,548
0.738

297,548
0.737

297,548
0.737

295,037
0.738

295,037
0.738

295,037
0.738

κL

-0.006
(0.021)
0.635***
(0.04)

0.005
(0.028)
1.070***
(0.054)

-0.019
(0.031)
1.590***
(0.072)

-0.009
(0.019)
0.610***
(0.038)

0.009
(0.024)
0.995***
(0.046)

-0.018
(0.027)
1.446***
(0.059)

-0.009
(0.019)
0.684***
(0.042)

0.001
(0.026)
1.138***
(0.054)

-0.025
(0.029)
1.666***
(0.071)

φ

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at firm level are in parentheses. Standard errors on κL and φ are computed using the delta method. Significance: ***:
1%, **: 5%, *: 10%. We define labor markets at the province level for China and state level for India. A cluster is defined as a group of firms in the same
industry locate in the same city/district. Various industry aggregation levels are employed, including 2-digit industry (in specifications 1, 4, and 7), 3-digit
industry (in specifications 2, 5, and 8), and 4-digit industry (in specifications 3, 6, and 9). All regressions include a constant term.

36

Table 5—Results about Monopsony Power using Four-year Differences

(1)
(2)
(3)
2-digit
3-digit
4-digit
∆Markdown (DLW)
Panel A: Chinese Firms, CIE
∆Firm’s Share
1.849***
(0.223)
∆Cluster’s Share 0.067**
(0.027)
Year FE
Firm FE

(4)
(5)
(6)
2-digit
3-digit
4-digit
∆Markdown (CD)

Trimmed Sample, 1999-2007
0.643*** 0.343*** 1.950***
(0.053)
(0.029)
(0.233)
0.049**
0.037*
0.064**
(0.027)
(0.023)
(0.020)

(7)
(8)
(9)
2-digit
3-digit
4-digit
∆Markdown (CRS)

0.659***
(0.053)
0.054**
(0.023)

0.348***
(0.029)
0.043**
(0.021)

1.750***
(0.207)
0.051**
(0.026)

0.564***
(0.047)
0.050**
(0.022)

0.303***
(0.027)
0.041**
(0.019)

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Observations
Adjusted R2

163,399
0.288

163,399
0.285

163,399
0.286

163,843
0.29

163,843
0.288

163,843
0.289

163,680
0.285

163,680
0.283

163,680
0.284

κL

0.035**
(0.014)
0.522***
(0.061)

0.071**
(0.032)
1.445***
(0.108)

0.098*
(0.052)
2.627***
(0.192)

0.032**
(0.014)
0.496***
(0.058)

0.076**
(0.032)
1.404***
(0.103)

0.110**
(0.051)
2.556***
(0.183)

0.028**
(0.014)
0.555***
(0.064)

0.081**
(0.034)
1.628***
(0.124)

0.118**
(0.054)
2.910***
(0.219)

Panel B: Indian Firms, ASI Trimmed Sample, 1999-2011
1.561*** 0.876*** 0.600*** 1.644***
∆Firm’s Share
(0.181)
(0.080)
(0.054)
(0.189)
0.028
∆Cluster’s Share
-0.000
0.024
-0.005
(0.068)
(0.055)
(0.044)
(0.068)

0.953***
(0.083)
0.035
(0.055)

0.673***
(0.056)
-0.014
(0.045)

1.423***
(0.167)
0.019
(0.063)

0.837***
(0.075)
0.012
(0.050)

0.587***
(0.051)
-0.021
(0.040)

φ

Year FE
Firm FE
Observations
Adjusted R2
κL
φ

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

63,419
0.185

63,419
0.186

63,419
0.189

65,438
0.192

65,438
0.193

65,438
0.195

65,068
0.192

65,068
0.192

65,068
0.195

0.000
(0.043)
0.641***
(0.071)

0.027
(0.06)
1.112***
(0.101)

-0.008
(0.073)
1.679***
(0.148)

0.017
(0.041)
0.598***
(0.063)

0.036
(0.055)
1.012***
(0.083)

-0.021
(0.068)
1.517***
(0.117)

0.013
(0.043)
0.694***
(0.075)

0.015
(0.058)
1.178***
(0.104)

-0.037
(0.072)
1.766***
(0.144)

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at firm level are in parentheses. Standard errors on κL and φ are computed using the delta method. Significance:
***: 1%, **: 5%, *: 10%. We define labor markets at the province level for China and state level for India. A cluster is defined as a group of firms in
the same industry locate in the same city/district. Various industry aggregation levels are employed, including 2-digit industry (in specifications 1, 4,
and 7), 3-digit industry (in specifications 2, 5, and 8), and 4-digit industry (in specifications 3, 6, and 9). All regressions use the differenced sample and
include a constant term.

37

Table 6—Regression Results about Monopoly Power

(1)

Firm’s Share
Region’s Share

Year FE
Firm FE
Observations
Adjusted R2
κ

(2)
(3)
Markup (DLW)
-0.633***
-0.664***
(0.073)
(0.077)
-0.086***
0.033
(0.026)
(0.028)

(4)

(5)
(6)
Markup (CD)
-0.536***
-0.483***
(0.088)
(0.085)
0.056**
-0.044*
(0.024)
(0.025)

(7)

(8)
(9)
Markup (CRS)
-1.044***
-1.039***
(0.115)
(0.113)
0.005
-0.180***
(0.021)
(0.022)

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

287,825
0.615

287,825
0.615

287,825
0.615

297,892
0.597

297,892
0.597

297,892
0.597

295,146
0.445

295,146
0.443

295,146
0.445

-0.053
(0.045)

-0.116
(0.046)

-0.0035
(0.021)

Note: Robust standard errors clustered at firm level are in parentheses. Significance: ***: 1%, **: 5%, *: 10%. Regions are defined at the district level.
Market shares are computed using 4-digit industries. Various markup measures are employed, including markup(DLW) (in specifications 1-4), markup(CD) (in
specifications 5-8), and markup(CRS) (in specifications 9-12). All regressions include a constant term.

38

Table 7—Monopsony and monopoly effect on wage

Markup(DLW)

Markup(CD)

Markup(CRS)

Panel A: China CIE
κL = 0
κL = s L = 0
κL = s L = s = 0

0.013
0.039
0.041

0.014
0.041
0.042

0.013
0.036
0.038

Panel B: India ASI
κL = s L = 0
κL = s L = s = 0

0.049
0.053

0.051
0.052

0.044
0.050

Notes: The estimates are based on 4-digit industry aggregation.

Table 8—Distribution of monopsony effect on wage across labor markets

Mean

Median

p75

p90

Panel A: China CIE (κL = sL = 0)
Markup (DLW)
Markup (CD)
Markup (CRS)

0.041
0.044
0.041

0.023
0.025
0.023

0.053
0.056
0.053

0.086
0.091
0.081

Panel B: India ASI (κL = sL = 0)
Markup (DLW)
Markup (CD)
Markup (CRS)

0.050
0.055
0.047

0.034
0.035
0.031

0.067
0.073
0.064

0.090
0.100
0.092

Notes: We define labor markets at the province level for China and state level for India. The estimates are based on
4-digit industry aggregation.

39

V.
A.

Appendix

Ownership Validation

In this appendix, we validate our product market screen using a subsample of firms in the
Prowess dataset. This subsample contains all firms that are owned by a parent firm, which
gives us multiple firms with common ownership. This is a validation exercise because we
have strong reason to believe that these jointly-owned firms are indeed internalizing their
effect on the one another. It also acts as a validation test for our various markup measures.
Prowess is a commercially available database collected by the the Centre for Monitoring
the Indian Economy (CMIE). It contains financial data from the annual reports of public
and private limited companies in India (those that are required to file annual reports).
The sample size varies over the years 1989 to 2016, starting with only 500 firms in 1989,
containing about 7500 firms by 2000 and up to 23,000 firms at its maximum. These are
disproportionately medium and large firms. Prowess does not report employment, so our
measure of labor is the total wage bill (including bonuses and pension contributions). Our
measure for materials include raw material expenses and consumption of inventory and
spare parts. Capital is measured by gross fixed assets, both structures and equipment. We
deflate these variables using two-digit NIC wholesale price indexes.
We use Prowess, rather than the ASI, because it allows us to construct a subset of
firms that are jointly owned by a parent firm (ASI does not include common ownership
information). Specifically, Prowess has the financial ownership of companies which allows
us to construct an indicator variable for firms that are wholly owned subsidiaries of other
firms. This allows us to validate our markups and approach, using evidence of cooperation
among firms that have the same ownership. This is a natural analysis to perform.19 We
19 Prowess also contains product level data, and another natural validation test is to see whether we show that
firms internalize the impacts of their pricing on the profitability of their other products. Unfortunately, however,
the inputs are not product specific. Although de Loecker et al. (2016) develop methods for creating proxies of the
allocation of inputs, these are clearly only proxies and may contain considerable measurement error. Because the
total inputs used are known, overestimation of inputs in one product leads to underestimation in the others, which
causes an inverse relationship in estimated markups. This moves precisely against what the model predicts, but it
would be driven by poor measurement of inputs rather than a lack of internal cooperation. This is precisely what
we find when applying their methods.

40

define our sets of cooperating firms in equation (30) according to this joint ownership. In
China, BKL found that this screen identified full cooperation among jointly-owned affiliates
of private firms and also among Chinese state-owned enterprises at the province level.
We find similar validation results for India as presented in Table A. The table shows
the results for the CD markups and CRS markups, respectively. The results for the CD
markups show strong (indeed, complete) cooperation among firms at the 4-digit industry
level. Consistent with theory, the narrowest definition of product markets generate the
strongest results. If we define markets at the 2-digit level, for example, we find that firm
markups only comove with their own market shares rather than the 2-digit market shares
of the jointly owned firms. We interpret this as evidence that firms don’t internalize their
behavior on other jointly owned firms that operate in other product markets. At the 4digit level, the coefficient on joint share is 0.096, which statistically significant at the 5
percent level despite focusing on only a small set of firms. The coefficient is comparable
to those found for China. In contrast the coefficient on the firm’s own share is smaller
and statistically insignificant at the 4-digit level. Ignoring the statistically insignificant
coefficient, this would give us an estimate of κ = 1. The results for the DLW markups are
quite similar to those for the CD markups. For the case of the CRS markups, however, the
results are less stark. We find a significant relationship between markups and both own
share and the joint share. The values imply a lower value of κ, κ = 0.45, but the fit of
the regression is also lower,. Recall that CRS is an imperfect measure in the presence of
monopsony power because it attributes all profits to markups, rather than a combination
of markups and markdowns. Thus, we are less troubled that the validation exercise is not
as strong for the CRS measure. Nevertheless, we find a high level of cooperation with all
three measures, and comparing the results for 2-digit and 4-digit industries, we see that
firms internalize products that are more similar.

41

Table A—Regression Results Using All Affiliated Firms in Prowess, Trimmed Sample, 1989-2016

(1)
4-digit

(2)
2-digit

(3)
3-digit

Panel A: Dependent Variable = 1/Markup(DLW)
-0.119***
Firm’s Share
(0.041)
Cluster’s Share
-0.061*** -0.083***
(0.023)
(0.024)
Year FE
Firm FE
Observations
Adjusted R2

Observations
Adjusted R2

Observations
Adjusted R2

(6)
3-digit

(7)
4-digit

-0.115***
(0.035)

-0.096**
(0.043)
-0.025
(0.021)

-0.072*
(0.044)
-0.049**
(0.021)

-0.032
(0.051)
-0.090**
(0.040)

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

26,927
0.695

26,927
0.695

26,927
0.695

26,927
0.695

26,927
0.695

26,927
0.695

26,927
0.695

-0.127***
(0.030)

-0.099**
(0.041)
-0.036
(0.024)

-0.097**
(0.043)
-0.037
(0.027)

-0.040
(0.052)
-0.096**
(0.048)

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

27,157
0.644

27,157
0.644

27,157
0.644

27,157
0.644

27,157
0.644

27,157
0.644

27,157
0.644

-0.253***
(0.042)

-0.233***
(0.053)
-0.053**
(0.025)

-0.226***
(0.054)
-0.060**
(0.029)

-0.153**
(0.064)
-0.135**
(0.055)

Panel C: Dependent Variable = 1/Markup(CRS)
-0.283***
Firm’s Share
(0.048)
Cluster’s Share
-0.144*** -0.168***
(0.024)
(0.027)
Year FE
Firm FE

(5)
2-digit

YES
YES

Panel B: Dependent Variable = 1/Markup(CD)
Firm’s Share
-0.132***
(0.034)
Cluster’s Share
-0.075*** -0.083***
(0.020)
(0.022)
Year FE
Firm FE

(4)
4-digit

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

26,864
0.461

26,864
0.460

26,864
0.460

26,864
0.461

26,864
0.461

26,864
0.461

26,864
0.461

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at firm level are in parentheses. Significance: ***: 1%, **: 5%, *: 10%. Cluster is
defined as a group of firms jointly owned by a common owner. Various industry aggregation levels are employed, including
4-digit industry (in specifications 1, 4 and 7), 3-digit industry (in specifications 3 and 6), and 2-digit industry (in specifications
2 and 5). All regressions include a constant term.

42

