                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


            THE TIME VARIATION IN RISK APPETITE AND UNCERTAINTY

                                       Geert Bekaert
                                      Eric C. Engstrom
                                        Nancy R. Xu

                                     Working Paper 25673
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25673


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2019

The views expressed in this document do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve
System, its Board of Governors, or staff, nor of the National Bureau of Economic Research. All
errors are the sole responsibility of the authors. We would like to thank Gurdip Bakshi
(discussant), Ing-Haw Cheng (discussant), Anna Cieslak (discussant), Drew Creal (discussant),
Xudong Zeng (discussant), Rob Engle, Bob Hodrick, Mark Kamstra, Lisa Kramers, Ian Martin,
Helene Rey, Nick Roussanov, and Paul Tetlock for many insightful discussions and seminar/
conference participants at Columbia Business School, Baruch College, London Business School,
University of Zurich, Luxembourg School of Finance, 2019 European Winter Finance Summit,
2019 Midwest Finance Association annual meeting, 2019 American Finance Association annual
meeting, 31st Australasian Finance and Banking Conference, 2018 China International Risk
Forum, 2018 Northern Finance Association Annual Meeting, ``Machine Learning and Finance:
The New Empirical Asset Pricing" hosted by University of Chicago Booth, 2018 North
American Summer Meeting of the Econometric Society, 11th Annual SoFiE Conference, Federal
Reserve Board's Conference on Risk, Uncertainty, and Volatility, and Columbia Women in
Economics. This version is scheduled to be presented at the upcoming 2019 European Winter
Finance Summit. We would like to thank the committee of the Global Association of Risk
Professionals (GARP) Research Excellence Award at the 2018 China International Risk Forum.
First circulated version: November 10, 2017. Corresponding author: Nancy Xu
(nancy.xu@bc.edu), Boston College, Carroll School of Management, 140 Commonwealth
Avenue, Chestnut Hill, MA, 02467, USA. Indices are available at https://www.nancyxu.net/risk-
aversion-index. All errors are our own.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Geert Bekaert, Eric C. Engstrom, and Nancy R. Xu. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Time Variation in Risk Appetite and Uncertainty
Geert Bekaert, Eric C. Engstrom, and Nancy R. Xu
NBER Working Paper No. 25673
March 2019
JEL No. C01,G10,G12,G13

                                             ABSTRACT

We develop measures of time-varying risk aversion and economic uncertainty that are calculated from
financial variables at high frequencies. We formulate a dynamic no-arbitrage asset pricing model for
equities and corporate bonds. The joint dynamics among asset-specific cash flows, macroeconomic
fundamentals and risk aversion feature heteroskedasticity and non-Gaussianity. Variance risk premiums
on equity are very informative about risk aversion, whereas credit spreads and corporate bond volatility
are highly correlated with economic uncertainty. Model-implied risk premiums outperform standard
instruments for predicting excess returns on equity and corporate bonds. A financial proxy to our economic
uncertainty predicts output growth significantly negatively.


Geert Bekaert                                       Nancy R. Xu
Graduate School of Business                         Carroll School of Management
Columbia University                                 Boston College
3022 Broadway, 411 Uris Hall                        140 Commonwealth Avenue
New York, NY 10027                                  Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER                                            nancy.xu@bc.edu
gb241@columbia.edu

Eric C. Engstrom
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Washington DC 20551
eric.engstrom@frb.gov




A Data is available at https://www.nancyxu.net/risk-aversion-index
I    Introduction
      Changes in risk appetite are widely viewed as an important determinant of asset
price dynamics. The behavioral finance literature (see, e.g., Lemmon and Portnaiguina,
2006; and Baker and Wurgler, 2006) has developed “sentiment indices” to discuss finan-
cial market anomalies whereas in the “structural” dynamic asset pricing literature, habit
models featuring time-varying risk aversion have become prominent (see Campbell and
Cochrane (1999) and a large number of related articles). Reduced-form asset pricing mod-
els that aim to simultaneously explaining stock return dynamics and option prices, have
also concluded that time-varying prices of risk are important drivers (see, e.g., Bakshi
and Wu, 2010; Broadie, Chernov, and Johannes, 2007; Pan, 2002). Risk aversion has
also featured prominently in recent work in the field of monetary economics that suggests
a potential link between loose monetary policy and greater risk appetite of market par-
ticipants, spurring a literature that explores what structural economic factors drive risk
aversion changes (see, e.g., Rajan, 2006; Adrian and Shin, 2009; Bekaert, Hoerova, and Lo
Duca, 2013). Another literature has suggested that aggregate risk aversion may be linked
to financial constraints, time-varying leverage or risk preferences of financial intermedi-
aries (see, e.g., He and Krishnamurthy, 2013; Adrian and Shin, 2013). In international
finance, Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2015) and Rey (2015) suggest that global risk aver-
sion is a key transmission mechanism by which US monetary policy is “exported” to
foreign countries and is a major source of asset return comovements across countries (see
also Xu, 2017). Finally, several papers on sovereign bonds (e.g. Bernoth and Erdogan,
2012) have stressed the importance of global risk aversion in explaining their dynamics
and contagion across countries.
      Given the real-world importance of understanding asset pricing dynamics, financial
institutions have developed a wide variety of “sentiment” or “risk aversion” indices (see
Coudert and Gex, 2008, for a survey), with (sometimes tenuous) links to the asset pricing
literature. Our goal is to develop a measure of aggregate time-varying risk aversion that is
both consistent with the structural asset pricing literature and relatively easy to compute,
so that it can be compared to existing indices and tracked over time. To do so, we build
on a dynamic asset pricing model related to the habit models of Campbell and Cochrane
(1999), Menzly, Santos, and Veronesi (2004) and Wachter (2006). Analogous to Bekaert,
Engstrom, and Xing (2009) and Bekaert, Engstrom, and Grenadier (2010), we allow for
stochastic risk aversion that is not perfectly correlated with fundamentals. Essentially,
our risk aversion measure constitutes a second factor in the pricing kernel that is not
driven exclusively by macroeconomic fundamentals.
      Our approach is agnostic regarding the economic sources of the non-fundamental


                                             1
component of risk aversion. It may reflect sentiment induced by news (see the recent
experimental evidence in Cohn, Engelmann, Fehr, and Maréchal, 2015), or even reflect
mood swings induced by the weather (Kamstra, Kramer, and Levi, 2003). It could also
reflect those unmodeled institutional factors (such as endogenous risk constraints faced
by financial institutions) that end up affecting the aggregate risk aversion implied by the
aggregate pricing kernel.
      In implementing our approach, we confront several challenges. First, we must sep-
arately identify both the price of risk (risk aversion) and the amount of risk (economic
uncertainty). After all, a large class of successful models (see e.g. Bansal, Kiku, Shalias-
tovich, and Yaron, 2014) relies on time variation in economic uncertainty as the main
mechanism to generate variation in financial risk premiums. Moreover, uncertainty shocks
play an increasingly prominent role in dynamic macro-models (see Bloom, 2009; Chris-
tiano, Motto, and Rostagno, 2014), perhaps contributing to a recent cottage industry of
creating indices of economic uncertainty (see e.g. Baker, Bloom, and Davis, 2016; Ju-
rado, Ludvigson, and Ng, 2015). Accounting for uncertainty in fundamentals empirically
is challenging because the empirical macro literature suggests that macro shocks feature
non-Gaussian distributions with time-varying second and higher order moments (Hamil-
ton, 1990; Fagiolo, Napoletano and Roventini, 2008; Gambetti, Pappa and Canova, 2008;
Adrian, Boyarchenko, and Giannone, 2018). To accommodate these features of the data
in a tractable fashion, we use the Bad Environment-Good Environment (BEGE, hence-
forth) framework developed in Bekaert and Engstrom (2017). Shocks to key variables are
modeled as the sum of two components that are distributed as de-meaned gamma distri-
butions, with shape parameters that vary through time. The model delivers non-Gaussian
shocks, with changes in “good” or “bad” volatility also changing through time. By realis-
tically modeling economic uncertainty, our model delivers an economic uncertainty index
as a by-product.
      Second, to develop the risk aversion measure in an internally consistent manner, we
must solve for asset prices as a function of preferences and cash flow dynamics. Focusing
on two prominent risky asset classes, corporate bonds and equities, we also use the BEGE-
class of models to capture their cash flow dynamics (dividends or earnings for equities;
default rates for corporate bonds).1 Despite the fact that the model accommodates state
variables with time-varying non-Gaussian shocks, our formulation admits (quasi) closed-
form solutions for asset prices within the affine class. Summing up, the model has three

   1
     In contrast, a number of articles develop time-varying risk aversion measures motivated by models
that really assume “constant” prices of risk and hence are inherently inconsistent (see, for example,
Bollerslev, Gibson, and Zhou, 2011), or fail to fully model the link between fundamentals and asset prices
(see e.g. Bekaert and Hoerova, 2016).


                                                    2
channels for generating time-variation in risk premiums and volatility for asset returns: (1)
fundamental macroeconomic uncertainty – of the good and bad varieties – (2) stochastic
risk aversion and (3) cash flow uncertainty.
       Third, to identify the model parameters and stochastic risk aversion, we go beyond
using information in returns and historical risk premiums—which are known to be noisy.
In particular, we use both realized variances and option-implied variances to help estimate
the model and identify its parameters. A large empirical literature (see e.g. Andersen,
Bollerslev, Diebold and Labys, 2003) shows that realized variances can be measured fairly
precisely and provide accurate forecasts of future return variances. Moreover, conditional
return variances are an exact function of the relevant state variables (including risk aver-
sion) in our pricing framework (see Joslin, Le, Singleton (2013) for a similar observation
in a term structure model). Therefore, realized variances greatly facilitate identifying the
risk aversion process. There is also a large literature on inferring risk and risk preferences
from option prices, which we discuss in more detail in Section II. Option-implied volatil-
ity, such as the famous VIX index in the equity market, reflects both the physical return
distribution, including the probability of crashes, and risk aversion. The risk aversion
of rational agents creates a demand for insurance against potential losses, making (out-
of-money) put options relatively more expensive than call options. Such expensive put
options are the source of the consistent presence of a positive variance risk premium (often
empirically measured as the difference between the VIX index-squared and the physical
conditional return variance) (see Bekaert and Hoerova, 2016; Bakshi and Madan (2006)
for formal arguments). Option data should also be informative about conditional risk pre-
miums, which are difficult to observe from the data. Martin (2017) uses option-implied
variances to provide bounds on equity premiums, and several articles (see Bollerslev and
Todorov, 2011; Liu, Pan, and Wang, 2004; Santa-Clara and Yan, 2010) suggest that com-
pensation for rare events (“jumps”) accounts for a large fraction of equity risk premiums.
       Our main results are as follows: First, we find significant time variation in the
volatilities and higher-order moments of the fundamentals, especially in real activity. The
time variation in uncertainty is dominated by strongly countercyclical “bad” volatility.
Moreover, we find that macroeconomic uncertainty is highly correlated with uncertainty
about risky asset cash flows, both for the equity and corporate bond markets. Nonetheless,
we do find evidence of independent time variation in the volatility of corporate bond loss
rates.
       Second, the extracted risk aversion process loads most significantly on equity risk
neutral variances (with a positive sign) and realized variances (with a negative sign),
supporting the variance premium as a good proxy for aggregate risk aversion. This finding
is consistent with recent work in the consumption-based asset pricing literature, showing

                                              3
the variance premium to be very informative in identifying equilibrium models featuring
complex data generating processes for the fundamentals (see Drechsler and Yaron, 2010;
Bollerslev, Tauchen, and Zhou, 2009; Bekaert and Engstrom, 2017). The risk aversion
process is much more rapidly mean reverting than would be implied by habit models,
which is consistent with the results in Martin (2017).
      Third, economic uncertainty is highly correlated with corporate bond volatility and,
especially, with credit spreads. Our model-implied risk premiums significantly predict
equity returns, whereas our economic uncertainty index predicts output negatively and
significantly.
      The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Sections II and III present
the model and estimation strategy in detail. Section IV briefly outlines the data we
use. Section V presents the estimation results and extracts risk aversion and uncertainty
from asset prices. In Section VI, we investigate how our measures of risk aversion and
macroeconomic uncertainty correlate with (and predict) macroeconomic activity as asset
price changes. We also illustrate the use of the indices at high frequencies by examining
their behavior around the Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers bankruptcies. Concluding
remarks are in Section VII.


II     Modeling Risk Appetite and Uncertainty
     In this section, we first define our concept of risk aversion. We then build a dynamic
model with stochastic risk aversion and macro-economic factors affecting the cash flows
processes of two main risky asset classes, corporate bonds and equity. The state variables
are described in Section II.B and the pricing kernel in Section II.C.


II.A     General Strategy
      An ideal measure of risk aversion would be model-free and would not confound time
variation in economic uncertainty with time variation in risk aversion. There are many
attempts in the literature to approximate this ideal, but invariably various modeling and
statistical assumptions are necessary to identify risk aversion. For example, in the options
literature, a number of articles (Aıt-Sahalia and Lo, 2000; Engle and Rosenberg, 2002;
Jackwerth, 2000; Bakshi, Kapadia and Madan, 2003; Britten-Jones and Neuberger, 2000;
Bliss and Panigirtzoglou, 2004) appear at first glance to infer risk aversion from equity
options prices in a model-free fashion, but it is generally the case that the utility function




                                              4
is assumed to be of a particular form and/or to depend only on stock prices.2
      Another strand of the literature relies on general properties of pricing kernels. A
strictly positive pricing kernel or stochastic discount factor, Mt+1 , under no-arbitrage
conditions, implies that for all gross returns, R,

                                          Et [Mt+1 Rt+1 ] = 1                                          (1)

It is then straightforward to derive that any asset’s expected excess return can be written
as an asset specific risk exposure (“beta”, or βt ) times a price of risk (or λt ), which applies
to all assets (see also Coudert and Gex, 2008):

                                        Et [Rt+1 ] − Rtf = βt λt                                       (2)

where Rtf is the risk free rate, βt = − ColpV tar
                                               (Rt+1 ,Mt+1 )
                                                  t (Mt+1 )
                                                             , and λt = VEart (M
                                                                              t (Mt+1 )
                                                                                 t+1 )
                                                                                        .
       Importantly, this price of risk is not equal to time-varying risk aversion, and in
particular may confound economic uncertainty with risk aversion. In a simple power
utility framework, it is easy to show that the price of risk is linked to both the coefficient
of relative risk aversion and the volatility of consumption growth, the latter being a
reasonable measure of economic uncertainty. We use the terms “risk aversion” and “risk
appetite” as each other’s inverse.3
       Our approach is to start from a utility function defined over both consumption
(“fundamentals”) and a “non-fundamental” factor. Our measure of risk aversion is then
the coefficient of relative risk aversion implied by the utility function. We specify a
consumption process accommodating time variation in economic uncertainty and use the
utility framework to price assets, given general processes for their cash flows. Therefore,
while certainly not model free, our risk aversion process is consistent with a wide set of
economic models that respect no-arbitrage conditions.
       Consider a period utility function in the HARA class:
                                                  1−γ
                                                C
                                            C     Q
                                         U     =                                                       (3)
                                            Q     1−γ

where C is consumption and Q is a process that will be shown to drive time-variation in
risk aversion. Essentially, when Q is high, consumption delivers less utility and marginal

   2
      This is also true in the recent debate about the recoverability of physical probabilities from option
prices, which claims to identify risk aversion as well (Ross, 2015; Carr and Wu, 2016).
    3
      Gai and Vause (2006) and Pflueger, Siriwardane, and Sunderam (2018) however use the term “risk
appetite” to indicate the price of risk, that is the product of “risk aversion” and “the amount of risk.”


                                                    5
utility increases. For the general HARA class of utility functions,
                                                   −1
                                            a   b
                                 Q=           −           = f (C)                          (4)
                                            γ C

where a and γ are positive parameters, and b is an exogenous benchmark parameter
or process. Note that γ (the curvature parameter) is not equal to risk aversion in this
framework. In principle, all parameters (a, γ, b) could have time subscripts, but we only
allow time-variation in b. This excludes internal habit models, for example.
      The coefficient of relative risk aversion for this class of models is given by

                                               CU 00 (C)
                                  RRA = −                = aQ                              (5)
                                                U 0 (C)
                                                                 −2
and is thus proportional to Q. Note that dQ    dC
                                                  = −b    a
                                                          γ
                                                            C − b     < 0; in good times when
consumption increases, risk aversion decreases.
      For pricing assets, it is helpful to derive the log pricing kernel which is the intertem-
poral marginal rate of substitution in a dynamic economy. We assume an infinitely lived
agent, facing a constant discount factor of β, and the HARA period utility function given
above. The pricing kernel is then given by

                                    U 0 (Ct+1 )
                                               
                mt+1   = ln(β) + ln               = ln(β) − γ∆ct+1 + γ∆qt+1                (6)
                                     U 0 (Ct )

where we use t to indicate time, lower case letters to indicate logs of uppercase variables,
and ∆ to represent the difference operator.
     To get more intuition for this framework, note that the Campbell and Cochrane
(1999) (CC henceforth) utility function is a special case. CC use an external habit model,
with utility being a power function over Ct − Ht , where Ht is the habit stock. Of course,
we can also write
                                                  Ct
                                      Ct − Ht =                                         (7)
                                                  Qt
with Qt = CtC−H t
                  t
                    . So the CC utility function is a special case of our framework with
a = γ and b = H. As Ct gets closer to the habit stock, risk aversion increases. Qt is
thus the inverse of the surplus ratio in the CC article. CC also model qt exogenously
but restrict the correlation between qt and ∆ct to be perfect. The “moody investor”
economy in Bekaert, Engstrom, and Grenadier (2010) is also a special case. In that
model, qt is also exogenously modeled, but has its own shock; that is, there are preference
shocks not correlated with fundamentals. Another special case is the model in Brandt and


                                                6
Wang (2003), but their risk aversion process specifically depends on inflation in addition
to consumption growth. Moreover, DSGE models in macro-economics routinely feature
preference shocks (see e.g. Besley and Coate, 2003). For example, in the famous New
Keynesian Smets and Wouters (2007) model, there is a persistent preference shock not
directly related to fundamentals, which could reflect pure “animal spirits.”
      The experimental literature (see e.g. Cohn, Engelmann, Fehr, and Maréchal, 2015)
shows that the subjective willingness to take risk is indeed lower during a recession,
which is simulated by “priming” people with a stock market crash (versus boom), and
that this risk aversion is rooted in emotions of fear. Even if this is the dominant source of
preference variation, it is unlikely that the aggregate component of this type of counter-
cyclical risk aversion is perfectly correlated with aggregate consumption growth. Da,
Engelberg, and Gao (2014) create a household sentiment measure based on the internet
searches for words such as “recession” and “bankruptcies” and find it to temporarily affect
stock prices. Another channel that may cause changes in aggregate risk aversion is shifts
in the wealth distribution. If we think of risk aversion of the representative agent as the
wealth weighted average of risk aversion in the economy, it is conceivable that in bad
times, the wealth of the richer people goes down proportionally more than that of poorer
people (because more of their wealth is tied up in risky asset classes). This in turn would
then increase aggregate risk aversion.
      Therefore, our approach specifies a stochastic process for q (risk aversion), which
is partly but not fully driven by fundamentals (consumption growth) and features an
independent shock.


II.B     Economic Environment: State Variables
II.B.1   Macroeconomic Factors

      In typical asset pricing models agents have utility over consumption, but it is well
known that consumption growth and asset returns show very little correlation. Moreover,
consumption data are only available at the quarterly frequency. Because the use of options
data is key to our identification strategy and these data are only available since 1986, it is
important to use macro-economic data that are available at the monthly frequency. We
therefore chose to use industrial production, which is available at the monthly frequency,
as our main macroeconomic factor. In the macro-economic literature, much attention
has been devoted recently to the measurement of “real” uncertainty (see e.g. Jurado,
Ludvigson and Ng, 2015) and its effects on the real economy (see e.g. Bloom, 2009).
We add to this literature by using a novel econometric framework to extract two macro
risk factors from industrial production: “good” uncertainty, denoted by pt , and “bad”

                                              7
uncertainty, denoted by nt .
      Specifically, under our model the change in log industrial production index, θt ,
has time-varying conditional moments governed by two state variables: pt and nt . The
conditional mean is modeled as a persistent process to accommodate a time-varying long-
run mean of output growth:

                 θt+1 = θ + ρθ (θt − θ) + mp (pt − p) + mn (nt − n) + uθt+1 ,                      (8)

where the growth shock is decomposed into two independent centered gamma shocks,

                              uθt+1 = σθp ωp,t+1 − σθn ωn,t+1 .                                    (9)

The shocks follow centered gamma distributions with time-varying shape parameters,

                                    ωp,t+1 ∼ Γ
                                             e (pt , 1)                                           (10)
                                    ωn,t+1 ∼ Γ
                                             e (nt , 1) ,                                         (11)

where Γe (x, 1) denotes a centered gamma distribution with shape parameter x and a unit
scale parameter. The shape factors, pt and nt , follow autoregressive processes,

                             pt+1 = p + ρp (pt − p) + σpp ωp,t+1                                  (12)
                            nt+1 = n + ρn (nt − n) + σnn ωn,t+1 ,                                 (13)

where ρx denotes the autoregressive term of process xt+1 , σxx the sensitivity to shock
ωx,t+1 , and x the long-run mean. We denote the macroeconomic state variables as,
            h        i0
Ytmac = θt pt nt , and the set of unknown parameters are θ, ρθ , mp , mn , n, σθp , σθn , ρp ,
σpp , ρn , and σnn .
       In this model, the conditional mean has an autoregressive component, but macro
risks also affect expected growth. These features can both accommodate cyclical effects
(e.g., lower conditional means in bad times), or the uncertainty effect described in Bloom
(2009). The shocks reflect the BEGE framework of Bekaert and Engstrom (2017), im-
plying that the conditional higher moments of output growth are linear functions of the
bad and good uncertainties. For example, the conditional variance and the conditional
unscaled skewness are as follows,
                                                       h           2 i
                      Conditional Variance:       Et       uθt+1             2
                                                                          = σθp       2
                                                                                pt + σθn nt ,
                                                       h           3 i
           Conditional Unscaled Skewness:         Et       uθt+1              3
                                                                          = 2σθp        3
                                                                                 pt − 2σθn nt .



                                              8
This reveals the sense in which pt represents “good” and nt “bad” volatility: pt (nt )
increases (decreases) the skewness of industrial production growth.
      The state variables and shocks derived from industrial production growth serve as
key macro determinants for consumption growth and cash flows.

II.B.2   Cash Flows and Cash Flow Uncertainty

      To model the cash flows for equities and corporate bonds, we focus attention on two
variables that exhibit strong cyclical movements, namely earnings (see e.g. Longstaff and
Piazzesi, 2004) and corporate defaults (see e.g. Gilchrist and Zakrajšek, 2012).

Corporate Bond Loss Rate To model corporate bonds, we must model the possibility
of defaults. Suppose a portfolio of one-period nominal bonds has a promised payoff
of C ≡ exp (c) at (t + 1), but will in fact only pay an unknown fraction Ft+1 ≤ 1 of
that amount. Therefore, the nominal payoffs for a one-period zero-coupon defaultable
corporate bond at period t + 1 is C × Ft+1 = exp(c + ln(Ft+1 )) = exp(c − lt+1 ). Thus,
lt+1 is defined as −ln(Ft+1 ) = −ln(1 − Lt+1 ) where Lt+1 (i.e., 1 − Ft+1 ) is the aggregate
corporate loss rate, which can be computed as the default rate times one minus the
recovery rate. We provide more detail on the pricing of defaultable bonds in the asset
pricing section (Section II.C).
       The dynamic system of the aggregate corporate bond log loss rate, lt , is modeled as
follows:

                lt+1 = l0 + ρll lt + mlp pt + mln nt + σlp ωp,t+1 + σln ωn,t+1 + ult+1   (14)
               ult+1 = σllp ωlp,t+1 − σlln ωln,t+1                                       (15)
             ωlp,t+1 ∼ Γ̃(lpt , 1),                                                      (16)
             ωln,t+1 ∼ Γ̃(ln, 1),                                                        (17)

where the variance equation is,

                            lpt+1 = lp + ρlp (lpt − lp) + σlplp ωlp,t+1 ,                (18)
                               ln > 0.                                                   (19)

      The conditional mean depends on an autoregressive term and the good and bad
macro uncertainty state variables pt and nt . The loss rate total disturbance is governed
by three independent heteroskedastic shocks: the good and bad environment macro shocks
{ωp,t+1 , ωn,t+1 } and the (orthogonal) loss rate shock ul,t+1 . The loss rate shock follows a


                                                     9
typical BEGE process, but we only allow ωlp ’s shape parameter to be time-varying.4
       This dynamic system allows macro-economic uncertainty to affect both the condi-
tional mean and conditional variance of the loss rate process. However, it also allows the
loss rate to have an autonomous autoregressive component in its conditional mean (making
lt a state variable) and accommodates heteroskedasticity not spanned by macro-economic
uncertainty. This “financial” cash flow uncertainty has a time-varying component, de-
noted by lpt , and a constant component denoted by ln. If σllp and σlplp are positive, as
we would expect, the loss rate and its volatility are positively correlated; that is, in bad
times with a high incidence of defaults, there is also more uncertainty about the loss rate,
and because the gamma distribution is positively skewed, the (unscaled) skewness of the
process increases. We would also expect the sensitivities to the good (bad) economic en-
vironment shocks, σlp (σln ) to be negative (positive): intuitively, defaults should decrease
(increase) in relatively good (bad) times.
                                                        2        2         2         2
       The conditional variance of the loss rate is σlp   pt + σln nt + σllp  lpt + σlln lnt , and
                                           3        3        3        3
                                                                             
its conditional unscaled skewness is 2 σlp pt + σln nt + σllp lpt − σlln lnt . We denote the
                                      h      i0
financial state variables as, Ytf in = lt lpt . The set of unknown parameters are l0 , ρll ,
mlp , mln , σlp , σln , σllp , σlln , lp, ρlp , σlplp , and ln.

Log Earnings Growth Log earnings growth, gt , is defined as the change in log real
earnings of the aggregate stock market. It is modeled as follows:

                    gt+1 = g0 + ρgg gt + ρ0g,mac Ytmac + ρ0g,f in Ytf in
                            + σgp ωp,t+1 + σgn ωn,t+1 + σglp ωlp,t+1 + σgln ωln,t+1 + ugt+1            (20)
                    ugt+1   = σgg ωg,t+1                                                               (21)
                  ωg,t+1 ∼ N (0, 1).                                                                   (22)

The conditional mean is governed by an autoregressive component and the three macro
factors; the time variation in the conditional variance comes from the good and bad un-
certainty factors, and the loss rate uncertainty factor. The earnings shock is assumed
to be Gaussian and homoskedastic, because we fail to reject the null that the residuals
series, after controlling for the heteroskedastic fundamental shocks, is Gaussian and ho-
moskedastic. Thus, the time variation in the conditional variance of earnings growth is

    4
     This final model is not chosen at random. We experimented with 5 other models including letting
only lnt follow a BEGE process, letting both lnt and lpt follow a BEGE process (with or without
restricting the parameters to be the same across lnt and lpt ) and, finally, a version of the last two models
where lnt and lpt also enter the loss rate mean. Our final loss rate model outperforms other models based
on standard model selection criteria. Details on alternative models are available upon request.


                                                        10
spanned by macro-economic uncertainty and the financial uncertainty present in default
rates. The set of unknown parameters is {g0 , ρgg , ρ0g,mac , ρ0g,f in , σgp , σgn , σglp , σgln , σgg }.

Log Consumption-Earnings Ratio We model consumption as stochastically coin-
tegrated with earnings so
                         that
                             the consumption-earnings ratio becomes a relevant state
                         Ct
variable. Define κt ≡ ln Et which is assumed to follow:


                 κt+1 = κ0 + ρκκ κt + ρ0κ,mac Ytmac + ρ0κ,f in Ytf in
                       + σκp ωp,t+1 + σκn ωn,t+1 + σκlp ωlp,t+1 + σκln ωln,t+1 + uκt+1              (23)
                 uκt+1 = σκκ ωκ,t+1                                                                 (24)
                ωκ,t+1 ∼ N (0, 1).                                                                  (25)

Similarly to earnings growth, there is an autonomous conditional mean component but
the heteroskedasticity of κt is spanned by other state variables. As with log earnings
growth, we fail to reject Gaussianity and homoskedasticity of uκt+1 . The set of unknown
parameters is {κ0 , ρκκ , ρ0κ,mac , ρ0κ,f in , σκp , σκn , σκlp , σκln , σκκ }.

Log Dividend Payout Ratio The log dividend payout ratio, ηt , is expressed as the
log ratio of dividends to earnings. Recent evidence in Kostakis, Magdalinos, and Stam-
atogiannis (2015) shows that the monthly dividend payout ratio is stationary. We model
ηt analogously to κt and gt , again assuming a Gaussian and homoskedastic residual shock
(as justified by the data):

                  ηt+1 = η0 + ρηη ηt + ρ0η,mac Ytmac + ρ0η,f in Ytf in
                       + σηp ωp,t+1 + σηn ωn,t+1 + σηlp ωlp,t+1 + σηln ωln,t+1 + uηt+1              (26)
                  uηt+1 = σηη ωη,t+1                                                                (27)
                ωη,t+1 ∼ N (0, 1).                                                                  (28)

The set of unknown parameters is {η0 , ρηη , ρ0η,mac , ρ0η,f in , σηp , σηn , σηlp , σηln , σηη }. Using
ηt+1 and gt+1 , dividend growth ∆dt+1 , is given by ηt+1 − ηt + gt+1 .

II.B.3     Pricing Kernel State Variables

      In the model we introduced above, the real pricing kernel depends on consumption
growth and changes in risk aversion. To price nominal cash flows (or to price default
free nominal bonds), we also need an inflation process. We discuss the modeling of these
variables here.

                                                   11
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                 Ct+1
Consumption Growth By definition, log real consumption growth, ∆ct+1 = ln              =          Ct
gt+1 + ∆κt+1 . Therefore, consumption growth is spanned by the previously defined state
variables and shocks.
                                                                                     
                                                                               Ct
Risk Aversion The state variable capturing risk aversion, qt ≡ ln            Ct −Ht
                                                                                          is, by defi-
nition, nonnegative. We impose the following structure,

             qt+1 = q0 + ρqq qt + ρqp pt + ρqn nt + σqp ωp,t+1 + σqn ωn,t+1 + uqt+1                (29)
             uqt+1 = σqq ωq,t+1                                                                    (30)
            ωq,t+1 ∼ Γ(q
                     e t , 1).                                                                     (31)

       The risk aversion disturbance is comprised of three parts, exposure to the good
uncertainty shock, exposure to the bad uncertainty shock, and an orthogonal prefer-
ence shock. Thus, given the distributional assumptions on these shocks, the model-
                                   2      2       2
implied conditional variance is σqp  pt +σqn nt +σqq qt , and the conditional unscaled skewness
     3       3        3
                           
2 σqp  pt + σqn nt + σqq qt . With σqq = 0 and certain restrictions on σqp and σqn , the model
would imply a perfect correlation between the conditional correlation between risk aver-
sion and real activity, as in the Campbell-Cochrane (1999) model.
       We model the pure preference shock also with a demeaned gamma distributed shock,
so that its variance and (unscaled) skewness are proportional to its own level. Controlling
for current business conditions, when risk aversion is high, so is its conditional variability
and unscaled skewness. This seems like a plausible assumption. For example, option-
implied volatilities, which are partially driven by risk aversion, are much more volatile in
stress times. The higher moments of risk aversion are perfectly spanned by macroeconomic
uncertainty on the one hand and pure sentiment (qt ) on the other hand. Note that our
identifying assumption is that qt itself does not affect the macro variables and uq,t+1
represents a pure preference shock. The conditional mean is modeled as before: an
autonomous autoregressive component and dependence on pt and nt . The set of unknown
parameters describing the risk aversion process is {q0 , ρqq , ρqp , ρqn , σqp , σqn , σqq }.

Inflation To price nominal cash flows, we must specify an inflation process. The con-
ditional mean of inflation depends on an autoregressive term and the three macro factors
Ytmac . The conditional variance and higher moments of inflation are proportional to the
good and bad uncertainty factors {pt , nt }. The inflation innovation uπt+1 is assumed to be
Gaussian and homoskedastic. There is no feedback from inflation to the macro variables:

            πt+1 = π0 + ρππ πt + ρ0π,mac Ytmac + σπp ωp,t+1 + σπn ωn,t+1 + uπt+1                   (32)

                                              12
             uπt+1 = σππ ωπ,t+1                                                              (33)
           ωπ,t+1 ∼ N (0, 1).                                                                (34)

The set of unknown parameters is {π0 , ρππ , ρ0π,mac , σπp , σπn , σππ }.

II.B.4    Matrix Representation

      The dynamics of all state variables introduced above           can bei written compactly in
                                                                 h           0
                                                          mac
matrix notation. We define the macro factors Yt                = θt pt nt and other state vari-
                h                                 i0
ables Ytother = πt lt gt κt ηt lpt qt . Among the ten state variables, the industrial
production growth θt , the inflation rate πt , the loss rate lt , earnings growth gt , the log
consumption-earnings ratio κt and the log divided payout ratio ηt are observable, while
the other four state variables, {pt , nt , lpt , qt } are latent. There are eight independent cen-
tered gamma and Gaussian shocks in this economy. The system can be formally described
as follows (technical details are relegated to the Online Appendix):

                                  Yt+1 = µ + AYt + Σωt+1 ,                                   (35)

wherehconstant matrices,     i0 µ (10 × 1), A (10 × 10) and Σ (10 × 9), are implicitly defined,
               0           0
Yt = Ytmac Ytother (10 × 1) is a vector comprised of the state variable levels, and
           h                                                                       i0
ωt+1 = ωp,t+1 ωn,t+1 ωπ,t+1 ωlp,t+1 ωln,t+1 ωg,t+1 ωκ,t+1 ωη,t+1 ωq,t+1 (9 × 1) is
a vector comprised of all the independent shocks in the economy.
       Note that, among the nine shocks, five shocks are gamma distributed—the good un-
certainty shock (ωp,t+1 ), the bad uncertainty shock (ωn,t+1 ), the right-tail loss rate shock
(ωlp,t+1 ), the left-tail loss rate shock (ωln,t+1 ), and the risk aversion shock (ωq,t+1 ). The
remaining four shocks are standard homoskedastic Gaussian shocks (i.e., N (0, 1)). Im-
portantly, given our preference structure, the state variables driving the time variation
in the higher order moments of these shocks are the only ones driving the time variation
in asset risk premiums and their higher order moments. Economically, we therefore rely
on time variation in risk aversion—as in the classic Campbell-Cochrane model and its
variants (see e.g. Bekaert, Engstrom, and Grenadier, 2010; Wachter, 2006)—and time
variation in economic uncertainty—as in the Bansal-Yaron (2004) model—to explain risk
premiums.5 The model’s implications for conditional asset return variances are critical in
identifying the dynamics of risk aversion (see also Joslin, Le, and Singleton, 2013).
       Our specific structure admits conditional non-Gaussianity yet generates affine pric-

   5
    Previous research by Bekaert, Engstrom, and Xing (2009) and Bekaert and Engstrom (2017) also
combines time variation in economic uncertainty with changes in risk aversion.


                                                13
ing solutions. The model is tractable because the moment generating functions of gamma
and Gaussian distributed variables can be derived in closed form, delivering exponentiated
affine functions of the state variables. In particular,
                                                                         
               0                  01 0     other 0
     Et [exp(ν Yt+1 )] = exp ν S0 + ν S1 Σ      S1 ν + fS (ν)Yt + S2 (ν)ln ,            (36)
                                   2

where S0 (10 × 1) is a vector of drifts; S1 (10 × 4) is a selection matrix of 0s and 1s
which picks out the Jensen’s inequality terms of the four Gaussian shocks; Σother (4 × 4)
represents the covariance of the Gaussian shocks. The matrix fS (ν) (the scalar S2 (ν)) is
a non-linear function of ν, involving the feedback matrix and the scale parameters of the
gamma-distributed variables, see the Online Appendix for more details.


II.C     Asset Pricing
      In this section, we present the model solutions. First, we formally define the real and
nominal pricing kernel as a function of the previously defined state variables. Assuming
complete markets, this kernel prices any cash flow pattern spanned by our state variable
dynamics. Second, asset prices for two risky assets—defaultable corporate bonds and
equities—are derived. The solution of the model shows that asset prices are (quasi) affine
functions of the state variables, which is crucial in developing the estimation procedure
in this paper. In particular, we derive approximate expressions for endogenous returns to
use in estimating the model parameters, and deriving a risk appetite index.

II.C.1   The pricing kernel

      Taking the ratio of marginal utilities at time t+1 and t, we obtain the intertemporal
marginal rate of substitution which constitutes the real pricing kernel denoted by Mt+1 .
As Equation (6) indicates, it has the same form as the pricing kernel in the Campbell
and Cochrane model, however, the kernel state variables and kernel shocks are quite
different. Unlike the CC model, changes in the log surplus consumption ratio (the inverse
of risk aversion) are not perfectly correlated with the consumption growth shock, and
consumption growth is heteroskedastic. The real pricing kernel in our model follows an
affine process as well:

                           mt+1 = m0 + m02 Yt + m01 Σωt+1 ,                             (37)

where m0 , m1 (10×1), m2 (10×1) are constant scalar or matrices that are implicitly
defined using Equations (18)–(23) and (27)-(29). To price nominal assets, we define the


                                             14
nominal pricing kernel, m
                        e t+1 , which is a simple transformation of the log real pricing
kernel, mt+1 ,

                           e t+1 = mt+1 − πt+1 ,
                           m                                                            (38)
                                  = m    f02 Yt + m
                                    e0 + m        f01 Σωt+1 ,                           (39)

where m e 0, m
             f1 (10×1) and m f2 (10×1) are implicitly defined. The nominal risk free rate,
ft , is defined as − ln {Et [exp (m
rf                                e t+1 )]} which can be expressed as an affine function of
the state vector.

II.C.2   Asset prices

     In this section, we further discuss the pricing of the two risky assets—corporate
bonds and equities. The Online Appendix contains detailed proofs and derivations.

Defaultable Nominal Bonds Above, we assume that a one period nominal bond faces
a fractional (logarithmic) loss of lt . Given the structure assumed for lt and Equation (34),
the log price-coupon ratio of the one-period defaultable bond portfolio is

                            pc1t = ln {Et [exp (m
                                                e t+1 − lt+1 )]}                        (40)
                                 = b10 + b10
                                          1 Yt ,                                        (41)

where b10 and b101 are implicitly defined. It is straightforward to show that a portfolio of
zero-coupon nominally defaultable corporate bonds, maturing in N periods, has a price
that is affine in the state variables. The assumed zero-coupon structure of the payments
before maturity implies that the unexpected returns to this portfolio are exactly linearly
spanned by the shocks to Yt .

Equities Equity is a claim to the dividend stream. The Online Appendix shows that
the price-dividend ratio is the sum of an infinite number of exponential affine functions
of the state vector, with the coefficients following simple difference equations.

II.C.3   Asset Returns

      Given that the log price-coupon ratio of a defaultable corporate bond can be ex-
pressed as an exact affine function of the state variables, it immediately implies that
                                             cb
the log nominal return (before maturity), ret+1  = pct+1 − pct , can be represented in
                                                                                  eq
closed-form. For equities, the log nominal equity return is derived as follows, ret+1 =


                                             15
                          
      P Dt+1 +1 Dt+1
ln       P Dt
                 exp(πt+1 ) . It is therefore a non-linear but known function of the state
                 Dt
variables. We approximate this function by a linear function (See the Online Appendix
for details). Note that this procedure is very different from the very popular Campbell-
Shiller (1988) model which approximates returns with a linear expression. Because they
approximate the return expression and then price future cash flows with approximate
expected returns, their procedure accumulates pricing errors. We approximate a known
quasi-affine pricing function in deriving a return expression.
      To account for the approximation error, we allow for two asset-specific homoskedastic
shocks that are orthogonal to the state variable innovations. As a result, log nominal asset
returns approximately satisfy the following factor model,

                                      i
                                    ret+1 = ξe0i + ξe1i0 Yt + rei0 Σωt+1 + εit+1 ,                     (42)

         i
where ret+1 is the log nominal asset return i from t to t + 1, ∀i = {eq, cb}; ξe1i (10 × 1)
is the loading vector on the state vector; rei (10 × 1) is the loading vector on the state
variable shocks, and εit+1 is a homoskedastic error term with unconditional volatility σi .
      Rather than exploiting the model restrictions on prices, we exploit the restrictions
the economy imposes on asset returns, physical variances and risk-neutral variances.
Given Equation (42) and the pricing kernel, the model implies that one period expected
log excess returns are given by:

                                                                       m1 + rei )
                                                                                
                                                               1 − σp (f
          RPti   ≡   Et (ei
                         rt+1 )   − rf
                                    f =
                                       t       σp (e i
                                                   r ) + ln                           pt
                                                                  1 − σp (f
                                                                          m1 )
                                                                        m1 + rei )
                                                                                 
                                                     i         1 − σn (f
                                         +     σn (er ) + ln                          nt
                                                                  1 − σn (fm1 )
                                                                         m1 + rei )
                                                                                  
                                                      i         1 − σlp (f
                                         +     σlp (e
                                                    r ) + ln                           lpt
                                                                   1 − σlp (f
                                                                            m1 )
                                                                         m1 + rei )
                                                                                  
                                                       i        1 − σln (f
                                         +     σln (e
                                                    r ) + ln                            ln
                                                                   1 − σln (f
                                                                            m1 )
                                                                       m1 + rei )
                                                                                
                                                     i         1 − σq (f
                                         +     σq (e
                                                   r ) + ln                           qt
                                                                  1 − σq (f
                                                                          m1 )
                                                                      1
                                              m01 S1 Σother S10 rei − rei0 S1 Σother S10 rei + σi2 .
                                                                                                  
                                         −                                                             (43)
                                                                      2

Here (as before), m f1 and rei are vectors containing the sensitivities of the log nominal
pricing kernel and the log nominal asset returns to the state variable shocks, respectively.
The symbols σp (x), σn (x), σlp (x), σln (x) and σq (x) represent linear functions of state
variables’ sensitivities to the good uncertainty shock (ωp,t+1 ), the bad uncertainty shock
(ωn,t+1 ), the right-tail loss rate shock (ωlp,t+1 ), the left-tail loss rate shock (ωln,t+1 ) and

                                                         16
the risk aversion shock (ωq,t+1 ).
h     The signs of state variable coefficients
                                       i0      are also
                                                      h intuitive. For instance, becausei0m
                                                                                          f1 =
  0 0 0 −1 0 −γ −γ 0 0 γ and Σ•9 = 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 σqq ,6 σq (f                             m1 ) =
f1 0 Σ•9 = γσqq > 0, where γ > 0 follows from the concavity of the utility function and
m
σqq > 0 implies positive skewness of risk aversion in Equation (29). It immediately implies
that an asset with a negative return sensitivity to the risk aversion shock exhibits a higher
risk premium when risk aversion is high.h That is, for       i  such an asset, σq (e    r i ) < 0; then,
                                                        ri )                       ri )
it can be easily shown that σq (e  r i ) + ln 1−σq (f
                                                    m1 +e
                                               1−σq (f
                                                     m1 )
                                                                               σq (e
                                                                     r i ) − 1−σ
                                                               ≈ σq (e           q (f
                                                                                    m1 )
                                                                                            > 0. Under
realistic parameter values, expected excess returns thus vary through time and are affine
in pt , nt , lpt (macroeconomic and cash flow uncertainties) and qt (aggregate risk aversion).
        The physical conditional return variance is obtained given the return loadings of
Equation (42):
                                              2               2                 2              2
     V ARti ≡ V ARt (ei
                     rt+1 ) =            r i ) pt + σn (e
                                     σp (e                r i ) nt + σlp (e                  r i ) qt
                                                                             r i ) lpt + σq (e
                                               2
                                 + σln (e r i ) ln + rei0 S1 Σother S10 rei + σi2 ,                  (44)
                                   |                     {z                      }
                                                             constant


where S1 is defined in the Online Appendix. The expected variance under the physical
measure is time-varying and affine in pt , nt , lpt and qt .
     The one-period risk-neutral conditional return variance is:
                                                        2                              2                              2
                                                ri )                            ri )                            ri )
                                                                                                  
                                            σp (e                           σn (e                          σlp (e
V   ARti,Q   ≡V   ARtQ (ei
                        rt+1 )   =                            pt +                           nt +                            lpt
                                         1 − σp (f
                                                 m1 )                    1 − σn (f
                                                                                 m1 )                   1 − σlp (f
                                                                                                                 m1 )
                                                        2
                                                ri )
                                     
                                            σq (e
                                 +                            qt
                                         1 − σq (f
                                                 m1 )
                                                         2
                                                 ri )
                                     
                                            σln (e
                                 +                            ln + rei0 S1 Σother S10 rei + σi2 .                        (45)
                                         1 − σln (f
                                                  m1 )

Note that the functions in Equation (45) are affine transformations from the ones in
Equation (44), using the “σ(m)” functions. Under normal circumstances, we would expect
that the relative importance of “bad” uncertainty, the loss rate’s uncertainty and risk
aversion increases under the risk neutral measure relative to the importance of “good”
uncertainty. In Equation (45), this intuition can be formally established as σn (m), σlp (m),
σq (m) are positive and σp (m) is negative. For example, as derived above, σq (m e 1 ) = γσqq
is strictly positive. Therefore, because σqq is likely a small number, as long as γ is not
very large, the risk neutral variance should load more heavily on qt than does the physical

     6
    Matrix Σ•j is the j-th column of the shock coefficient matrix in the state variable process, or Σ in
Equation (35).


                                                         17
variance.


III     The Identification and Estimation of Risk Aver-
        sion and Uncertainty
      In this section, we first describe our general estimation strategy which is focused
on retrieving a risk aversion process that can be measured at high frequencies, and then
outline the estimation methodology in detail, which consists of two steps. The first step
is the identification of macro-economic and cash flow uncertainties; the second step is the
actual estimation of the remainder of the model parameters and the identification of risk
aversion.


III.A       General Estimation Philosophy
      While there are 10 state variables in the model, there are only four latent state
variables that drive risk premiums and conditional physical and risk neutral variances
in the model as described in Equations (43)–(45). Three of these state variables, good
uncertainty, pt , bad uncertainty, nt and cash flow uncertainty, lpt , describe economic
uncertainty. We want to ensure that these variables are identified from macro-economic
and cash flow information alone and are not contaminated by asset prices. We therefore
pre-estimate these variables. This constitutes the first step in the estimation methodology.
      After identifying the dynamics of these variables, there are a variety of ways that
we can retrieve risk aversion from the model and data on corporate bonds and equities.
However, an important goal of the paper is to make risk aversion observable, even at high
frequencies. Under the null of the model, asset prices, risk premiums and variances are
an exact function of the state variables, including risk aversion. It thus follows that risk
aversion should be spanned by a set of asset prices and risk variables. Given our desire to
generate a high frequency risk aversion index, we select these instruments to be observable
at high frequencies and to reflect risk and return information for our two asset classes. In
particular, we assume
                                          qt = χ0 zt ,                                  (46)

where zt is a vector of 6 observed asset prices (and a vector of ones), including (1) the
credit spread, (2) a “detrended” dividend yield or earnings yield, (3) the realized equity
return variance, (4) the risk-neutral equity return variance, (5) the realized corporate
bond return variance, and (6) term spread.
      The term spread may reflect information about the macro-economy (see e.g. Harvey,

                                            18
1988) and was also included in the risk appetite index of Bekaert and Hoerova (2016). The
credit spread and price yields contain direct price information from the corporate bond
and equity market respectively and thus reflect partially information about risk premiums.
Ideally, we would include information on both risk-neutral and physical variances for both
equities and corporate bonds, but we do not have data on the risk neutral corporate bond
return variance. We use the realized variance for both markets, rather than an estimate
of the physical conditional variance, because realized variances are effectively observed,
whereas conditional variances must be estimated. Given a loading vector χ, the risk
aversion process can be computed daily from observable data.
      So far, the methodology is reminiscent of the FAVAR literature (see Bernanke,
Boivin, and Eliasz, 2005) and Stock and Watson (2002), where unobserved macro-factors
are identified using large date sets of observable macro-data using a spanning assumption.
However, in contrast to the above literature and all “principal component” type analysis,
we exploit the restrictions the economy imposes on risk premiums, and physical and risk
neutral variances to estimate the loadings of the time-varying risk aversion process. That
is, our risk aversion estimate is forced to satisfy the properties of risk aversion implied by
the above model: it is an element of the pricing kernel, which must, in turn, correctly price
asset returns and be consistent with observed measures of return volatility under both
the physical and risk-neutral measures. To do so, we adopt a GMM procedure detailed
in Section III.C.7


III.B       Identifying Economic and Cash Flow Uncertainties
       Given that there is no feedback from risk aversion to the three uncertainty state
variables, we can pre-estimate the uncertainty factors without using financial asset prices.
       First, we use the monthly log real growth rate of industrial production to measure
θt . In the system for θt , described in Equations (8)–(13), there are three state variables,
which we collect in Ytmac ,
                                            h           i0
                                   Y\mac =
                                         t           b t .8
                                              θt pbt n

We denote the filtered shocks,
                                                h            i0
                                        ω mac =
                                        \    t   ωb p,t ω
                                                        b n,t .


The system is estimated using Bates (2006)’s approximate MLE procedure (see the Online

   7
      Imposing the model restrictions and no arbitrage through a positive pricing kernel also differentiates
the estimation from the approach taken in Bekaert and Hoerova (2016).
    8
      In the remainder of the paper, a hat superscript is used to indicate estimated variables or matrices.


                                                    19
Appendix for details).
       Second, we must determine the latent cash flow uncertainty factor lpt , which de-
termines the time variation in the conditional variance of the log corporate bond default
rate. The dynamics of the variables are described in Equations (14)–(18). We use Bates’
approximate MLE to estimate the model parameters. Unlike the BEGE structure for real
shocks, for the idiosyncratic loss rate shock, only the right-tail shock (i.e., the adverse
tail) is heteroskedastic. We denote the estimated right-tail loss rate shape parameter as
lp
b t , and the loss rate shocks as ω
                                  blp,t+1 and ω
                                              bln,t+1 .


III.C        Identifying Risk Aversion
       To identify the risk aversion process and the parameters in the spanning condi-
tion (Equation (46) above), we exploit the restrictions the model imposes on return risk
premiums (equities and corporate bonds), physical conditional variances (equities and
corporate bonds) and risk neutral variances (for equities only). The estimation is a GMM
system in which we as instruments the same variables that are used to span risk aversion
(zt ). Apart from the χ parameters, we must also identify the parameters in the kernel
(β, the discount factor, and γ, the curvature parameter), and the scale parameter of the
preference shock, σqq . Note that the level of risk aversion is also driven by the qt process,
so that γ and β are not well identified. We impose γ = 2 and β = 0.999. The GMM
system thus has 8 unknown parameters,

                    Θ = [χ0 , χtsprd , χcsprd , χCF 5yr , χrvareq , χqvareq , χrvarcb , σqq ] ,

where the notation is obvious, and CF 5yr refers to either a detrended dividend or earnings
yield (“DY5yr” or “EY5yr”). Before the moment conditions can be evaluated, we must
identify the state variables and their shocks, the pricing kernel, and the return shocks.
The estimation process consists of six steps: for each candidate Θ      b0 , σ
                                                                   b = [χ    bqq ] vector,

  1. Identify the implied risk aversion series given the loading choices, qbt = χb0 zt . We im-
     pose a lower boundary of 10−8 on qt during the estimation. This    is consistent
                                                                                         with
     theory, as qt is motivated from a habit model (qt = ln (Qt ) = ln CtC−H   t
                                                                                 t
                                                                                     > 0). It
     is also consistent with the distributional assumption for qt as the positive shape
     parameter of the ωq shock.9

  2. Identify the state variable levels (Yt ) and shocks (Σωt+1 ).
     The parameters of the state variable processes, {θt , pt , nt , lt , lpt }, are pre-determined

   9
       However, for the best model, the minimum q is 0.1436 and the boundary is non-binding.


                                                       20
         according to Section III.B. For the remaining cash flow state variables {πt , gt , κt , ηt },
         we estimate the parameters in each iteration using simple projections. To identify
         the risk aversion-specific shock in the risk aversion process, we first project qbt+1 on qbt ,
         pbt , n
               bt , ω
                    bp,t+1 and ω                                  bqt+1 , and then divide it by σ
                               bn,t+1 to obtain the residual term u                             bqq to
         obtain the preference shock ω     bq,t+1 (see Equations (29)–(31)). Now, given the choice
                                                              h                                     i0
         of χ, b a full set of state variables levels, Ybt = Yb mac0 πt lt gt κt ηt lp     t
                                                                                             b t qbt ,
                                                             q
         and the eight independent shocks, ω
                                           b t+1 including ω
                                                           bt+1 , can be identified.10

    3. Identify the nominal pricing kernel.
       Consumption growth in this model is (endogenously) implied by two state variables,
       real log earnings growth and (changes in) the log consumption-earnings ratio. Given
       consumption growth (i.e., gt +∆κt ), the risk aversion process qbt , γ and β, the monthly
       nominal kernel is obtained:

                                         e t+1 = ln(β) − γ∆ct+1 + γ (b
                                         m
                                         b                           qt+1 − qbt ) − πt+1 .

         Constant matrices related to the log nominal kernel—m e 0, m
                                                                    f1 , m
                                                                         f2 (as in the affine
         representation of the kernel; see Equation (39))—are implicitly identified.

    4. Estimate the return loadings.
       In this step, we obtain the loadings of nominal asset returns on the state variable
       shocks, controlling for time-varying conditional means. Note that there are 8 state
       variables {θt , pt , nt , πt , gt , κt , lpt , qt } affecting the pricing kernel. The remaining state
       variables, {lt , ηt }, correspond to cash flow state variables in the corporate bond and
       equity markets. We estimate the loadings by simple projections, assuming the asset-
       specific approximation shock is homoskedastic:

                                                  i
                                                ret+1 = ξ0i + ξ1i0 Ybt + rei0 Σb
                                                                              b ωt+1 + εi ,
                                                                                        t+1                                                  (47)

                 i
         where ret+1 is the log nominal return for asset i, Σ
                                                            b and ω
                                                                  b t+1 are identified previously,
         and εt+1 has mean 0 and variance σi . To obtain asset moments, rei0 is the crucial
              i                                 2

         shock loading vector, but we also need σ  bi .

    5. Obtain the model-implied endogenous moments.
       We derive three moments for the asset returns: 1) the expected excess return implied

    10
       The parameters obtained from this substep are π0 , ρππ , ρπθ , ρπp , ρπn , σπp , σπn , σππ , l0 , ρll , mlp , mln ,
σlp , σln , σlp , σln , lp, ρlp , σlplp , ln, g0 , ρgg , ρgθ , ρgp , ρgn , ρgl , ρglp , σgp , σgn , σglp , σgln , σgg , κ0 , ρκκ , ρκθ , ρκp , ρκn , ρκl ,
ρκlp , σκp , σκn , σκlp , σκln , σκκ , η0 , ρηη , ρηθ , ρηp , ρηn , ρηl , ρηlp , σηp , σηn , σηlp , σηln , σηη , q0 , ρqq , ρqp , ρqn , σqp
and σqn .


                                                                        21
   by the model (using the pricing kernel), RP i ; 2) the physical (conditional expected)
   return variance, V ARi , which only depends on the return definition in Equation (47)
   and 3) the risk neutral conditional variance, V ARi,Q , which also uses the pricing
   kernel. The expressions for these variables are derived in Equations (43)–(45) where
   pt , nt , lpt ,qt , rei , Σother and σi have been estimated in previous steps.

6. Obtain the moment conditions ε(Θ; Ψt ) . Given data on asset returns and options,
   we use the derived moments to define 7 error terms that can be used to create GMM
   orthogonality conditions. There are three types of errors we use in the system. First,
   neither risk premiums nor physical conditional variances are observed in the data,
   but we use the restriction that the observed returns/realized variances minus their
   expectations under the null of the model ought to have a conditional mean of zero:

                                                             d eq
                                                                        
                                                  eq
                                                    − rf t − RP
                                                ret+1 f
                                                                t
                                                    eq        eq          
                                           RV ARt+1 − V[   ARt            
                          ε1 (Θ; Ψt ) =                                   ,           (48)
                                                                          
                                                             d cb
                                                         
                                                cb
                                        
                                             ret+1 − rf
                                                      ft − RP
                                                                t
                                                                           
                                                                           
                                                                     cb
                                                 cb
                                            RV ARt+1 − V[
                                                        ARt

            i
   where ret+1 is the realized nominal return from t to t + 1, rft is the risk free rate, and
           i
   RV ARt+1 is the realized nominal variance from t to t + 1 defined as the sum of the
   squares of the log high-frequency returns from t to t + 1 (see the Data section for
   details). Here Ψt denotes the information set at time t. The risk neutral variance
   can be measured from options data (see e.g. Bakshi and Madan, 2000; Bakshi,
   Kapadia, and Madan, 2003), and so we use the error:
                                         h
                                               eq      eq,Q i
                            ε2 (Θ; Ψt ) = QV ARt − V ARt
                                                   [          ,                         (49)

   where QV ARteq is the ex-ante risk-neutral variance of rt+1
                                                           eq
                                                               calculated from the data.
   We assume that ε2 (Θ; Ψt ) reflects model and measurement error, orthogonal to Ψt .
   Finally, we also construct two moment conditions to identify σqq , exploiting the
   model dynamics for uqt+1 (i.e., the shock to the risk aversion process as in Equa-
   tion (29)):
                                            "                              #
                                                 uqt+1 )2 − (b
                                                (b           σqq )2 qbt
                            ε3 (Θ; Ψt ) =                                               (50)
                                                 uqt+1 )3 − 2(b
                                                (b            σqq )3 qbt
                      h                       i
                                  0
   Let ε1,2 (Θ; Ψt ) = ε1 (Θ; Ψt ) ε2 (Θ; Ψt ) . Under our assumptions these errors are
   mean zero given the information set, Ψt . We can therefore use them to create the

                                            22
     usual GMM moment conditions. Given our previously defined set of instruments,
     zt (7 × 1, including a vector of 1’s), we define the moment conditions as:
                                                                     
                                                 ε1,2 (Θ; Ψt ) ⊗ zt
                                                | {z } |{z}
                                                      5×1         7×1 
                       E [gt (Θ; Ψt , zt )] ≡ E                       = |{z}
                                                                           0 .                  (51)
                                                
                                                     ε3 (Θ; Ψt )     
                                                                          37×1
                                                      | {z }
                                                          2×1


     Note that to keep the set of moment conditions manageable, we only use two moment
     conditions for the identification of σqq . Denote gt (Θ; Ψt , zt ) (37 × 1) as the vector
     of errors at time t, and gT (Θ; Ψ, z) (37 × 1) the sample mean of gt (Θ; Ψt , zt ) from
     t = 1 to t = T . Then, the GMM objective function is,

                            J(Θ; Ψ, z) ≡ T gT0 (Θ; Ψ, z)W gT (Θ; Ψ, z),

     where W is the weighting matrix. We use the standard GMM procedure, first using
     an identity weighting matrix, yielding a first stage set of parameters Θ           b 1 . We then
     compute the usual optimal weighting matrix as the inverse of the spectral density
     at frequency zero of the orthogonality conditions, S      b1 , using 5 Newey-West (1987)
     lags:
                          j=5
                          X   5 − |j| b                         b 1 ; Ψt−1 , zt−1 )0 ].
                  S1 =
                   b                 E[gt (Θ
                                           b 1 ; Ψt , zt )gt−j (Θ                                (52)
                         j=−5
                                 5

     Then, the inverse of S b is shrunk towards the identity matrix with a shrinkage
     parameter of 0.1 in obtaining the second-step weight matrix W2 :

                                             b−1 + 0.1I37×37 ,
                                     W2 = 0.9S                                                  (53)

     where I37×37 is a identity matrix of dimension 37 × 37. This gives rise to a second-
     round Θb 2 estimator. To ensure that poor first round estimates do not affect the
     estimation, we conduct one more iteration with shrinkage, compute S     b2 (Θ
                                                                                 b 2 ), and
     produce a third-round GMM estimator, Θ  b 3 . Lastly, the asymptotic distribution for
                                                    √
     the third-step GMM estimation parameter is, T (Θ     b 3 − Θ0 ) → N (0, Avar(Θ   b 3 )),
                                                                             d
     where Avar(
             \ Θ b 3 ) = (G0 (Θ    b2−1 GT (Θ
                              b 3 )S        b 3 ))−1 and where GT denotes the gradient
                           T
     of gT .

Because the estimation involves several steps and is quite non-linear in the parameters, we
increase the chance of finding the true global optimum by starting from 24,000 different
starting values for χ
                    b drawn randomly from a large set of possible starting values for each


                                                23
parameter. The global optimum is defined as the parameter estimates generating the
lowest minimum objective function value.


IV      Data
      Because we combine macro and cash flow data to estimate the dynamics of the
state variables, with financial data in the GMM estimation, we use the longest data
available for the various estimations of the state variable dynamics. The estimation of the
macroeconomic uncertainty state variables uses the period from January 1947 to February
2015, and the estimation of the loss rate uncertainty state variable uses data from January
1982 to February 2015. For the GMM estimation, the sample spans the period from June
1986 to February 2015 (T=345 months). All estimations are conducted at the monthly
frequency.


IV.A      State variables
      Our output variable—delivering three state variables (θt , pt and nt )—is the change
in log real industrial production where the monthly real industrial production index is
obtained from the Federal Reserve Bank at St. Louis. Inflation (π), is defined as the
change in the log of the consumer price index (CPI) obtained from the Bureau of Labor
Statistics (BLS).
      The fifth state variable, the log corporate bond loss rate (l), as indicated before
requires data on default rates and recovery rates for the US corporate bond market. We
obtain data on 3-month trailing all-corporate bond default rates and monthly recovery
rates spanning November 1980 to February 2015 from the Federal Reserve Board. We use
6 month moving averages of these raw data to compute the log loss rate representative
for each month.
      The sixth state variable, real earnings growth (g), is defined as the change in log
real earnings per capita. Real earnings is the product of real earnings per share and the
number of shares outstanding during the same month. The seventh state variable, the
log consumption-earnings ratio (κ), uses real per capita consumption and real per capita
earnings. Real monthly consumption is defined as the sum of seasonally-adjusted real
personal consumption expenditures on nondurable goods and services; as widely recog-
nized in the literature, the consumption deflator is different from the CPI and is computed
using monthly data in this paper. The eighth state variable, the log dividend payout ratio
(η), uses the log ratio of real dividends and real earnings. Therefore, consumption growth
(dividend growth) is implicitly defined given g and κ (g and η).

                                            24
      The source for the consumption data is the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis
(BEA). The source for the dividends and earnings data is Robert Shiller’s website. We
use the 12-month trailing dividends and earnings, i.e., Et12 = Et−12 + ...Et−1 where Et
denotes the monthly earnings. There are no true monthly earnings data because almost all
firms report earnings results only quarterly. According to Shiller’s website, the monthly
dividend and earnings data provided are inferred from the S&P four-quarter totals, which
are available since 1926. Calculating 12-month trailing values of earnings and dividends
is common practice to control for the strong seasonality in the data. Total market shares
are obtained from CRSP. To obtain per capita units, we divide real consumption and real
earnings by the population numbers provided by BEA.


IV.B     Financial Variables
      Daily equity returns are the continuously compounded value-weighted nominal mar-
ket returns with dividends from CRSP. The monthly return (req ) is the sum of daily
returns within the same month. To create excess returns, we subtract the one-month
Treasury bill rate from the end of the prior month, also from CRSP. We use the square
of the month-end VIX index (divided by 120000) as the one-period risk-neutral condi-
tional variance of equity returns (QV AReq ) which is obtained from the Chicago Board
Options Exchange (CBOE) and is only available from the end of January 1990. We use
the VXO index prior to 1990, also from CBOE, going back to June 1986. We construct
the monthly one-period physical conditional variance of equity returns (P V AReq ) as in
Bekaert, Hoerova, and Lo Duca (2013). We calculate the monthly realized variance as
the sum of the squared daily equity returns within the same month; then, we project the
monthly realized variance onto the lagged risk-neutral variance and the lagged realized
variance to obtain the monthly P V AReq .
      The daily corporate bond market return is the continuously compounded log change
in the daily Dow Jones corporate bond total return index (source: Global Financial
Data). The monthly return (rcb ) is the sum of daily returns within the same month. The
conditional variance under the physical measure (P V ARcb ) is the projection of monthly
realized variance onto the lagged realized variance and the lagged credit spread (defined
as the difference between the month-end Baa yield and the 10-year zero-coupon Treasury
yield).
      In some of our work below, we also use data on speculative corporate bonds, which
may be more informative about the economic environment than the universe of corporate
bonds dominated by investment grade securities (source: FRED, “ICE BofAML US High
Yield Total Return Index”). We obtain monthly realized speculative corporate bond


                                           25
return variances using the methodology described above for overall corporate returns.
Because the daily index only starts in February 1990, we use an empirical model to fill in
the missing data from June 1986 to January 1990.11
      In terms of the financial variables that span risk aversion, the credit spread is the
difference between Moody’s Baa yield and the 10-year Treasury bond yield. The detrended
dividend yield is calculated as the difference between the raw dividend yield and an moving
average term that takes the 5 year average of monthly dividend yields, starting one year
before, or DY 5yrt = DYt − 60
                              P
                                 i=1 DYt−12−i where DYt denotes the dividend yield level at
time t (the ratio of 12-month trailing dividends and the equity market price). We create
an analogous detrended earnings yield variable using earnings data. The term spread is
the difference between the 10-year Treasury yield and the 3-month Treasury yield, where
the yield data is obtained from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.


V        Estimation Results
     In this section, we describe the estimation of the state variable processes, and the
actual risk aversion process.


V.A         State Variable Dynamics
V.A.1       Macro-economic factors

      While we entertained a number of alternative model specifications for industrial
production growth, the model described in Section II.B was best in terms of the standard
BIC criterion. The parameter estimates are reported in Table 1. Industrial production
growth features slight positive auto-correlation and high realizations of “bad” volatility
decrease its conditional mean significantly. The pt process is extremely persistent (almost
a unit root) and nearly Gaussian, forcing us to fix its unconditional mean at 500 (for
such values, the skewness and kurtosis of shocks to pt are effectively zero). The shape
parameter nt has a much lower mean, featuring gamma-distributed shocks ωn,t+1 with
                                                               2
a higher unconditional skewness coefficient of 0.50 ( √16.14      ) and a higher excess kurtosis
                        6
coefficient of 0.37 ( 16.14 ). It is also less persistent than the pt process.
      We graph the conditional mean of θt and the pt and nt process in Figure 1 together
with NBER recessions. The strong countercyclicality of the nt process and the procycli-
cality of the conditional mean of the growth rate of industrial production are apparent
from the graph. We also confirmed the cyclicality by running a regression of the three

  11
       Th exact model is described in the Online Appendix.


                                                  26
processes (conditional mean, pt , and nt ) on a constant and a NBER dummy. The NBER
dummy obtains a highly statistically significant positive (negative) coefficient for the nt
(conditional mean) equation. The coefficient is in fact positive in the pt equation as well,
but not statistically significant. In fact, the nt regression features an adjusted R2 of
almost 45%.
      The conditional variance of industrial production and its conditional unscaled skew-
ness (see the Online Appendix for a plot) are dominated by nt and therefore highly
countercyclical. Thus, exposure to such macroeconomic uncertainty may render asset
prices countercyclical as well.

V.A.2     Cash flow dynamics

      As shown in Table 2, the loss rate process is persistent with the autocorrelation
coefficient close to 0.83. The pt -process does not significantly affect the loss rate process,
either through the conditional mean or through shock exposures. However, the ωn,t shock
has a statistically significant effect on the loss rate process; moreover nt affects the loss
rate’s conditional mean with a statistically significant positive coefficient. The time-
varying part of the conditional variance, lpt , is persistent with an autoregressive coefficient
of 0.86. The idiosyncratic shocks to the loss rate process also exhibit substantial excess
kurtosis (unconditional kurtosis = 1.15) and positive skewness (unconditional skewness =
0.90). The gamma shock generating negative skewness, which has a time-invariant shape
parameter, is nearly Gaussian, with the shape parameter exceeding 100, so that while
it contributes to the variance of the loss rate, there is no meaningful negative skewness
associated with this shock.
      In Figure 2, we first plot the loss rate process l. The loss rate clearly spikes around
recessions, from an overall average of 0.6% to 2.1% on average in recessions (the maximum
value is 5.6% during February 2009). The conditional mean of the loss rate in fact inherits
the countercyclicality of the loss rate itself, given the loss rate’s high persistence and it
positive dependence on nt . Our model fits the positive skewness of the loss rate process
through the positively skewed ul shocks and the positive dependence on ωn .
      Next, in the second and third plots of Figure 2, we show the conditional higher-
order moments of the loss rate process, including the lpt process and the total conditional
variance. While lpt is overall countercyclical, it appears to peak a few months after
recessions. The conditional variance in the second panel (V art (lt+1 )) also appears coun-
tercyclical, which is the combined result of a countercyclical lpt process and a strongly
countercyclical nt process (σln being positive). In fact, a regression of lpt on a constant
and a NBER dummy, yields a NBER coefficient of 6.78 with a t statistic of 3.03, but the


                                              27
t statistic increases to 8.87 when regressing total variance on the NBER dummy.
       We decompose the total conditional variance of the loss rate in its contributions
coming from shocks associated with lpt , pt and nt in the fourth plot of Figure 2. The
dominant sources of variation are lpt (accounting for 29% of the total variance on average)
and nt (accounting for 40%). The relative importance of lpt drops slightly in recessions
while that of nt increases. It tends to peak when the economy starts recovering, reaching
as high as 93%. The pt process has a negligible effect on the loss rate variance. Clearly, the
loss rate variance has substantial independent variation not spanned by macro-economic
uncertainty.
       With the loss rate process estimated, the dynamics of the other cash flow state
variables (earnings growth, the consumption earnings ratio and the payout ratio) follow
straightforwardly. We simply use linear projections of the variables onto the previously
identified state variables and shocks. The results are reported in Table 3. Earnings
growth is less persistent than the two equity yield variables, but loads positively and
significantly on industrial production growth. The nt state variable has a positive effect on
the conditional mean of the consumption-earnings and dividend-earnings ratio, indicating
that in recessions these ratios are expected to be larger than in normal times. This makes
economic sense as consumption and dividends are likely smoothed over the cycle whereas
earnings are particularly cycle sensitive (see also Longstaff and Piazessi, 2004). Yet, the
cyclicality of earnings growth does not show through a significant effect of nt but rather
appears through its positive dependence on industrial production growth directly and
its negative dependence on the loss rate. Again, the ratio variables load significantly,
but positively on the loss rate. The same intuition explains why the ratio variables load
positively on ωn shocks and earnings growth loads negatively on this shock. The ωp
and ωlp shocks do not have a significant effect on these state variables. The ωln shock,
which has a negative effect on loss rates, somewhat surprisingly affects the ratio variables
positively and significantly.
       The projections implicitly define the residuals shock for the cash flow variables,
which we found to be homoskedastic (in unreported results). Table 3 indicates that
these shocks still feature substantial and significant variability. We do not impose any
correlation structure on these shocks, and Table 4 shows that they are quite correlated.
Essentially, because earnings growth is quite variable, the ratio variables are positively
correlated with one another and negatively correlated with earnings growth. When pricing
assets with the model, this correlation structure must be accounted for (see below). The
correlations with the other state variable shocks and between these state variable shocks
(ωp , ωn , ωlp , ωln ) ought to be zero in theory and the table shows that they are economically
indeed close to zero.

                                              28
V.B       Risk Aversion
      Recall that we assume risk aversion to be spanned by 6 financial instruments. We
report some properties of these financial instruments in the Online Appendix and offer a
summary here. First, all of the instruments are highly persistent. This high correlation
is the main reason we use a stochastically detrended dividend (AR(1)=0.982) or earnings
yield (AR(1)=0.984) series rather than the actual dividend or earnings yield series.12
Second, the various instruments are positively correlated but the correlations never exceed
85%. Perhaps surprisingly, the term spread is also positively correlated with the other
instruments, even though it is generally believed that high term spreads indicate good
times, whereas the yield and variance instruments would tend to be high in bad times.
Third, 4 of the instruments show significant positive skewness. This is consistent with
our assumptions that the risk aversion dynamics are positively skewed through its gamma
distributed shock (see Equation (31)), and we need the linear spanning model to be
consistent with the assumed dynamics for risk aversion. The term spread, and earnings
yields are significantly negatively skewed so that a negative weight on one of them could
also induce positive skewness in risk aversion, but their skewness coefficients are much
smaller in magnitude.
      Table 5 reports the reduced form estimates in the spanning relation. The system
estimates 8 parameters with 37 moment conditions. The test of the over-identifying
restrictions fails to reject at the 5% level but we investigate the fit of the model along
various dimensions in more detail later. The significant determinants of the risk aversion
process are the credit spread, realized equity return and corporate bond return variances
and the equity return risk neutral variance. The positive coefficient on the risk neutral and
the negative coefficient on the physical realized equity return variances is consistent with
the idea that the variance risk premium may be quite informative about risk aversion in
financial markets (see also Bekaert and Hoerova, 2016). The implied risk aversion process
shows a 0.40 correlation with the NBER indicator and is thus highly counter-cyclical.13
      In Table 6, we estimate the dynamic properties of the risk aversion process according
to Equation (29). All the parameters are estimated by OLS, except for the σqq parameter,
which is delivered by the GMM estimation (see Section III.C). The process shows mod-
erate persistence (an autocorrelation coefficient of 0.67), and the conditional mean shows
significant positive loadings on qt and nt which account for 80% and 19% of the variation
  12
      The dividend yield shows a secular decline over part of the sample that induces much autocorrelation.
This decline is likely due to the introduction of a tax policy favoring repurchases rather than dividends
as a means of returning cash to shareholders, and therefore not likely informative about risk aversion (see
e.g. Boudoukh et.al, 2007).
   13
      We also estimated the system using the detrended dividend yield instead of the earnings yield, which
produces very similar results. The two resulting qt processes are 98% correlated.


                                                    29
in the conditional mean, respectively. Risk aversion shocks do not load significantly on
the macro-economic uncertainty shocks and therefore most of their variation is driven
by the risk aversion specific shock. It appears that economic models that impose a very
tight link between aggregate fundamentals and risk aversion, such as pure habit models
(Campbell and Cochrane, 1999) are missing important variation in actual risk aversion.
In addition, risk aversion is much less persistent than the risk aversion implied by these
models; the autocorrelation coefficient of the surplus ratio process in the CC model is
0.99 at the monthly level; the first-order autocorrelation coefficient of qt derived in this
paper is 0.67.
      While the test of the over-identifying restrictions fails to reject, Table 7 examines
in more detail how well the estimated dynamic system fits critical asset price moments in
the data. The moments are reported in monthly units; for example, the monthly equity
premium produced by the model is 78.5 basis points. All model moments are within
two standard errors of the data moments and most are within one standard error of the
data moment.14 The model over-estimates the equity premium but is still close to within
one standard error of the data moment. The corporate bond risk premium is only 4
basis points higher than the data moment. The model implied variance moments are
all quite close to their empirical counterparts. Finally, the table also reports the model-
                                                                             2          3
implied variance and unscaled skewness of the risk aversion innovation, σqq    qt and 2σqq qt
(respectively).
      Figure 3 graphs the empirical and model implied risk neutral variance. While the
model fails to match the distinct spikes of the VIX in several crisis periods, the fit is
remarkably good, with the correlation between the two series being 90.06%.


VI       Risk Aversion, Uncertainty and Asset Prices
     In this section, we first characterize the link between risk aversion and macroe-
conomic uncertainty, and asset prices. We compare the time variation in risk aversion
and macroeconomic uncertainty and document how our measures correlate with extant
measures of uncertainty and risk aversion.


  14
     Bootstrapped standard errors for the five asset price moments (equity risk premium, equity phys-
ical variance, equity risk-neutral variance, corporate bond risk premium, and corporate bond physical
variance) use different block sizes to accommodate different serial auto-correlations, to ensure that the
sampled blocks are approximately i.i.d.. In particular, Politis and Romano (1995) (and later discussed
in Politis and White, 2004) suggest looking for the smallest integer after which the correlogram appears
negligible, where the significance of the autocorrelation estimates is tested using the Ljung-Box Q Test
(Ljung and Box, 1978).


                                                   30
VI.A      Risk Aversion, Macro-Economic Uncertainty and the First
          and Second Moments of Asset Returns
     Figure 4 graphs the risk aversion process (black line), which in our model is:

                                    raBEX
                                      t   = γ exp(qt ).                                (54)

The weak countercyclicality of the process is immediately apparent with risk aversion
spiking in all three recessions, but also showing distinct peaks in other periods. The
highest risk aversion of 6.31 is reached at the end of February in 2009, at the height of
the Great Recession. However, the risk aversion process also peaks in the October 1987
crash, the August 1998 crisis (Russia default and LTCM collapse), after the TMT bull
market ended in August 2002 and in August 2011 (Euro area debt crisis).
       How important is risk aversion for asset prices? In this article’s model, the priced
state variables for risk premiums and variances are those entering the conditional covari-
ance between asset returns and the pricing kernel and therefore are limited to risk aversion
qt , the macro-economic uncertainty state variables, pt and nt and the loss rate variability
lpt . In Table 8, we report the loadings of risk premiums and variances on the 4 state
variables. To help interpret these coefficients, we scaled the projection coefficients by the
standard deviation of the state variables so that they can be interpreted as the response
to a one standard deviation move in the state variable. For the equity premium, by far
the most important state variable is qt which has an effect more than 10 times larger
than that of nt . The effects of pt and lpt are trivially small. The economic effect of a
one standard deviation change in qt is large representing 52 basis points at the monthly
level (this is a bit lower than the average monthly equity premium). For the corporate
bond premium, nt and qt are again the most important state variables. A one standard
deviation increase in nt increases the monthly corporate bond risk premium by 5 basis
points, representing more than 10% of the average monthly premium. The effect of qt is
about twice as large as the effect of nt .
       The coefficients for variances are somewhat harder to interpret, but nt and qt remain
the most important state variables with the former (latter) more important for corporate
bond (equity) variances. The one variable for which qt is only the third most important
variable is the corporate bond physical variance, which reacts more strongly to nt , and
lpt . Recall that lpt measures the idiosyncratic component in corporate loss rates but that
loss rates load very significantly on our business cycle variable.
       Because the relationship between asset prices and state variables is affine, we also
compute a variance decomposition. That is, we compute, for x ∈ {p, n, v, q}, coefficient on xt ×


                                            31
Cov(xt ,M omt )
 V ar(M omt )
              where M om represents an asset price moment like the equity risk premium,
or corporate bond physical variance. These variance proportions add up to one. In the
model, 96% of the equity risk premium’s variance is driven by risk aversion; only 72.5%
of the corporate bond risk premium is driven by risk aversion, while more than 27% is
accounted for by “bad” macro-economic uncertainty. The physical equity variance is pre-
dominantly driven by risk aversion (69%) while 89% of the corporate bond return’s phys-
ical variance is driven by bad macroeconomic uncertainty. Nevertheless, macro-economic
uncertainty also accounts for 31% of the variance of the physical equity variance. It
would be logical that the risk neutral variance would load more on risk aversion and less
on macroeconomic uncertainty than the physical variance and this is indeed the case, with
risk aversion accounting for 85% of the variance of the risk neutral variance.
      Bekaert, Hoerova and Lo Duca (2013) argue that the variance risk premium houses
much information about risk aversion. Is this true in our model? To answer this question,
we compute the model-implied variance risk premium as the difference between the risk
neutral variance and the physical variance. A projection on the 4 state variables reveals
that 96.8% of the variance of the variance risk premium is accounted for by risk aversion.
Conversely, regressing risk aversion on the variance premium, the coefficient is 160.40
with a t-stat of 93.37, and the R2 is 96.2%. Through the lens of our model, the variance
premium is clearly a good proxy for risk aversion. However, they are not identical. As
Cheng (2019) discusses in detail, the estimates of the variance risk premium occasionally
go negative but our risk aversion process never does.
      Finally, because the state variables perfectly explain conditional first and second
moments of asset returns in the model, they should help predict realized returns and
variances in the data. We test this in Table 9. We regress realized monthly excess returns
and variances in both the equity and corporate bond markets on 1) the 4 state variables,
or 2) the model-implied conditional moment (either the conditional risk premium or the
conditional variance). Not imposing the model restrictions on how the state variables
combine to the model implied conditional moment, slightly decreases the adjusted R2 ,
but for equity returns the R2 decreases strongly from 5.5% to 0.1%. In this case, the
coefficient on the model implied moment is about 0.61 and not significantly different
from 1, but it is significantly different from zero. For corporate bond risk premiums, the
coefficient is only borderline significantly different from zero. Not surprisingly, the R2 s
are higher for the realized equity and corporate bond variances hovering around 20–25%.
The coefficients on the model-implied conditional moments are higher than 1 in this case.
      When investigating the coefficients of individual state variables, risk aversion sig-
nificantly predicts equity returns and both realized variances. Bad economic uncertainty
predicts the realized variances and equity returns, the earlier with a negative sign. The

                                            32
latter result is reminiscent of a result in Bekaert and Hoerova (2014). They show that the
variance risk premium predicts stock returns with a positive sign whereas uncertainty, as
measured by an estimate of the conditional variance in the stock market, predicts stock
returns with a negative sign. As nt is highly correlated with the stock market physical
variance and qt with the variance risk premium, this result is therefore no surprise. The
loss rate variance has an intuitive positive coefficient in the variance and corporate bond
return regressions but is not statistically significantly different from zero. However, it
predicts equity returns with a negative sign, with the coefficient significant at the 10%
level. The last line reports correlations of the model-implied moments with the NBER
recession indicator, showing all of them to be significantly countercyclical.
      Given the vast literature on return predictability, it is informative to contrast the
predictive power of our model implied premiums with the predictive power of the usual
instruments used in the literature. We do this exercise out of sample as the literature
has shown huge biases due to in sample over-fitting (Goyal and Welch, 2008). Our model
premium candidates are either derived from a projection of excess returns on the 4 state
variables (Model 2) or the actual model-implied risk premium (Model 1). We consider
three empirical models, depending on the instruments used: 1) earning yield, 2) earnings
yield, term spread and credit spread, 3) physical uncertainty and variance risk premium
estimate. For equity (corporate bond) returns, we use the physical uncertainty derived
from equity (corporate bond) returns. We then generate out-of-sample predictions for the
risk premiums according to the various empirical models by starting the sample after five
years of data and then running rolling samples to generate predictions from the five-year
point to one month before the end of the sample. For the model implied risk premiums,
Model 1 uses whatever the model predicts the premium to be. For Model 2, the projections
are also conducted in a rolling fashion, but note that the construction of the state variables
uses information from the full sample. With those competing risk premium estimates in
hand, we then run simple horse races over the full sample by estimating:

  ret+1 − rft = a Mod(t, i) + (1 − a) Emp Mod(t, j) + et+1 , for i = 1, 2, j = 1, 2, 3.   (55)

The results are reported in Table 10. The table then reports the optimal weight on
Mod (1) or Mod (2), with the complement of the weight being on Emp Mod (1), (2), or
(3). Using the implied risk premiums form the model (Model 1) clearly outperforms the
empirical model for equity returns with the “a”-coefficients being well over 0.50, varying
between 0.73 and 0.85. For corporate bond returns, the “a”-coefficient varies between 0.45
and 0.56, with all “a”-coefficients highly statistically different from zero. Thus, while the
data suggest that the model implied risk premiums are very useful in forecasting excess


                                             33
corporate bond returns out of sample, the empirical instruments yield information about
risk premiums that is equally important.
      Model 2 fares less well, with the coefficients only being above 0.5 for the equity
return regressions when the model is pitted against empirical models 2 and 3. Yet, the
“a”-coefficients remain statistically significant different from zero in all cases except for
corporate bond returns when pitted against the first instrument set. The “a”-coefficients
vary between 0.36 and 0.56 in the other 5 cases. We conclude that our model seems to
capture the predictable variation better, or at least as well, than the fitted values extracted
from standard instruments used in the literature. While the model premium is not strictly
out of sample, the model imposes numerous restrictions relative to the empirical models.


VI.B      Interpreting Economic Uncertainty
      An advantage of the risk aversion process we estimated is that because of its de-
pendence on financial instruments it can be computed at even a daily level. In contrast,
our filtered macro-economic uncertainty variables were extracted from industrial produc-
tion which is only available at the monthly level. Here we consider whether we can use
the financial instruments to approximate macro uncertainty. First, total macro-economic
uncertainty, the conditional variance of industrial production growth, is a function of
                     2       2
both pt and nt , σθp   pt + σθn nt , where the coefficient estimates of σθp and σθn are pro-
vided in Table 1. In Table 11, we show the coefficients from a regression of uncertainty
on the financial instruments used to span risk aversion and two additional instruments,
the detrended dividend yield and realized variances of speculative bond returns. The
R2 is almost 50% and uncertainty loads significantly on all instruments except for the
realized equity and speculative bond return variances. Unlike the risk aversion process,
uncertainty loads very strongly on both credit spreads and the physical corporate bond
variance. The term spread also has a significant negative effect on uncertainty (and no
effect on risk aversion). This makes sense as flattening yield curves are associated with
future economic downturns. The table also reports regressions from the two components
in macro-economic uncertainty, bad and good uncertainty, onto the instruments. Clearly,
the variation in macro-economic uncertainty is dominated by the bad component and the
coefficients for the bad component projection coefficients are very similar to those of total
uncertainty. We also report the results from a variance decomposition applied to the
fitted values of the regression. The credit spread explains almost 63% of the explained
uncertainty variation. The dividend and earnings yield variables likely offset one another
partially with one contributing a positive, the other a negative amount to the total vari-
ation but jointly the equity yield variables still explain close to 20%. Finally, the risk


                                              34
neutral equity variance and the physical corporate bond return variance each contribute
about 13-14% of the explained variation of uncertainty.
     From this analysis, we create an uncertainty index representing the part of total
uncertainty that is explained by the financial instruments:

                                    uncBEX
                                       t   = χunc0 zt .                                 (56)

       In Figure 4, we graph the financial instrument proxies to uncertainty and risk aver-
sion for comparison. The correlation between actual uncertainty and risk aversion is 51%;
when we use the proxy the correlation increases to 70%. Obviously, most of the time
crisis periods feature both high uncertainty and high risk aversion. There are exceptions
however. For example, the October 1987 crash happened during a time of relatively low
economic uncertainty. It also appears that at the end of the 90s, macro-uncertainty seems
to secularly increase, consistent with the Great Moderation ending around that time (see
also Baele et al., 2015).
       Bloom (2009) has argued that uncertainty precedes bad economic outcomes. We
regress future real industrial production growth at various horizons on our uncertainty
index—its financial proxy and the actual one—and the risk aversion process. In addition,
we use the VIX as suggested in Bloom (2009). The results are in Table 12. We use Hodrick
(1992) standard errors to accommodate the overlap in the data. Panel A shows univariate
results. All indices predict growth with a negative sign at the one month, one quarter
and one year horizons. Our financial instrument uncertainty index generates the highest
R2 by far. This suggests that it is indeed macro uncertainty predicting output growth,
with the VIX having much lower predictive power in univariate regressions. The actual
macroeconomic uncertainty (Column “unctrue ”) exhibits substantially more predictive
power than the VIX (Column “QV AR”), but still substantially less than the combination
of financial instruments most correlated with it (Column “uncBEX ”). This is likely due to
the important role played by the credit spread in uncBEX ; with the credit spread known
to predict future economic activity (see De Santis, 2018, and the references therein).
       This result is confirmed in multivariate regressions. In Panel B, we use our risk
aversion index (raBEX ), “financial instruments” uncertainty index (uncBEX ), and the
VIX simultaneously. The “financial instruments” uncertainty index is statistically signif-
icant for all horizons, whereas risk aversion (with a positive sign) and the VIX squared
(with a negative sign) are significant at the quarterly horizon and beyond. Thus, our
uncertainty index dominates the VIX index in terms of its predictive power for real activ-
ity. In Panel C, the “financial instruments” uncertainty index is replaced by the actual
economic uncertainty. The latter variable is statistically significant at all three horizons.


                                             35
However, the predictive power of the multivariate model drops substantially at all hori-
zons being only 1/4 to 2/3’s of that present in Panel B (by 24% ∼ 64%). Not surprisingly,
Panel D shows that the “financial instruments” uncertainty proxy also dominates actual
economic uncertainty (unctrue ), when both are present. The actual economic uncertainty
is insignificant at all horizons.
       Finally, we also examine the correlation between lpt , the idiosyncratic variance com-
ponent of corporate bond loss rates, with financial instruments, but the R2 in such a
regression is only 9% (see the Online Appendix for detailed results).


VI.C       Correlations with Extant Measures
      In this section, we examine the correlation of our risk aversion and uncertainty in-
dices with existing measures. For risk aversion, we consider three categories: risk aversion
indices based on “fundamental” habit models, sentiment indices and commercially avail-
able risk aversions indices. For uncertainty, we focus on the recent uncertainty index
developed by Jurado, Ludvigson and Ng (2015) and the Baker, Bloom and Davis (2016)
political uncertainty measure.
      Recall that in an external habit model such as Campbell and Cochrane (1999),
the curvature of the utility function is a negative affine function of the log “consump-
tion surplus ratio,” which in turns follows a heteroskedastic autoregressive process with
shocks perfectly correlated with consumption growth. We follow Wachter (2006) and cre-
ate a “fundamental” risk aversion process from consumption data and CC’s parameter
estimates, which we denote by RACC . Table 13 shows that it is only weakly correlated
with our risk aversion measure but the correlation is still significantly different from zero.
Work by Bekaert, Engstrom and Grenadier (2010) and Martin (2017) also suggests the
existence of more variable risk aversion in financial markets, imperfectly correlated with
fundamentals.15
      The behavioral finance literature suggests that the sentiment of retail investors may
drive asset prices and cause non-fundamental price swings. As a well-known representative
of this work, we use the sentiment index from Baker and Wurgler (2006). The index is
based on the first principal component of six (standardized) sentiment proxies including:
the closed-end fund discount, the NYSE share turnover, the number and the average first-
day returns of IPOs, the share of equity issues in total equity and debt issues, and the
dividend premium (the log-difference of the average market-to-book ratios of payers and

  15
     When computing the same correlations, with our alternative risk aversion index (using the dividend
rather than the earnings yield as the equity yield instrument), all the correlations in Table 13 are quite
similar (but mostly slightly higher in absolute magnitude).


                                                   36
nonpayers). We denote their index by SentBW . High values mean positive sentiment so we
expect a negative correlation with our risk aversion indicator, and indeed the correlation
is significantly negative but still relatively small at -0.17.
      Because the Baker-Wurgler index relies on financial data, it may not directly reflect
the sentiment of retail investors. Lemmon and Portnaiguina (2006) and Qiu and Welch
(2006) therefore suggest using a consumer sentiment index such as the Michigan Consumer
Sentiment Index (MCSI). The correlation with this index is also negative, as expected,
and larger in absolute magnitude at -0.28. Hence, our risk aversion index correlates more
with a pure consumer sentiment index than with SentBW , derived from financial variables.
      Finally, many financial services companies create their own risk appetite indices. As
a well-known example, we obtain data on the Credit Suisse First Boston Risk Appetite
Index (RAI). The indicator draws on the correlation between risk appetite and the rel-
ative performance of safe assets (proxied by seven to ten-year government bonds) and
risky assets (equities and emerging market bonds). The underlying assumption is that an
increasing risk preference shifts the demand from less risky investments to assets associ-
ated with higher risks, thus pushing their prices up relative to low-risk assets (and vice
versa). The indicator is based on a cross-sectional linear regression of excess returns of
64 international stock and bond indices on their risk, approximated by historic volatility.
The slope of the regression line represents the risk appetite index. The index shows a
-0.48 correlation with our index and is thus highly correlated with our concept of risk
aversion.
      Our uncertainty measure only uses industrial production data. Jurado, Ludvigson
and Ng (2015) use the weighted sum of the conditional volatilities of 132 financial and
macroeconomic series, with the bulk of them being macroeconomic. They have three ver-
sions of the measure depending on the forecasting horizon, but we focus on the one month
horizon, which is most consistent with our model. The correlation with our uncertainty
index is highly significant and substantial at 81%.
      Macroeconomic uncertainty may be correlated with political uncertainty, which has
recently been proposed as a source of asset market risk premiums (Pastor and Veronesi,
2013). Baker, Bloom and Davis (2016) create a policy uncertainty measure, based on
newspaper coverage frequency, which we denote by U CBBD . The index shows a highly
significant correlation of 0.34 with our uncertainty index. One advantage of U CBBD
relative to the Jurado, Ludvigson, and Ng (2015) measure is that it can also be computed
at the daily frequency. However, our financial proxy to uncertainty can also be computed
at the daily frequency.




                                            37
VI.D      Daily Risk Aversion and Uncertainty Indices
      Monthly indices may hide important variation within the month in uncertainty and
risk aversion. To demonstrate this, Figure 5 shows how the indices behaved around two
critical events in the recent global financial crisis plotting 2-month intervals of our daily
risk aversion index (top plots) and our daily financial instrument proxy to macroeconomic
uncertainty (bottom plots): the Bear Stearns collapse and bail out and the Lehman Broth-
ers bankruptcy. While there are some local peaks in risk aversion and uncertainty around
the Bear Stearns bailout on March 14, 2008, the overall effects are relatively small. Dur-
ing August and September 2008, both risk aversion and especially uncertainty gradually
increase, with risk aversion rising to around the same level that it reached during the Bear
Stearns’ collapse. However, as the systemic nature of the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy
became clear to financial market participants, both risk aversion and especially uncer-
tainty continued to rise, and remained relatively elevated. Risk aversion shows two major
peaks towards the end of October and the end of November, corresponding to the after-
math of central banks around the world acknowledging the ramifications of the crisis by
cutting their interest rates at the end of October and the fall out for car companies at
the end of November.


VII       Conclusion
      We formulate a no arbitrage model where fundamentals such as industrial produc-
tion, consumption earnings ratios, corporate loss rates, etc. follow dynamic processes that
admit time-variation in both conditional variances and the shape of the shock distribution.
The agent in the economy takes this time-varying uncertainty into account when pricing
equity and corporate bonds, but also faces preference shocks imperfectly correlated with
fundamentals. The state variables in the economy that drive risk premiums and higher
order moments of asset prices involve risk aversion, good and bad economic uncertainty
and the conditional variance of loss rates on corporate bonds. We use equity and cor-
porate bond returns, physical equity and corporate bond return variances and the risk
neutral equity variance to estimate the model parameters and simultaneously derive a risk
aversion spanning process. Risk aversion is a function of 6 financial instruments, namely
the term spread, credit spread, a detrended earnings yield, realized and risk-neutral equity
return variance, and realized corporate bond return variance.
      We find that risk aversion loads significantly and positively on the risk neutral equity
variance and the realized corporate bond variance, and negatively on the realized equity
return variance. Risk aversion is much less persistent than the risk aversion process


                                             38
implied by standard habit models. It is the main driver of the equity premium and the
equity return risk neutral variance. It also accounts for 68% of the conditional variance of
equity returns with the remainder accounted for by bad macro uncertainty. For corporate
bonds, bad economic uncertainty plays a relatively more important role. It accounts for
27% of the risk premium variation and 89% of the corporate bond physical variance.
Hence, different asset markets reflect differential information about risk appetite versus
economic uncertainty. Our model-implied risk premiums often beat standard predictors of
equity and corporate bond returns in an out-of-sample horse race, but their performance
for corporate bonds is weaker than for equities.
      While our risk aversion measure is correlated with some existing risk appetite and
sentiment indices, the simplest approximation may be the variance risk premium in equity
markets which is 96% correlated with our risk appetite index.
      Because the spanning instruments are financial data, we can track the risk aversion
index at higher frequencies. Similarly, we obtain a financial proxy to economic uncertainty
(the conditional variance of industrial production growth) which can be obtained at the
daily frequency as well. This measure is 81% correlated with the well-known Jurado,
Ludvigson and Ng (2015) measure, extracted from macro data. The financial proxy to
economic uncertainty predicts output growth negatively and significantly and is a much
stronger predictor of output growth than is the VIX. We plan to make both our risk
aversion and uncertainty indices available on our websites and update them regularly,
which could potentially be useful for both academic researchers and practitioners.
      Our work has important implications for the dynamic asset pricing literature. Clearly,
to provide a unified framework explaining asset return dynamics in different asset classes,
both changes in risk aversion and economic uncertainty must be accommodated. In addi-
tion, aggregate risk aversion must contain a relatively non-persistent variable component.
      Finally, we only used risky asset classes to create the risk appetite index, omit-
ting Treasury bonds, arguably an additional important asset class. In principle, given
a process for inflation our model should also price Treasury bonds. In fact, Cremers,
Fleckenstein and Gandhi (2017) claim that an implied volatility measure computed from
Treasury bonds predicts the level and volatility of macro-economic indicators better than
stock market implied indicators do. However, for our purposes, the problem with consid-
ering Treasuries as determining general risk aversion is that they are often viewed as the
benchmark “safe” assets and are subject to occasional flights-to safety (see Baele et al,
2018). This makes it ex-ante unlikely that a simple pricing model such as ours can jointly
price the three assets classes. We therefore defer incorporating Treasury bonds to future
work.



                                            39
References
 [1] Adrian, T., Boyarchenko, N., and Giannone, D. Vulnerable growth. American Economic
     Review (2018).
 [2] Adrian, T., and Shin, H. S. Procyclical leverage and value-at-risk. The Review of Financial
     Studies 27, 2 (2013), 373–403.
 [3] Adrian, T., Shin, H. S., Adrian, T., and Shin, H. S. Money, liquidity and monetary policy.
     American Economic Review (2009).
 [4] Aıt-Sahalia, Y., and Lo, A. W. Nonparametric risk management and implied risk aversion.
     Journal of Econometrics 94, 1 (2000), 9–51.
 [5] Andersen, T. G., Bollerslev, T., Diebold, F. X., and Labys, P. Modeling and forecasting
     realized volatility. Econometrica 71, 2 (2003), 579–625.
 [6] Baele, L., Bekaert, G., Cho, S., Inghelbrecht, K., and Moreno, A. Macroeconomic
     regimes. Journal of Monetary Economics 70 (2015), 51–71.
 [7] Baele, L., Bekaert, G., Inghelbrecht, K., and Wei, M. Flights to safety. Working Paper
     (2018).
 [8] Baker, M., and Wurgler, J. Investor sentiment and the cross-section of stock returns. The
     Journal of Finance 61, 4 (2006), 1645–1680.
 [9] Baker, S. R., Bloom, N., and Davis, S. J. Measuring economic policy uncertainty. The
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 131, 4 (2016), 1593–1636.
[10] Bakshi, G., Kapadia, N., and Madan, D. Stock return characteristics, skew laws, and the
     differential pricing of individual equity options. The Review of Financial Studies 16, 1 (2003),
     101–143.
[11] Bakshi, G., and Madan, D. Spanning and derivative-security valuation. Journal of financial
     economics 55, 2 (2000), 205–238.
[12] Bakshi, G., and Madan, D. A theory of volatility spreads. Management Science 52, 12 (2006),
     1945–1956.
[13] Bakshi, G., and Wu, L. The behavior of risk and market prices of risk over the nasdaq bubble
     period. Management Science 56, 12 (2010), 2251–2264.
[14] Bansal, R., Kiku, D., Shaliastovich, I., and Yaron, A. Volatility, the macroeconomy, and
     asset prices. The Journal of Finance 69, 6 (2014), 2471–2511.
[15] Bansal, R., and Yaron, A. Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset pricing puzzles.
     The journal of Finance 59, 4 (2004), 1481–1509.
[16] Bates, D. S. Maximum likelihood estimation of latent affine processes. The Review of Financial
     Studies 19, 3 (2006), 909–965.
[17] Bekaert, G., and Engstrom, E. Asset return dynamics under habits and bad environment–good
     environment fundamentals. Journal of Political Economy 125, 3 (2017), 713–760.
[18] Bekaert, G., Engstrom, E., and Grenadier, S. R. Stock and bond returns with moody
     investors. Journal of Empirical Finance 17, 5 (2010), 867–894.
[19] Bekaert, G., Engstrom, E., and Xing, Y. Risk, uncertainty, and asset prices. Journal of
     Financial Economics 91, 1 (2009), 59–82.
[20] Bekaert, G., and Hoerova, M. What do asset prices have to say about risk appetite and
     uncertainty? Journal of Banking & Finance 67 (2016), 103–118.
[21] Bekaert, G., Hoerova, M., and Lo Duca, M. Risk, uncertainty and monetary policy. Journal
     of Monetary Economics 60, 7 (2013), 771–788.


                                                  40
[22] Bernanke, B. S., Boivin, J., and Eliasz, P. Measuring the effects of monetary policy: a
     factor-augmented vector autoregressive (favar) approach. The Quarterly journal of economics 120,
     1 (2005), 387–422.
[23] Bernoth, K., and Erdogan, B. Sovereign bond yield spreads: A time-varying coefficient ap-
     proach. Journal of International Money and Finance 31, 3 (2012), 639–656.
[24] Besley, T., and Coate, S. Centralized versus decentralized provision of local public goods: a
     political economy approach. Journal of public economics 87, 12 (2003), 2611–2637.
[25] Bliss, R. R., and Panigirtzoglou, N. Option-implied risk aversion estimates. The journal of
     finance 59, 1 (2004), 407–446.
[26] Bloom, N. The impact of uncertainty shocks. Econometrica 77, 3 (2009), 623–685.
[27] Bollerslev, T., Gibson, M., and Zhou, H. Dynamic estimation of volatility risk premia and
     investor risk aversion from option-implied and realized volatilities. Journal of Econometrics 160, 1
     (2011), 235–245.
[28] Bollerslev, T., Tauchen, G., and Zhou, H. Expected stock returns and variance risk premia.
     The Review of Financial Studies 22, 11 (2009), 4463–4492.
[29] Bollerslev, T., and Todorov, V. Tails, fears, and risk premia. The Journal of Finance 66, 6
     (2011), 2165–2211.
[30] Boudoukh, J., Michaely, R., Richardson, M., and Roberts, M. R. On the importance
     of measuring payout yield: Implications for empirical asset pricing. The Journal of Finance 62, 2
     (2007), 877–915.
[31] Brandt, M. W., and Wang, K. Q. Time-varying risk aversion and unexpected inflation. Journal
     of Monetary Economics 50, 7 (2003), 1457–1498.
[32] Britten-Jones, M., and Neuberger, A. Option prices, implied price processes, and stochastic
     volatility. The Journal of Finance 55, 2 (2000), 839–866.
[33] Broadie, M., Chernov, M., and Johannes, M. Model specification and risk premia: Evidence
     from futures options. The Journal of Finance 62, 3 (2007), 1453–1490.
[34] Campbell, J. Y., and Cochrane, J. H. By force of habit: A consumption-based explanation of
     aggregate stock market behavior. Journal of Political Economy 107, 2 (1999), 205–251.
[35] Campbell, J. Y., and Shiller, R. J. The dividend-price ratio and expectations of future divi-
     dends and discount factors. The Review of Financial Studies 1, 3 (1988), 195–228.
[36] Carr, P., and Wu, L. Analyzing volatility risk and risk premium in option contracts: A new
     theory. Journal of Financial Economics 120, 1 (2016), 1–20.
[37] Cheng, I.-H. The vix premium. The Review of Financial Studies 32, 1 (2019), 180–227.
[38] Christiano, L. J., Motto, R., and Rostagno, M. Risk shocks. American Economic Review
     104, 1 (2014), 27–65.
[39] Cohn, A., Engelmann, J., Fehr, E., and Maréchal, M. A. Evidence for countercyclical risk
     aversion: an experiment with financial professionals. American Economic Review 105, 2 (2015),
     860–85.
[40] Coudert, V., and Gex, M. Does risk aversion drive financial crises? testing the predictive power
     of empirical indicators. Journal of Empirical Finance 15, 2 (2008), 167–184.
[41] Cremers, M., Fleckenstein, M., and Gandhi, P. Treasury yield implied volatility and real
     activity.
[42] Da, Z., Engelberg, J., and Gao, P. The sum of all fears investor sentiment and asset prices.
     The Review of Financial Studies 28, 1 (2014), 1–32.



                                                   41
[43] De Santis, R. A. Unobservable systematic risk, economic activity and stock market. Journal of
     Banking & Finance 97 (2018), 51–69.
[44] Drechsler, I., and Yaron, A. What’s vol got to do with it. The Review of Financial Studies
     24, 1 (2010), 1–45.
[45] Fagiolo, G., Napoletano, M., and Roventini, A. Are output growth-rate distributions fat-
     tailed? some evidence from oecd countries. Journal of Applied Econometrics 23, 5 (2008), 639–669.
[46] Gai, P., and Vause, N. Measuring investors risk appetite. International Journal of Central
     Banking (2006).
[47] Gambetti, L., Pappa, E., and Canova, F. The structural dynamics of us output and inflation:
     what explains the changes? Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 40, 2-3 (2008), 369–388.
[48] Gilchrist, S., and Zakrajšek, E. Credit spreads and business cycle fluctuations. The American
     Economic Review 102, 4 (2012), 1692–1720.
[49] Hamilton, J. D. Analysis of time series subject to changes in regime. Journal of econometrics 45,
     1-2 (1990), 39–70.
[50] Harvey, C. R. The real term structure and consumption growth. Journal of Financial Economics
     22, 2 (1988), 305–333.
[51] He, Z., and Krishnamurthy, A. Intermediary asset pricing. American Economic Review 103, 2
     (2013), 732–70.
[52] Hodrick, R. J. Dividend yields and expected stock returns: Alternative procedures for inference
     and measurement. The Review of Financial Studies 5, 3 (1992), 357–386.
[53] Jackwerth, J. C. Recovering risk aversion from option prices and realized returns. The Review
     of Financial Studies 13, 2 (2000), 433–451.
[54] Joslin, S., Le, A., and Singleton, K. J. Why gaussian macro-finance term structure models
     are (nearly) unconstrained factor-vars. Journal of Financial Economics 109, 3 (2013), 604–622.
[55] Jurado, K., Ludvigson, S. C., and Ng, S. Measuring uncertainty. The American Economic
     Review 105, 3 (2015), 1177–1216.
[56] Kamstra, M. J., Kramer, L. A., and Levi, M. D. Winter blues: A sad stock market cycle.
     American Economic Review 93, 1 (2003), 324–343.
[57] Kostakis, A., Magdalinos, T., and Stamatogiannis, M. P. Robust econometric inference for
     stock return predictability. The Review of Financial Studies 28, 5 (2015), 1506–1553.
[58] Lemmon, M., and Portniaguina, E. Consumer confidence and asset prices: Some empirical
     evidence. The Review of Financial Studies 19, 4 (2006), 1499–1529.
[59] Liu, J., Pan, J., and Wang, T. An equilibrium model of rare-event premia and its implication
     for option smirks. The Review of Financial Studies 18, 1 (2004), 131–164.
[60] Ljung, G. M., and Box, G. E. On a measure of lack of fit in time series models. Biometrika 65,
     2 (1978), 297–303.
[61] Longstaffa, F. A., and Piazzesib, M. Corporate earnings and the equity premium. Journal of
     Financial Economics 74 (2004), 401–421.
[62] Martin, I. What is the expected return on the market? The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132,
     1 (2017), 367–433.
[63] Menzly, L., Santos, T., and Veronesi, P. Understanding predictability. Journal of Political
     Economy 112, 1 (2004), 1–47.
[64] Miranda-Agrippino, S., and Rey, H. World asset markets and the global financial cycle. Tech.
     rep., 2015.


                                                 42
[65] Pan, J. The jump-risk premia implicit in options: Evidence from an integrated time-series study.
     Journal of financial economics 63, 1 (2002), 3–50.
[66] Pástor, L., and Veronesi, P. Political uncertainty and risk premia. Journal of Financial
     Economics 110, 3 (2013), 520–545.
[67] Pflueger, C., Siriwardane, E., and Sunderam, A. A measure of risk appetite for the macroe-
     conomy. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research, 2018.
[68] Politis, D. N., and Romano, J. P. Bias-corrected nonparametric spectral estimation. Journal
     of time series analysis 16, 1 (1995), 67–103.
[69] Politis, D. N., and White, H. Automatic block-length selection for the dependent bootstrap.
     Econometric Reviews 23, 1 (2004), 53–70.
[70] Qiu, L., and Welch, I. Investor sentiment measures. Tech. rep., 2006.
[71] Rajan, R. G. Has finance made the world riskier? European Financial Management 12, 4 (2006),
     499–533.
[72] Rey, H. Dilemma not trilemma: the global financial cycle and monetary policy independence. Tech.
     rep., 2015.
[73] Rosenberg, J. V., and Engle, R. F. Empirical pricing kernels. Journal of Financial Economics
     64, 3 (2002), 341–372.
[74] Ross, S. The recovery theorem. The Journal of Finance 70, 2 (2015), 615–648.
[75] Santa-Clara, P., and Yan, S. Crashes, volatility, and the equity premium: Lessons from s&p
     500 options. The Review of Economics and Statistics 92, 2 (2010), 435–451.
[76] Smets, F., and Wouters, R. Shocks and frictions in us business cycles: A bayesian dsge approach.
     American economic review 97, 3 (2007), 586–606.
[77] Stock, J. H., and Watson, M. W. Forecasting using principal components from a large number
     of predictors. Journal of the American statistical association 97, 460 (2002), 1167–1179.
[78] Wachter, J. A. A consumption-based model of the term structure of interest rates. Journal of
     Financial Economics 79, 2 (2006), 365–399.
[79] Welch, I., and Goyal, A. A comprehensive look at the empirical performance of equity premium
     prediction. Review of Financial Studies 21, 4 (2008), 1455–1508.
[80] Xu, N. R. Global risk aversion and international return comovements. Working Paper (2017).




                                                 43
                         Table 1: The Dynamics of the Macro Factors

This tables reports parameter estimates from the model below using the monthly log growth rate of
U.S. industrial production from January 1947 to February 2015. This system involves latent processes
(good shape parameter governing positive skewness, pt , and bad shape parameter governing negative
skewness, nt ) and is estimated using the MLE-filtration methodology described in Bates (2006). Bold
(italic) coefficients have <5% (10%) p-values.

                       θt+1 = θ + ρθ (θt − θ) + mp (pt − 500) + mn (nt − n) + uθt+1
                       pt+1 = 500 + ρp (pt − 500) + σpp ωp,t+1
                       nt+1 = n + ρn (nt − n) + σnn ωn,t+1

, where

                                      uθt+1 = σθp ωp,t+1 − σθn ωn,t+1
                                     ωp,t+1 ∼ Γ̃(pt , 1)
                                    ωn,t+1 ∼ Γ̃(nt , 1)
                                        σpp > 0
                                       σnn > 0.

Standard errors are displayed in parentheses. Note that Row “ ωn,t loading” in Column “θt ”
corresponds to the parameter estimate of σθn , and the actual loading of θt on ωn,t is −σθn ; Row “ ωn,t
loading” in Column “pt ” (“nt ”) is +σpp (+σnn ).

                                               θt             pt           nt
                             mean           0.0000         500 (fix)    16.1421
                                           (0.0005)                     (2.1453)
                              AR            0.1310         0.9997        0.9108
                                           (0.0309)        (0.0192)     (0.0135)
                              mp            0.0000
                                           (0.0003)
                              mn           -0.0002
                                           (0.0000)
                         ωp,t loading       0.0001         0.5528
                                           (0.0000)        (0.0707)
                         ωn,t loading       0.0017                      2.1775
                                           (0.0001)                     (0.1503)
                              LL           2861.308
                              BIC          -5648.85
                              AIC          -5700.62




                                                     44
                     Table 2: The Dynamics of the Corporate Loss Rate

This table reports parameter estimates for the corporate loss rate model using monthly data from June
1984 to February 2015. The actual nominal payoff of a one-period zero-coupon defaultable (risky)
corporate bond at period t + 1 is C × Ft+1 where Ft+1 < 1 is an unknown fraction of the total promised
payment C. The nominal payment can be rewritten as, CFt+1 = exp(c + ln(Ft+1 )) = exp(c − lt+1 ).
Thus, lt+1 is −ln(Ft+1 ) = −ln(1 − Lt+1 ) where Lt+1 is corporate loss rate. The empirical proxy for Lt
is obtained using the following equality, DEFt × (1 − RECOVt ). Both the default rate DEFt and
recovery rate RECOVt pertain to the overall corporate bond market and are empirically constructed as
6-month trailing measures from 3-month trailing all-corporate bond default rate and monthly recovery
rate, respectively; both raw series are obtained from the Federal Reserve Board; (1 − RECOVt ) is the
monthly loss-given-default rate. The dynamic process of lt+1 is as follows:

                    lt+1   = l0 + ρll lt + mlp pt + mln nt + σlp ωp,t+1 + σln ωn,t+1 + ult+1
                   ult+1   = σllp ωlp,t+1 − σlln ωln,t+1
                 ωlp,t+1   ∼ Γ̃(lpt , 1),
                 ωln,t+1   ∼ Γ̃(ln, 1),

where the variance equation is,

                               lpt+1    =   lp + ρlp (lpt − lp) + σlplp ωlp,t+1 ,
                                   ln   > 0.

The mean equation is estimated by projection, the variance equation by Bates’ approximate
MLE-filtration. Standard errors are displayed in parentheses. Bold (italic) coefficients have <5% (10%)
p-values.

                                                   Mean:
                                 l0        ρll       mlp       mln
                              -0.0009   0.8306 1.95E-06 0.0001
                             (0.0017)   (0.0241) 3.57E-06 (0.0000)
                                        Shock Sensitivities:
                                σlp        σln       σllp      σlln
                              0.0000    0.0005 0.0006        0.0001
                             (0.0000) (0.0001) (0.0001) (0.0001)
                                    Shape Parameter Dynamics:
                                lp         ρlp      σlplp       ln
                             5.2153 0.8556 1.8615 103.58
                             (0.2566) (0.0126) (0.1809) (1.2566)
                                       Model Specifications:
                                LL        AIC       BIC
                             1814.51 -3617.01 -3593.58




                                                      45
                                   Table 3: Cash Flow Dynamics

This table shows the estimation results of cash flow dynamics. The dynamic processes of cash flow
variables are expressed in Equation (20) for the log earnings growth, gt+1 , Equation (23) for the log
consumption-earnings ratio, κt+1 , Equation (26) for the log dividend-earnings ratio, ηt+1 , and
Equation (32) for the inflation rate, πt+1 . These coefficients are estimated using simple linear
projections. Bold (italic) coefficients have <5% (10%) p-values. Robust errors are shown in parentheses.
The adjusted R2 of the conditional mean part (with information set t) is reported in the last row. The
sample period is 1986/06 to 2015/02 (345 months).

                                             earnings growth      log CE     log DE     inflation
                Coefficients on:                    gt+1            κt+1       ηt+1       πt+1
                     drift                        0.0207         0.1451     -0.0966      0.0031
                                                 (0.0277)        (0.0459)   (0.0340)    (0.0014)
                      AR                          0.6589         0.9303     0.9102       0.3973
                                                 (0.0433)        (0.0095)   (0.0109)    (0.0500)
                       θt                         1.5181          -0.2731     0.1765    -0.0718
                                                 (0.6933)        (0.8565)   (0.8880)    (0.0315)
                       pt                         -0.0001          0.0000     0.0000     0.0000
                                                 (0.0001)        (0.0001)   (0.0001)    (0.0000)
                       nt                          0.0005        0.0031     0.0037      -0.0001
                                                 (0.0007)        (0.0008)   (0.0008)    (0.0000)
                       lt                        -1.2318         2.3791     2.1250
                                                 (0.7376)        (0.9352)   (0.9596)
                       lpt                        0.0007         -0.0008    -0.0008
                                                 (0.0004)        (0.0004)   (0.0004)
                     ωp,t+1                       -0.0001          0.0001     0.0001     0.0000
                                                 (0.0001)        (0.0001)   (0.0001)    (0.0000)
                     ωn,t+1                      -0.0033         0.0066     0.0068       0.0001
                                                 (0.0011)        (0.0013)   (0.0014)    (0.0001)
                     ωlp,t+1                      -0.0005          0.0008     0.0008
                                                 (0.0010)        (0.0013)   (0.0013)
                     ωln,t+1                     -0.0002         0.0004     0.0004
                                                 (0.0001)        (0.0001)   (0.0002)
       Gaussian shock volatility                  0.0462         0.0558     0.0574      0.0023
                                                 (0.0018)        (0.0021)   (0.0022)    (0.0001)
       Adjusted R2 (conditional mean)             56.76%          98.34%     98.06%      20.85%




                                                  46
                                Table 4: Shock Correlation Matrix

The table provides a correlation matrix of the shock structure of the economy. The shocks are
summarized as follows:

                        ωp,t+1 :           good uncertainty shock         Γ(p
                                                                          e t , 1);
                        ωn,t+1 :            bad uncertainty shock         Γ(n
                                                                          e t , 1);
                        ωlp,t+1 :    cash flow good uncertainty shock     Γ(lp
                                                                          e t , 1);
                        ωln,t+1 :     cash flow bad uncertainty shock     Γ(v
                                                                          e n , 1);
                        ωg,t+1 :    log earnings growth-specific shock     N(0,1);
                        ωκ,t+1 :            log C/E-specific shock         N(0,1);
                        ωη,t+1 :            log D/E-specific shock         N(0,1);
                        ωq,t+1 :         risk aversion-specific shock     Γ(q
                                                                          e t , 1).

Bold (italic) coefficients have <5% (10%) p-values. The sample period is 1986/06 to 2015/02 (345
months).

         ωp      ωn         ωπ          ωlp        ωln        ωg             ωκ           ωη         ωq
  ωp     1    -0.1129     0.0000     -0.0011     -0.0007    0.0000        0.0000       0.0000      0.0000
  ωn              1       0.0000     -0.0912     -0.0828    0.0000         0.0000      0.0000     0.0000
  ωπ                         1       0.0943      -0.0442    0.1060        -0.0120      -0.0536     0.0360
  ωlp                                    1      -0.1877     0.0000        0.0000       0.0000      0.0296
  ωln                                               1       0.0000        0.0000       0.0000    -0.1789
  ωg                                                           1         -0.6765      -0.6589      0.0613
  ωκ                                                                          1       0.9863      -0.0413
  ωη                                                                                      1       -0.0351
  ωq                                                                                                  1




                                                    47
                      Table 5: Reduced-Form Risk Aversion Parameters

This table presents the GMM estimation results for risk aversion, qt = χ0 zt , using equity market and
corporate bond market asset prices. The utility curvature parameter, γ, is fixed at 2 in the estimation.
The first-step GMM weighting matrix is an identity matrix; the second-step weighting matrix builds on
the Newey-West spectral density function with 5-month lags, and then is shrunk towards an identity
matrix where the shrinkage parameter is 0.1. The GMM system also consistently estimates σqq .
Therefore, the system has 8 unknown parameters. The p-value of Hansen’s overidentification test (J
test) is calculated from the asymptotic χ2 distribution with the degree of freedom being 29 (37-8). Bold
(italic) coefficients have <5% (10%) p-values. Efficient standard errors are shown in parentheses. The
sample period is 1986/06 to 2015/02 (345 months).

                                                            qt
                                      Efficient GMM Estimators
                                  constant                0.059
                                                         (0.011)
                                     χtsprd               0.222
                                                         (0.511)
                                    χcsprd                1.948
                                                         (0.564)
                                   χEY 5yr                0.126
                                                         (0.265)
                                   χrvareq              -20.195
                                                         (0.460)
                                   χqvareq               61.196
                                                         (1.551)
                                   χrvarcb              105.721
                                                        (11.500)
                               Correlation with the NBER Indicator
                               ρ(qt , N BERt )            0.401
                                                         (0.045)
                                          Model Specifications
                                Hansen’s J              41.2904
                                   p-value               0.0649




                                                  48
                          Table 6: Structural Risk Aversion Parameters

This table presents the model-implied risk aversion process parameters. In the first panel, parameter
estimates are obtained either from simple projection or from the GMM procedure introduced earlier
(see Table 5). The second and third panels report the variance decomposition (VARC) results of the
conditional mean and shock structure of qbt+1 , respectively. In the second panel, VARC of a linear
variable x is as follows, V ARC = βx cov(b   y ,x)
                                         var(by ) ) where y
                                                          b= Ebt (b
                                                                  qt+1 ). VARC in the third panel is calculated
using the residual, yb = qbt+1 − E
                                 bt (b
                                     qt+1 ). Therefore, the sum of VARC in explaining the conditional mean
and the shock structure is 100% each. Bold (italic) coefficients have <5% (10%) p-values. Robust and
efficient standard errors are shown in parentheses. The sample period is 1986/06 to 2015/02 (345
months).

                     qbt+1 = q0 + ρqq qbt + ρqp pbt + ρqn n
                                                          bt + σqp ω            bn,t+1 + uqt+1 ,
                                                                   bp,t+1 + σqn ω
                    uqt+1 = σqq ωq,t+1 ,
                   ωq,t+1 = Γ(q
                            e t , 1).


                         Structual Risk Aversion Parameters, qt+1
                                       ◦ Projection                          ◦ GMM
               Constant      pt        nt         qt    ωp,t+1     ωn,t+1     ωq,t+1
         Est    -0.0886   0.0003 0.0037 0.6712          0.0004    -0.0004 0.1557
        (SE)   (0.0566) (0.0001) (0.0007) (0.0387) (0.0002) (0.0023) (0.0019)
             Conditional Mean Variance Decomposition (65% of Total Variance)
                             pt        nt         qt
       VARC                1.06%    18.74%     80.20%
              Shock Structure Variance Decomposition (35% of Total Variance)
                                                        ωp,t+1     ωn,t+1     ωq,t+1
       VARC                                             0.77%      0.02%     99.22%




                                                       49
                                        Table 7: Fit of Moments

 This table evaluates the fit of conditional moments of equity and corporate bond returns. Column
 “Model” reports the averages of the relevant model-implied conditional moments. The “Empirical
 Averages” represent the sample averages of the excess returns (for “Mom 1” and “Mom 4”), the sample
 averages of empirical conditional variances (for “Mom 2”, “Mom 3”, and “Mom 5”). For “Mom 6” and
 “Mom 7”, “Risk Aversion Innovation” is uqt+1 in Equation (29). The variance and unscaled skewness
 rows compare the average model-implied conditional moments with the unconditional moments. Bold
 numbers denote a distance of less than 1.645 standard errors from the corresponding empirical point
 estimate. Block bootstrapped standard errors are shown in parentheses; we allow the block size to vary
 for different moments: block sizes=[0 6 15 1 10] for Mom 1 to Mom 5, respectively. Asymptotic
 standard errors (standard deviation divided by square root of the number of observations) are reported
 for Mom 6 and Mom 7. The sample period is 1986/06 to 2015/02 (345 months).

                                             Moment             Model       Empirical Average       Boot.SE/SE
Mom   1                         Equity Risk Premium            0.00785          0.00530              (0.00246)
Mom   2                      Equity Physical Variance          0.00346          0.00286              (0.00051)
Mom   3                  Equity Risk-neutral Variance          0.00412          0.00397              (0.00049)
Mom   4                Corporate Bond Risk Premium             0.00429          0.00388              (0.00050)
Mom   5            Corporate Bond Physical Variance            0.00023          0.00024              (0.00003)
Mom   6            Risk Aversion Innovation Variance           0.00767          0.00929              (0.00195)
Mom   7   Risk Aversion Innovation Unscaled Skewness           0.00239          0.00216              (0.00111)




                           Table 8: Asset Prices and the State Variables

 This table reports the decomposition of model-implied conditional moments by the underlying dynamic
 drivers. The closed form solutions of each conditional moments are shown in the main text. The asset
 conditional moments are explained by four premium state variables, {pt , nt , lpt , qt }. This table presents
 1. scaled coefficients for interpretation purpose and 2. variance decomposition. 1. The coefficients are
 multiplied by standard deviations of the corresponding state variables of the same column and then
 multiplied by 10000. 2. VARC (as previously defined) is coefficient* Cov(x  t ,M omt )
                                                                        V ar(M omt ) where x ∈ {p, n, v, q}
 and M om is from Mom 1 to Mom 5. The variance decomposition is reported in a bold italic font. The
 sum of the four VARCs in the same add up to 100% by design.

              Model-implied coefficients of moments on state variables {pt , nt , lpt , qt }
                                       Moment       pt           nt             lpt                   qt
  Mom 1                 Equity Risk Premium       0.1473      4.0169         -0.0852               52.6093
                                       VARC 0.014%           4.014%       -0.033%                 96.004%
  Mom 2              Equity Physical Variance     0.0492      3.1165         0.0555                 5.6090
                                       VARC -0.042% 31.249% 0.148%                                68.645%
  Mom 3          Equity Risk-neutral Variance     0.0493      3.0708         0.0554                11.8273
                                       VARC 0.000% 14.717% 0.086%                                 85.197%
  Mom 4         Corporate Bond Risk Premium       0.0625      4.7338         0.1157                 9.8541
                                       VARC -0.025% 27.310% 0.187%                                72.528%
  Mom 5      Corporate Bond Physical Variance     0.0004      0.1610         0.0408                0.0101
                                       VARC -0.076% 88.928% 7.921%                                3.227%



                                                      50
                      Table 9: Predicting Realized Excess Returns and Variances

     This table reports the regression coefficients of realized future excess returns and realized variances of
     equity and corporate bond on model implications. In the first set of analysis, moment realizations are
     regressed on the four premium state variables, {pt , nt , lpt , qt }. The coefficients are multiplied by
     standard deviations of the corresponding state variables of the same column and then multiplied by
     100. In the second set of analysis, moment realizations are regressed on “Model-Implied Moments”
     which are risk premiums (for realized excess returns) and physical variances (for realized variances).
     Bold (italic) coefficients have <5% (10%) p-values. Adjusted R2 s are reported. Standard errors are
     shown in parentheses. The last line reports the correlation of the fitted value with a NBER dummy.
     The sample period is 1986/06 to 2015/02 (345 months).

                                  eq                          eq                   cb − rf                     cb
                                ret+1 − rft             RV ARt+1                 ret+1    t              RV ARt+1
          pt                -0.2263                  0.0146                  -0.0821                 -0.0007
                           (0.2649)                 (0.0313)                (0.0944)                (0.0015)
         nt                -1.1843                  0.1461                   0.0530                 0.0081
                           (0.2974)                 (0.0352)                (0.1059)                (0.0016)
         lpt               -0.4346                   0.0014                  0.0674                  0.0010
                           (0.2483)                 (0.0294)                (0.0885)                (0.0014)
          qt                0.8623                  0.1976                   0.0911                 0.0071
                           (0.2916)                 (0.0345)                (0.1039)                (0.0016)
Model-Implied Moments                   0.6108               2.1525                     0.1553                3.9400
                                       (0.2460)              (0.2025)                  (0.0907)               (0.4189)
     Adjusted R2             5.5%        0.1%        25.0%    24.8%           1.4%       0.9%         24.4%    20.6%
      ρ(N BER)                          0.4361                0.5798                    0.5651                 0.7041




                                                         51
                                Table 10: Out-Of-Sample Exercise

This table evaluates the ability of in-sample (see Section III.C) and out-of-sample risk premium
estimates of equity returns and corporate bond returns to explain realized future excess returns. To be
more specific, model-implied risk premium estimates (from the paper) and empirical risk premium
estimates (from a wide set of empirical predictors that are widely-used in the stock return predictability
literature) are both included to predict one-month future excess returns. 1. Model-implied risk
premium estimates, “Mod”: “Mod (1)” indicates the in-sample (full-sample) estimates of
model-implied risk premiums, the dynamics of which are determined by {pt , nt , lpt , qt }. “Mod (2)”
indicates the out-of-sample estimates of model-implied risk premiums: Define a 60-month rolling
window from t − 60 to t − 1, then project one-period ahead excess returns on the 4 premium state
                                                                rt+1 − rft ), repeatedly. 2. Empirical
variables, and then use the coefficient estimates to obtain Et (e
risk premium estimates, “Emp Mod”: We also consider three out-of-sample empirical risk
premium estimates that use three instruments sets (subsets of zt ), respectively: (1) 5-year detrended
earnings-price ratio, (2) 5-year detrended earnings-price ratio + term spread + credit spread, (3)
market return physical uncertainty plus variance risk premium estimate. The table then reports the
optimal combination of Mod and Emp Mod estimates which minimize the sum of squared innovations.
Least Square standard errors are shown in parentheses. Bold (italic) coefficients have <5% (10%)
p-values (against zero). The (full) sample period is 1986/06 to 2015/02 (345 months).

                                      Least-Square Estimate of a in
                      ret+1 − rft = a × Mod(t, i) + (1 − a) × Emp Mod(t, j) + et+1
                                            i = 1, 2; j = 1, 2, 3
                                           ◦ Equity:              ◦ Corporate Bond:
                                      Mod (1) Mod (2)             Mod (1) Mod (2)
                     Emp Mod (1) 0.7322           0.3987          0.4501     0.1051
                                      (0.0958) (0.0894)           (0.0740) (0.0778)
                     Emp Mod (2) 0.8483           0.5628          0.5509    0.3614
                                      (0.0878) (0.0848)           (0.0591) (0.0720)
                     Emp Mod (3) 0.7609           0.5619          0.5579    0.4507
                                      (0.0758) (0.0763)           (0.0579) (0.0836)




                                                   52
       Table 11: Projecting Macroeconomic Uncertainty on Financial Instruments

This table presents regression results of the estimated monthly macroeconomic uncertainty (from
industrial production growth) on a set of monthly asset prices; some are used to span the time-varying
risk aversion. “Total” is the total industrial production growth variance, which is a function of pt and
      2        2
nt , σθp pt + σθn nt . “×103 ” in the header means that the coefficients and their SEs reported are
multiplied by 1000 for reporting convenience.“VARC” reports the variance decomposition. Bold (italic)
coefficients have <5% (10%) p-values. Robust and efficient standard errors are shown in parentheses.
Adjusted R2 s are reported. The sample period is 1986/06 to 2015/02 (345 months).

                           (×103 )               (×103 )                (×103 )
                            Total     VARC       Upside      VARC      Downside       VARC
             constant      -0.009                 0.006                 -0.015
                           (0.005)               (0.000)                (0.005)
              χtsprd       -0.577     -2.33%     -0.004      2.70%      -0.573       -2.47%
                           (0.112)               (0.002)                (0.112)
              χcsprd        2.024     62.69%     -0.016      6.52%       2.040       62.32%
                           (0.246)               (0.004)                (0.246)
              χDY 5yr       2.343     41.57%     -0.162     139.79%      2.505       44.74%
                           (0.456)               (0.007)                (0.456)
              χEY 5yr      -0.609     -22.57%     0.048     -55.56%     -0.657       -24.28%
                           (0.189)               (0.003)                (0.189)
              χrvareq       -0.257    -3.76%      -0.002    -0.03%       -0.255      -3.65%
                           (0.620)               (0.010)                (0.621)
              χqvareq       1.190     13.25%      0.066      5.20%       1.124       12.20%
                           (0.669)               (0.010)                (0.670)
              χrvarcb      17.792     13.67%      -0.056     0.37%      17.848       13.49%
                           (5.927)               (0.092)                (5.935)
           χrvarcbSP EC     -2.233    -2.51%      -0.108     1.01%       -2.125      -2.35%
                           (5.564)               (0.087)                (5.571)
                R2         50.20%                70.80%                 50.60%




                                                  53
Table 12: On the Predictive Power of Risk Aversion and Uncertainty for Future Output
Growth

This table reports the coefficient estimates of the following predictive regression,

                                        θt+k = ak + b0k xt + rest+k ,
                                                                                          Pk
where θt+k represents future industrial production growth during period t + 1 and t + k ( τ =1 θt+τ )
and xt represents a vector of current predictors. We consider (1) our GMM-implied risk aversion index,
raBEX , (2) our financial instrument proxy of economic uncertainty, uncBEX , (3) the risk-neutral
conditional variance (the square of the month-end VIX (after 1990) / VXO (prior to 1990) index
divided by 120000), QV AR, and (4) the true total macroeconomic uncertainty filtered from industrial
production growth unctrue . The coefficients are scaled by the standard deviation of the predictor in the
same column for reporting purposes. Hodrick (1992) standard errors are reported in parentheses, and
adjusted R2 s are in %. Bold (italic) coefficients have <5% (10%) p-values.

                                raBEX    uncBEX QV AR             unctrue
                                         A. Univariate
                         1m    -0.002 -0.003 -0.002               -0.002
                               (0.001) (0.000) (0.001)            (0.001)
                                 7.2%      20.6%      6.5%         13.1%
                         1q    -0.005 -0.008 -0.005               -0.007
                               (0.001) (0.001) (0.002)            (0.001)
                                14.9%      37.9%     15.3%         26.5%
                         4q    -0.006 -0.017 -0.008               -0.010
                               (0.003) (0.004) (0.003)            (0.004)
                                 2.5%      17.7%      3.7%          6.5%
                                      B. Multivariate (1)                    R2
                         1m     0.001     -0.003     0.000                  21.2%
                               (0.001) (0.001) (0.001)
                         1q     0.004     -0.009 -0.003                     39.1%
                               (0.001) (0.002) (0.001)
                         4q     0.021     -0.025 -0.011                     22.8%
                               (0.004) (0.005) (0.002)
                                      C. Multivariate (2)                    R2
                         1m     0.000                0.000        -0.002    14.1%
                               (0.001)              (0.001)       (0.001)
                         1q     0.001               -0.003        -0.006    29.6%
                               (0.001)              (0.002)       (0.001)
                         4q     0.010               -0.012        -0.010     8.1%
                               (0.003)              (0.003)       (0.003)
                                      D. Multivariate (3)                    R2
                         1m     0.001     -0.003     0.000         -0.001   21.5%
                               (0.001) (0.001) (0.001)            (0.001)
                         1q     0.004     -0.008 -0.003            -0.002   40.4%
                               (0.001) (0.001) (0.001)            (0.001)
                         4q     0.021     -0.027 -0.011             0.003   23.1%
                               (0.004) (0.006) (0.002)            (0.003)


                                                     54
              Table 13: Alternative Risk Aversion and Uncertainty Measures.

This table report the correlation between our risk aversion and economic uncertainty indices and
existing measures. For risk aversion (Panel A), we consider three categories. A.1) We follow Wachter
(2006) to create a fundamental risk aversion process from inflation-adjusted (real) quarterly
                        P4
consumption growth ( j=0 ∆ct−j ); A.2) we consider the well-known sentiment index by Baker and
Wurgler (2006) from the behavior finance literature, and the Michigan Consumer Sentiment Index (that
directly measures the consumer sentiment); A.3) we also consider an industry index, the Credit Suisse
First Boston Risk Appetite Index. For economic uncertainty (Panel B), we consider B.1) the
macroeconomic uncertainty index created by Jurado, Ludvigson, and Ng (2015), and B.2) the Economic
Policy Uncertainty Index created by Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016). Correlations are calculated using
overlapping samples at the monthly frequency. Standard errors are shown in parentheses. Bold
correlation coefficients have <5% p-values.

                       A. Correlations with Extant Risk Aversion Indices
                   A.1) “Fundamental” Habit Model:
                   Wachter (2006) / Campbell and Cochrane (1999) 0.1307
                                                                      (0.0534)
                   A.2) Sentiment Index:
                   Baker and Wurgler (2006)                           -0.1652
                                                                      (0.0531)
                   Michigan Consumer Sentiment Index                  -0.2752
                                                                      (0.0518)
                   A.3) Industry Index
                   Credit Suisse First Boston Risk Appetite Index     -0.4830
                                                                      (0.0471)
                         B. Correlations with Extant Uncertainty Indices
                   B.1) Macroeconomic Uncertainty:
                   Jurado, Ludvigson, and Ng (2015)                    0.8094
                                                                      (0.0316)
                   B.2) Political Uncertainty:
                   Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016)                      0.3428
                                                                      (0.0506)




                                                 55
                                       conditional mean
      0.06
      0.04
      0.02
        0
     -0.02
     -0.04
       194701   195504   196308   197112   198004    198808   199612   200504   201308
                                                pt

     1000


      500


        0
       194701   195504   196308   197112   198004    198808   199612   200504   201308
                                              nt
       80

       60

       40

       20

        0
       194701   195504   196308   197112   198004    198808   199612   200504   201308



Figure 1: Filtered state variables extracted from industrial production growth. The
estimation results are displayed in Table 1. The plot covers the estimation period from
January 1947 to February 2015. The shaded regions are NBER recession months from
the NBER website.




                                           56
                                                 Loss rate, lt+1
     0.06

     0.04

     0.02


      198406         198807   199209       199611        200101      200503   200905   201307
                                       Loss rate upside uncertainty, lpt

      60
      40
      20
       0
      198406         198807   199209       199611        200101      200503   200905   201307

            #10 -5
                                       Conditional Variance, V art (lt+1 )
       3

       2

       1

       0
      198406         198807   199209       199611        200101      200503   200905   201307

                                Conditional total loss rate decomposition
       1
                                          pt
                                          nt
      0.8                                 lpt
                                          lnt

      0.6

      0.4

      0.2

       0
      198406         198807   199209       199611        200101      200503   200905   201307


Figure 2: The dynamics and properties of the loss rate. The dynamics and estimation
results are shown in Table 2. From top to bottom: loss rate lt+1 , the cash flow uncertainty
state variable lpt , the total conditional variance and its decomposition. In particular, there
are four independent gamma shocks in the system that contribute to the magnitude and
the dynamics of the total loss rate disturbance: real economic shocks, ωp and ωn , and
pure cash flow shocks, ωlp and ωln . The fourth plot depicts the shares of total conditional
variances that are explained by each of the shocks at each point of time. Among them,
only ωln is homoskedastic. The loss rate estimation uses the longest sample available from
June 1984 to February 2015. The shaded regions are NBER recession months from the
NBER website.


                                                    57
          0.03
                                               Empirical
                                               Model

         0.025



          0.02



         0.015



          0.01



         0.005



            0
           198606   199007   199409   199811    200301     200703   201105   201502


Figure 3: Model-implied and empirical risk-neutral conditional variances of equity market
returns. The shaded regions are NBER recession months from the NBER website. The
two series are 90.06% correlated.




                                           58
                                                                                    #10 -4




                                                                                             2
                         5
   Risk Aversion Index




                                                                                                 Uncertainty Index
                                                                                             1




                0                                                                         0
               198606        199007   199409   199811    200301   200703   201105     201502


Figure 4: Risk aversion index (black/left y-axis) and Uncertainty index (red/right y-axis).
The risk aversion index denoted as raBEX = γ exp(qt ) and the uncertainty index denoted
as uncBEX are linear functions of a set of financial instruments. The utility curvature
parameter γ is 2. Correlation between the two series is 70.43%. The shaded regions are
NBER recession months from the NBER website.




                                                    59
Figure 5: Risk aversion and economic uncertainty at daily frequencies around the Bear
Stearns and Lehman Brothers Collapses in 2008.




                                         60
Online Appendices

A       The state variables
A.1       Matrix representation of the state variables
     In this section, we show the matrix representation of the system of ten state variables in this
economy. The ten state variables, as introduced in Section 3, are as follows,
                                                                                           0
                                    Yt = [θt , pt , nt , πt , lt , gt , κt , ηt , lpt , qt ] ,

where {pt , nt } denote the upside uncertainty factor and the downside uncertainty factor, as latent variables
extracted from the system of output growth (i.e., change in log real industrial production index); πt
represents the inflation rate; lt represents the log of corporate loss rate; gt represents the log change in
real earnings; κt represents the log consumption-earnings ratio; ηt represents the log dividend payout
ratio; lpt represents the cash flow uncertainty factor, as the latent variable extracted from the system of
corporate loss rate lt ; qt represents the latent risk aversion of the economy. The state variables have the
following matrix representation:

                                        Yt+1 = µ + AYt + Σωt+1 ,                                           (A.1)

where ωt+1 = [ωp,t+1 , ωn,t+1 , ωπ,t+1 , ωlp,t+1 , ωln,t+1 , ωg,t+1 , ωκ,t+1 , ωη,t+1 , ωq,t+1 ] (9 × 1) is a vector com-
prised of eight independent shocks in the economy. Among the nine shocks, {ωπ,t+1 , ωln,t+1 , ωg,t+1 , ωκ,t+1 , ωη,t+1 }
shocks are homoskedastic. The conditional variance, skewness and higher-order moments of the following
four centered gamma shocks—ωp,t+1 , ωn,t+1 , ωlp,t+1 , and ωq,t+1 —are assumed to be proportional to
pt , nt , lpt , and qt respectively. The underlying distributions for the rest four shocks are assumed to be
Gaussian with unit standard deviation.
         The constant matrices are defined implicitly,
                                                                 
                                 (1 − ρθ )θ̄ − mp p̄ − mn n̄ ≡ θ0
                                
                                        (1 − ρp )p̄ ≡ p0         
                                                                  
                                
                                       (1 − ρn )n̄ ≡ n0          
                                                                  
                                
                                                π0               
                                                                  
                                                l0               
                        µ =                                      ,                                                (A.2)
                                
                                                g0               
                                                                  
                                
                                                κ0               
                                                                  
                                
                                                η0               
                                                                  
                                                v0               
                                                 q0
                                                                                                  
                                  ρθ mp mn            0      0     0      0      0       0      0
                                 0    ρp       0     0      0     0      0      0       0      0 
                                                                                                  
                                 0     0      ρn     0      0     0      0      0       0      0 
                                                                                                  
                                ρπθ ρπp ρπn ρππ ρπl               0      0      0 ρπv          0 
                                                                                                  
                                 0    ρlp ρln        0     ρll    0      0      0      ρlv     0 
                       A =      ρgθ ρgp ρgn ρgl
                                                                                                   ,               (A.3)
                                                            0 ρgg        0      0      ρgv     0 
                                ρκθ ρκp ρκn ρκl             0     0 ρκκ         0 ρκv          0 
                                                                                                  
                                ρηθ ρηp ρηn ρηl             0     0      0     ρηη ρηv         0 
                                                                                                  
                                 0     0       0     0      0     0      0      0      ρvv     0 
                                   0   ρqp ρqn        0      0     0      0      0       0 ρqq




                                                               1
                                                                                          
                        σθp         −σθn       0     0         0      0     0     0     0
                       σpp           0        0     0         0      0     0     0     0 
                                                                                          
                       0           σnn        0     0         0      0     0     0     0 
                                                                                          
                      σπp          σπn       σππ   σπlp     σπln     0     0     0     0 
                                                                                          
                       σlp          σln       0    σllp     −σlln    0     0     0     0 
                  Σ = 
                       σgp
                                                                                           .      (A.4)
                                   σgn        0    σglp     σgln    σgg    0     0     0 
                      σκp          σκn        0    σκlp     σκln     0    σκκ    0     0 
                                                                                          
                      σηp          σηn        0    σηlp     σηln     0     0    σηη    0 
                                                                                          
                       0             0        0    σvl       0       0     0     0     0 
                        σqp          σqn       0     0        0       0     0     0    σqq

      Given the moment generating functions (mgf) of gamma and Gaussian distributions, we show that
the model is affine, ∀ν ∈ IR10 ,

      MY (ν) := Et [exp(ν 0 Yt+1 )] = exp(ν 0 µ + ν 0 AYt )Et [exp(ν 0 Σωt+1 )]
                                                                                            
                                              0      1 0      other 0
                                    = exp ν S0 + ν S1 Σ            S1 ν + fS (ν)Yt + S2 (ν)vn ,    (A.5)
                                                     2

where S0 = µ (10 × 1),
                                             
                            0 0         0    0
                           0 0         0    0
                                             
                           0 0         0    0
                                             
                           1 0         0    0
                                             
                           0 0         0    0
                  S1     = 
                           0 1
                                              ,                                                   (A.6)
                                       0    0
                                              
                           0 0         1    0
                                             
                           0 0         0    1
                                             
                           0 0         0    0
                            0 0         0    0
                            2                 
                            σππ        σπg σπησπκ
                            σgπ         2
                                       σgg    σgκ
                                           σgη 
              Σother     = 
                           σκπ
                                                (cov-var matrix of {ωπ , ωg , ωκ , ωη }),
                                               2                                                   (A.7)
                                       σκg    σκκ
                                           σκη 
                                             2
                             σηπ       σηg σηησηκ
                                                          0
                                            0
                                −σp (ν) − ln (1 − σp (ν)) 
                                                          
                                −σn (ν) − ln (1 − σn (ν)) 
                                                          
                               
                                           0              
                                                           
                            0
                                           0              
               fS (ν)    = ν A+
                                                           ,                                     (A.8)
                                           0              
                                                           
                               
                                           0              
                                                           
                               
                                           0              
                                                           
                               −σlp (ν) − ln (1 − σlp (ν))
                                 −σq (ν) − ln (1 − σq (ν))
               S2 (ν)    = −σvn (ν) − ln (1 − σvn (ν)) ,                                           (A.9)
                                0
               σp (ν)    = ν Σ•1 ,                                                                (A.10)
                                0
               σn (ν)    = ν Σ•2 ,                                                                (A.11)
               σlp (ν)   = ν 0 Σ•4 ,                                                              (A.12)
                                0
              σvn (ν)    = ν Σ•5 ,                                                                (A.13)
                                0
               σq (ν)    = ν Σ•9 ,                                                                (A.14)

where M•j denotes the j-th column of the matrix M .



                                                         2
A.2      Consumption growth
       Consumption growth in this economy is endogenous defined and can be expressed in an affine
function:

                                   ∆ct+1        = gt+1 + ∆κt+1                                              (A.15)
                                                = c0 +         c02 Yt   +   c01 Σωt+1 ,                     (A.16)
                                                                                                            (A.17)
                                                                     0
where c0 = g0 + κ0 , c1 = 0    0   0   0    0    1       1    0   0  0 , and
                                                                        
                                                               ρgθ + ρκθ
                                                              ρgp + ρκp 
                                                                        
                                                             ρgn + ρκn 
                                                                        
                                                             
                                                                  0     
                                                                         
                                                                  0     
                                            c2       =        ρgg  .
                                                                                                          (A.18)
                                                                        
                                                              ρκκ − 1 
                                                                        
                                                             
                                                                  0     
                                                                         
                                                                  0     
                                                                   0


B      Asset Pricing
       In this section, we solve the model analytically. First, given consumption growth and changes in
risk aversion, the log of real pricing kernel of the economy is derived as an affine function of the state
variables. Next, we show that asset prices of claims on cash flows from three different asset markets can
be expressed in (quasi) affine equations. The model is solved using the non-arbitrage condition. The goal
of this section is to derive the analytical solutions for the expected excess returns, the physical variance
of asset returns and the risk-neutral variance of asset returns in closed forms. The implied moments are
crucial for the estimation procedure.


B.1      The real pricing kernel
      The log real pricing kernel for this economy is given by,

                                   mt+1     =    ln(β) − γ∆ct+1 + γ∆qt+1                                     (B.1)
                                            =    m0 + m02 Yt + m01 Σωt+1 ,                                   (B.2)
                                                                                                  0
where m0 = ln(β) + γ(q0 − g0 − κ0 ), m1 = 0 0                 0    0    0     −γ    −γ    0   0   γ , and
                                                                          
                                                         γ(−ρgθ − ρκθ )
                                                      γ(ρqp − ρgp − ρκp ) 
                                                                          
                                                     γ(ρqn − ρgn − ρκn )
                                                                          
                                                     
                                                              0           
                                                                           
                                                              0           
                                       m2   =                             .                                (B.3)
                                                     
                                                            −γρgg         
                                                                           
                                                      −γ(ρκκ − 1) 
                                                                          
                                                     
                                                              0           
                                                                           
                                                              0           
                                                           γ(ρqq − 1)

As a result, the moment generating function of the real pricing kernel is, ∀ν ∈ IR,

 Et [exp(νmt+1 )] = exp νm0 + νm02 Yt
                                         


                                                              3
                      ·   exp {[−νσp (m1 ) − ln (1 − νσp (m1 ))] pt + [−νσn (m1 ) − ln (1 − νσn (m1 ))] nt }
                      ·   exp {[−νσlp (m1 ) − ln (1 − νσlp (m1 ))] lpt + [−νσq (m1 ) − ln (1 − νσq (m1 ))] qt }
                                                                                                    
                                                                           1 
                          exp [−νσvn (m1 ) − ln (1 − νσvn (m1 ))] vn + ν 2 m01 S1 Σother S10 m1 , (B.4)
                                                                                                    
                      ·
                                                                           2

where m0 , m1 , m2 , S1 , and Σother are constant matrices defined earlier, and

                                                σp (m1 )         = m01 Σ•1 ,                             (B.5)
                                                σn (m1 )         =       m01 Σ•2 ,                       (B.6)
                                                σlp (m1 )        =       m01 Σ•4 ,                       (B.7)
                                            σvn (m1 )            =       m01 Σ•5 ,                       (B.8)
                                                σq (m1 )         =       m01 Σ•9 .                       (B.9)

Accordingly, the model-implied short rate rft is,

                rft   = − ln {Et [exp(mt+1 )]}                                                          (B.10)
                      = −m0 −      m02 Yt                                                               (B.11)
                      +    [σp (m1 ) + ln (1 − σp (m1 ))] pt + [σn (m1 ) + ln (1 − σn (m1 ))] nt        (B.12)
                      + [σlp (m1 ) + ln (1 − σlp (m1 ))] lpt + [σq (m1 ) + ln (1 − σq (m1 ))] qt        (B.13)
                                                                1 0
                                                                    m1 S1 Σother S10 m1 ,
                                                                                        
                      + [σvn (m1 ) + ln (1 − σvn (m1 ))] vn −                                           (B.14)
                                                                2
                      = rf0 + rf20 Yt .                                                                 (B.15)

To price nominal assets, we define the nominal pricing kernel, m
                                                               e t+1 , which is a simple transformation of
the log real pricing kernel, mt+1 ,

                                    m
                                    e t+1       =       mt+1 − πt+1 ,                                   (B.16)
                                                =       m    f02 Yt + m
                                                        e0 + m        f01 Σωt+1 ,                       (B.17)
                                                                                      0
      e 0 = m0 − π0 , m
where m               f 1 = m1 − 0          0       0    1   0       0    0   0   0   0 , and
                                                                         
                                                                  ρπθ
                                                                 ρπp 
                                                                     
                                                                ρπn 
                                                                     
                                                                ρππ 
                                                                     
                                                                 0 
                                            m
                                            f2           = m2 − 
                                                                     .                                (B.18)
                                                                 0 
                                                                      
                                                                 0 
                                                                     
                                                                 0 
                                                                     
                                                                 0 
                                                                   0

                           f is defined as − ln {Et [exp(m
The nominal risk free rate rf                            e t+1 )]}.
                              t



B.2      Valuation ratio
       It is a crucial step in this paper to show that asset prices are (quasi) affine functions of the state
variables.

Defaultable Nominal Bonds In the paper, we assume that a one period nominal bond faces a
fractional (logarithmic) loss of lt . Given the structures assumed for lt and πt and the model-implied log




                                                                 4
pricing kernel, the price-coupon ratio of the one-period defaultable bond portfolio is

                                         P Ct1                   e t+1 − lt+1 )]
                                                      = Et [exp (m                                 (B.19)
                                                      = exp b0 + b10
                                                              1
                                                                        
                                                                    1 Yt ,                         (B.20)

where b10 and b10
               1 are implicitly defined. Consider next a portfolio of multi-period zero-coupon defaultable
bonds with a promised terminal payment of C at period (t + N ). As for the N -period bond, the
actual payment will be less than or equal to the promised payment, and the ex-post nominal payoff
can be expressed as exp (c − lt+N ). We ignore the possibility of early default or prepayment. Then,
                                                                                                1
      1    10
                      of this bond at period (t + N − 1), one period before maturity, P Ct+N −1 , is
the price-coupon ratio
exp b0 + b1 Yt+N −1 . Given the Euler equation and the law of iterated expectations, it then follows by
induction that all earlier dated zero-coupon nominally defaultable corporate bond (maturing in N period)
prices are similarly affine in the state variables, in particular:
                                                      h              i
                                         P CtN = Et M   ft+1 P C N −1 ,
                                                                t+1
                                                               N0
                                               = exp bN
                                                                     
                                                         0 + b1 Yt .                               (B.21)

Therefore, the assumed zero-coupon structure of the payments before maturity implies that the unex-
pected returns to this portfolio are exactly linearly spanned by the shocks to Yt .

Equity It is especially not obvious for equity price-dividend ratio, of which we provide proofs below.
First, we rewrite the real dividend growth in a general matrix expression:

                                     ∆dt+1            = gt+1 + ∆ηt+1
                                                      = h0 + h02 Yt + h01 Σωt+1 ,                  (B.22)
                                                                             0
where h0 = g0 + η0 , h1 = 0    0     0       0    0     1       0    1     0 0 , and
                                                                                
                                                                      ρgθ + ρηθ
                                                                     ρgp + ρηp 
                                                                                
                                                                    ρgn + ρηn 
                                                                                
                                                                    
                                                                         0      
                                                                                 
                                                                         0      
                                                  h2        =        ρgg  .
                                                                                                 (B.23)
                                                                                
                                                                    
                                                                         0      
                                                                                 
                                                                     ρηη − 1 
                                                                                
                                                                         0      
                                                                          0
                                   h              i
The price-dividend ratio, P Dt = Et Mt+1 Pt+1D
                                             +Dt+1
                                              t
                                                      , can be rewritten as,
                                                                              
                                                 ∞
                                                 X              Xn
                              P Dt       =             Et exp    mt+j + ∆dt+j  .               (B.24)
                                                 n=1                      j=1


Let Ftn denote the n-th term in the summation:
                                                             
                                               Xn
                                Ftn = Et exp    mt+j + ∆dt+j  ,                                (B.25)
                                                                    j=1


and Ftn Dt is the price of zero-coupon equity that matures in n periods.

      To show that equity price is an approximate affine function of the state variables, we first prove


                                                                      5
that Ftn (∀n ≥ 1) is exactly affine using induction. First, when n = 1,

Ft1   = Et [exp (mt+1 + ∆dt+1 )]
      = Et exp (m0 + h0 ) + (m02 + h02 )Yt + (m01 + h01 )Σωt+1
                                                             

      = exp (m0 + h0 ) + (m02 + h02 )Yt
                                       

      ·   exp {[−σp (m1 + h1 ) − ln (1 − σp (m1 + h1 ))] pt + [−σn (m1 + h1 ) − ln (1 − σn (m1 + h1 ))] nt }
      · exp {[−σlp (m1 + h1 ) − ln (1 − σlp (m1 + h1 ))] lpt + [−σq (m1 + h1 ) − ln (1 − σq (m1 + h1 ))] qt }
                                                                                                        
                                                                 1 0
                                                                   (m1 + h01 )S1 Σother S10 (m1 + h1 )
                                                                                                        
      · exp [−σvn (m1 + h1 ) − ln (1 − σvn (m1 + h1 ))] vn +
                                                                 2
              1     10
                       
      = exp e0 + e1 Yt ,                                                                            (B.26)

where m0 , m1 , m2 , h0 , h1 , h2 , S1 , and Σother are constant matrices defined earlier, and

                                    σp (m1 + h1 )    =   (m01 + h01 )Σ•1 ,                                     (B.27)
                                    σn (m1 + h1 )    =   (m01 + h01 )Σ•2 ,                                     (B.28)
                                    σlp (m1 + h1 )   =   (m01   +   h01 )Σ•4 ,                                 (B.29)
                                   σvn (m1 + h1 )    =   (m01   +   h01 )Σ•5 ,                                 (B.30)
                                    σq (m1 + h1 )    =   (m01   +   h01 )Σ•9 ,                                 (B.31)
                                                                          1
                                                                                (m01 + h01 )S1 Σother S10 (m1 + h1 ) ,
                                                                                                                   
and e10 = m0 +h0 +[−σvn (m1 + h1 ) − ln (1 − σvn (m1 + h1 ))] vn + 2
and                                                                                         
                                                           0
                                       −σp m1 + h1 ) − ln (1 − σp (m1 + h1 )) 
                                                                               
                                       −σn (m1 + h1 ) − ln (1 − σn (m1 + h1 )) 
                                                                               
                                      
                                                          0                    
                                                                                
                     1
                                                          0                    
                    e1 = m2 + h2 +                                            .                             (B.32)
                                                          0                    
                                                                                
                                      
                                                          0                    
                                                                                
                                      
                                                          0                    
                                                                                
                                      −σlp (m1 + h1 ) − ln (1 − σlp (m1 + h1 ))
                                        −σq (m1 + h1 ) − ln (1 − σq (m1 + h1 ))
                                                                      
                                                               n−10
Now, suppose that the (n − 1)-th term Ftn−1 = exp en−1
                                                     0   +   e 1    Yt   , then
                                              
                                Xn
               Ftn   = Et exp    mt+j + ∆dt+j 
                                    j=1
                                                                             
                                                                   n−1
                                                                    X              
                     =   Et Et+1 exp(mt+1 + ∆dt+1 ) exp      mt+j+1 + ∆dt+j+1 
                                                                                  
                                                           j=1
                                                                                  
                            
                                                                                  
                                                                                   
                            
                                                                             
                            
                                                          n−1
                                                                                   
                                                                                   
                                                          X                       
                     =   Et exp(mt+1 + ∆dt+1 ) Et+1 exp
                                                             mt+j+1 + ∆dt+j+1  
                                                                                  
                            
                                                          j=1                     
                                                                                   
                            
                                               |                {z               }
                                                                                   
                            
                                                                                  
                                                                                   
                                                                 n−1
                                                               Ft+1
                            h                                        i
                     =   Et exp(mt+1 + ∆dt+1 ) exp en−1
                                                    0   + e1n−10 Yt+1
                         exp en0 + en0
                                        
                     =              1 Yt ,                                                                     (B.33)




                                                     6
where en0 and en0
               1 are defined implicitly.
      Hence, the price-dividend ratio is approximately affine:
                                                                    
                                        X∞           Xn
                            P Dt =         Et exp      mt+j + ∆dt+j 
                                            n=1                 j=1
                                            ∞
                                            X
                                       =          Ftn
                                            n=1
                                            X∞
                                                  exp en0 + en0
                                                                 
                                       =                     1 Yt .                                     (B.34)
                                            n=1

                                                                                                             


B.3      Log asset returns
Log return of zero-coupon nominally defautable corporate bonds maturing at
t + N Given the exact exponential affine expression of the valuation ratio of this asset (see derivations
above), the log return can be derived an approximate linear closed form:
                                             !  
                                    N −1
                     cb,N       P Ct+1   +1        C
                   ret+1 = ln                  ln       ln (Πt+1 )
                                   P CtN           C
                                                                       
                                                              −10
                                        1 + exp b0N −1 + bN1      Yt+1
                          = πt+1 + ln                     N0
                                                                          
                                              exp bN0 + b1 Yt
                                                                             
                                                               −10      N −10
                                             exp b0N −1 + bN1      Ȳ b 1
                                                                                          0
                          ≈ πt+1 + const. +            
                                                         N −1   N −10
                                                                               Yt+1 − bN
                                                                                        1 Yt
                                                        1+exp b0      +b1    Ȳ
                                                                    N0
                                                           exp(bN
                                                                0 +b1 Ȳ )

                         = ξe0cb + ξe1cb0 Yt + recb0 Σωt+1 ,                                            (B.35)

        cb
where ret+1 is the log nominal return of corporate bond from t to t + 1, ξe0cb is constant, ξe1cb is a vector
of state vector coefficients, and recb is a vector of shock coefficients. Thus, this step involves linear
approximation.

Log nominal equity return We apply first-order Taylor approximations to the log nominal
equity return, and obtain a linear system,
                                 
     eq         Pt+1 + Dt+1
   ret+1 = ln                Πt+1
                     Pt
                                    
                P Dt+1 + 1        Dt+1
         = ln                ln          ln (Πt+1 )
                   P Dt            Dt
                              "     P∞                            #
                                1 + n=1 exp en0 + en0    1  Y t+1
         = ∆dt+1 + πt+1 + ln       P∞            n     n0
                                                              
                                      n=1 exp e0 + e1 Yt
                                     P∞            n       n0
                                                                 n0       P∞        n    n0
                                                                                                n0
                                       n=1 exp e0 + e1 Ȳ e1                n=1 exp e0 + e1 Ȳ e1
         ≈ ∆dt+1 + πt+1 + const. +                                   Yt+1 − P∞         n    n0
                                                                                                  Yt
                                        1+ ∞                n0
                                             n=1 exp(e0 +e1 Ȳ )
                                                       n
                                           P
                                          P∞               n0
                                                                              n=1 exp e0 + e1 Ȳ
                                            n=1 exp(e0 +e1 Ȳ )
                                                     n

             eq    eq0      eq0
         = ξe + ξe Yt + re Σωt+1 ,
            0      1                                                                                (B.36)
        eq
where ret+1  is the log nominal return of equity from t to t + 1, ξe0eq is constant, ξe1eq is a vector of state
vector coefficients, and reeq is a vector of shock coefficients. Thus, this step involves linear approximation.


                                                            7
General expression To acknowledge the errors that are potentially caused by the linear approx-
imations (the Taylor approximation in log price-dividend ratio in the return equation), we write down
the return innovations for asset i with an idiosyncratic shock:
                                     i          i
                                                      = rei0 Σωt+1 + εit+1 ,
                                                    
                                   ret+1 − Et ret+1                                                  (B.37)
            i
               
where Et ret+1   is the expected return, rei (10 × 1) is the asset i return loadings on selected state
variable innovations (the choice of which depends on the asset classes), and εit+1 is the Gaussian noise
uncorrelated with the state variable shocks but may be cross-correlated (with other asset-specific shocks).
The Gaussian shock εit+1 has an unconditional variance σi2 .


B.4      Model-implied moments
       In this section, we derive three model-implied asset conditional moments— expected excess returns,
physical and risk-neutral conditional variances of nominal asset returns. The moments are crucial in
creating the moment conditions during the third step of model estimation.

B.4.1     One-period expected excess return
                                                                     i
      We impose the no-arbitrage condition, 1 = Et [exp(m  e t+1 + ret+1 )] (∀i ∈{equity, treasury bond,
corporate bond}), and obtain the expected excess returns. Expand the law of one price (LOOP) equation:
                         i
1   = Et [exp(me t+1 + ret+1 )]
                                i
                                   
    = exp Et (m e t+1 ) + Et (e
                              rt+1 )
                   m1 + rei ) − ln 1 − σp (f
                                           m1 + rei ) pt + −σn (f m1 + rei ) − ln 1 − σn (f
                                                                                          m1 + rei ) nt
                                                                                               
    · exp −σp (f
                    m1 + rei ) − ln 1 − σlp (f
                                             m1 + rei ) lpt + −σq (f
                                                                   m1 + rei ) − ln 1 − σq (f
                                                                                           m1 + rei ) qt
                                                                                                
    · exp −σlp (f
                    m1 + rei ) − ln 1 − σvn (f
                                             m1 + rei ) vn
                                                       
    · exp −σvn (f
                                                            
             1 0
                 m1 + rei0 )S1 Σother S10 (f
                                           m1 + rei ) + σi2 ,
                                                            
    · exp       (f                                                                                   (B.38)
             2

      f1 , rei , σi , S1 , and Σother are constant matrices defined earlier, and
where m

                                        m1 + rei )
                                    σp (f            =    m01 + rei0 )Σ•1 ,
                                                         (f
                                        m1 + rei )
                                    σn (f            =    m01 + rei0 )Σ•2 ,
                                                         (f
                                        m1 + rei )
                                   σlp (f            =    m01 + rei0 )Σ•4 ,
                                                         (f
                                        m1 + rei )
                                   σvn (f            =    m01 + rei0 )Σ•5 ,
                                                         (f
                                        m1 + rei )
                                    σq (f            =    m01 + rei0 )Σ•9 .
                                                         (f                                          (B.39)

Given the nominal risk free rate derived earlier using real pricing kernel and inflation, the nominal excess
return is,

                                               m1 + rei )
                                                        
     i                      i          1 − σp (f
    rt+1 ) − rf t =
Et (e        f        σp (e
                          r ) + ln                            pt
                                          1 − σp (f
                                                  m1 )
                                                m1 + rei )
                                                         
                                       1 − σn (f
                  +       r i ) + ln
                      σn (e                                   nt
                                          1 − σn (fm1 )
                                                 m1 + rei )
                                                          
                                        1 − σlp (f
                  +        r i ) + ln
                      σlp (e                                   lpt
                                           1 − σlp (f
                                                    m1 )
                                               m1 + rei )
                                                        
                                       1 − σq (f
                  +       r i ) + ln
                      σq (e                                  qt
                                          1 − σq (f
                                                  m1 )


                                                     8
                                                         m1 + rei )
                                                                    
                                                1 − σvn (f                                                1  i0
                               r i ) + ln                                       f01 S1 Σother S10 rei −      re S1 Σother S10 rei + σi2
                                                                                                                                        
                  +       σvn (e                                           vn − m
                                                   1 − σvn (f
                                                            m1 )                                          2
                                                                                                                                  (B.40)

where

                                                         ri )
                                                     σp (e      =   rei0 Σ•1 ,                                           (B.41)
                                                          i
                                                    σn (e
                                                        r )     =   rei0 Σ•2 ,                                           (B.42)
                                                          i           i0
                                                    σlp (e
                                                         r )    =   re Σ•4 ,                                             (B.43)
                                                          i
                                                   σvn (e
                                                        r )     =   rei0 Σ•5 ,                                           (B.44)
                                                  ri )
                                              σq (e             =   rei0 Σ•9 ,                                           (B.45)
                                            m1 + rei )
                                        σp (f                   =    m01
                                                                    (f           i0
                                                                           + re )Σ•1 ,                                   (B.46)
                                        σn (f
                                            m1 + re )     i
                                                                =    m01
                                                                    (f           i0
                                                                           + re )Σ•2 ,                                   (B.47)
                                        σlp (f
                                             m1 + re )    i
                                                                =    m01
                                                                    (f           i0
                                                                           + re )Σ•4 ,                                   (B.48)
                                       σvn (f
                                            m1 + re )     i
                                                                =    m01
                                                                    (f           i0
                                                                           + re )Σ•5 ,                                   (B.49)
                                        σq (f
                                            m1 + re )     i
                                                                =    m01
                                                                    (f           i0
                                                                           + re )Σ•9 .                                   (B.50)

B.4.2      One-period physical conditional return variance
        The physical variance is easily obtained given the loadings:
                        i
                                                2               2                2              2
                V ARt (e
                       rt+1 )    =         r i ) pt + σn (e
                                       σp (e                r i ) nt + σlp (e r i ) lpt + σq (e
                                                                                              r i ) qt
                                                2
                                 +     σvn rei ) vn + rei0 S1 Σother S10 rei + σi2 .                                     (B.51)

B.4.3      One-period risk-neutral conditional return variance
      To obtain the risk-neutral variance of the asset returns, we use the moment generating function
under the risk-neutral measure:
                                              i
                                                   
         Q i             Et exp m  e t+1 + νe rt+1
    mgft (e rt+1 ; ν) =
                              Et [exp (me t+1 )]
                                                    i
                             
                      = exp Et (m  e t+1 ) + νEt (ert+1 )
                                                 i
                                                                m1 + ν rei ) pt
                                                                          
                      · exp −σp (f    m1 + ν re ) − ln 1 − σp (f
                                      m1 + ν rei ) − ln 1 − σn (f
                                                                m1 + ν rei ) nt
                                                                          
                      · exp −σn (f
                                      m1 + ν rei ) − ln 1 − σlp (f
                                                                 m1 + ν rei ) lpt
                                                                           
                      · exp −σlp (f
                                      m1 + ν rei ) − ln 1 − σq (f
                                                                m1 + ν rei ) qt
                                                                          
                      · exp −σq (f
                                       m1 + ν rei ) − ln 1 − σvn (f
                                                                  m1 + ν rei ) vn
                                                                             
                      · exp −σvn (f
                                                                                      
                               1 0
                                   m1 + ν rei0 )S1 Σother S10 (f
                                                               m1 + ν rei ) + ν 2 σi2
                                                                                      
                      · exp       (f
                               2
                      / exp {Et (me t+1 )}
                       /     exp {[−σp (f
                                        m1 ) − ln (1 − σp (f                 m1 ) − ln (1 − σn (f
                                                           m1 ))] pt + [−σn (f                  m1 ))] nt }
                       / exp {[−σlp (f
                                     m1 ) − ln (1 − σlp (f
                                                         m1 ))] lpt + [−σq (fm1 ) − ln (1 − σq (f
                                                                                                m1 ))] qt }
                                                                                                 
                                                                        1
                                                                            f01 S1 Σother S10 m
                                                                                                
                       / exp [−σvn (f  m1 ) − ln (1 − σvn (f
                                                           m1 ))] vn +     m                  f1
                                                                        2
                                     i
                             
                       = exp νEt (ert+1 )
                                                          m1 + ν rei )
                                                                     
                                                  1 − σp (f
                       · exp −σp (ν rei ) − ln                            pt
                                                     1 − σp (f
                                                             m1 )



                                                                9
                                                                m1 + ν rei )
                                                                           
                                                       1 − σn (f
                         ·   exp   −σn (ν rei ) − ln                            nt
                                                           1 − σn (f
                                                                   m1 )
                                                                 m1 + ν rei )
                                                                            
                                                        1 − σlp (f
                         ·   exp −σlp (ν rei ) − ln                              lpt
                                                           1 − σlp (f
                                                                    m1 )
                                                               m1 + ν rei )
                                                                          
                                                       1 − σq (f
                         ·   exp −σq (ν rei ) − ln                             qt
                                                          1 − σq (f
                                                                  m1 )
                         ·   A(ν),                                                                             (B.52)

where
                                                m1 + ν rei )
                                                           
                             i         1 − σvn (f
        A(ν) = exp −σvn (ν re ) − ln                           vn
                                          1 − σvn (f
                                                   m1 )
                                                                                         
                     1 0        i0     other 0             i     0    other 0       2 2
                                                                                         
             + exp     (f
                        m1 + ν re )S1 Σ          m1 + ν re ) − m
                                             S1 (f              f1 S1 Σ     S1 m
                                                                               f1 + ν σi    (B.53)
                     2

, and

                                           m01 + ν rei0 )
                                       σp (f                =     m01 + ν rei0 )Σ•1 ,
                                                                 (f                                            (B.54)
                                          m01
                                      σn (f           i0
                                                + ν re )    =     m01
                                                                 (f          i0
                                                                        + ν re )Σ•2 ,                          (B.55)
                                          m01
                                     σlp (f           i0
                                                + ν re )    =     m01
                                                                 (f          i0
                                                                        + ν re )Σ•4 ,                          (B.56)
                                          m01
                                     σvn (f           i0
                                                + ν re )    =     m01
                                                                 (f          i0
                                                                        + ν re )Σ•5 ,                          (B.57)
                                          m01
                                      σq (f           i0
                                                + ν re )    =     m01
                                                                 (f          i0
                                                                        + ν re )Σ•9 .                          (B.58)

The first-order moment is the first-order derivate at ν = 0:

                ∂mgftQ (e  i
                          rt+1 ; ν)
EtQ (ei
     rt+1 )   =                     |ν=0
                       ∂ν
                     i       σp (f        ri )
                                  m1 )σp (e         σn (f       ri )
                                                        m1 )σn (e         σlp (f        ri )
                                                                               m1 )σlp (e          σq (f       ri )
                                                                                                       m1 )σq (e
              = Et (e
                    rt+1 )+                    pt +                  nt +                    lpt +                  qt
                               1 − σp (fm1 )         1 − σn (f
                                                             m1 )          1 − σlp (f
                                                                                    m1 )            1 − σq (f
                                                                                                            m1 )
                   σvn (f        ri )
                        m1 )σvn (e
              +                            f01 S1 Σother S10 rei .
                                      vn + m                                                                   (B.59)
                    1 − σvn (f
                             m1 )

Note the similarity between Et (e i
                                 rt+1 ) − EtQ (ei
                                               rt+1 ) from this equation and the equity premium derived
before using the no-arbitrage condition. The second-order moment is derived,
                                            2
V ARtQ (ei
        rt+1 )    = EtQ (ei
                         rt+1 )2 − EtQ (ei
                                        rt+1 )
                                                                             !2
                    ∂ 2 mgftQ (e i
                               rt+1 ; ν)            ∂mgftQ (e  i
                                                             rt+1  ; ν)
                  =                      |ν=0 −                         |ν=0
                           ∂ν 2                             ∂ν
                                    2                         2                         2                      2
                             ri )                       ri )                        ri )                    ri )
                                                                                                
                         σp (e                      σn (e                      σlp (e                   σq (e
                  =                     pt +                       nt +                      lpt +                   qt
                      1 − σp (f
                              m1 )              1 − σn (fm1 )               1 − σlp (f
                                                                                     m1 )            1 − σq (f
                                                                                                             m1 )
                                      2
                              ri )
                    
                         σvn (e
                  +                       vn + rei0 S1 Σother S10 rei + σi2 .                                    (B.60)
                      1 − σvn (fm1 )


C       Variables and parameters
                                 Table C.1: Variables. (In order of first appearance)

 Symbol



                                                            10
Ct                        consumption level
Qt                        the relative risk aversion state (RRA) variable
mt                        log real pricing kernel
ct                        ln(Ct )
qt                        ln(Qt )
∆ct                       log change in consumption
∆qt                       log change in RRA of per period utility of the representative agent
Ht                        external habit level (as in Campbell and Cochrane, 1999)
θt                        log change in the real industrial production index, or growth
pt                        upside macroeconomic uncertainty state variable, or “good” uncertainty,
                          or shape parameter of the upside macroeconomic shock
nt                        downside macroeconomic uncertainty state variable, or “bad” uncertainty,
                          or shape parameter of the downside macroeconomic shock
uθt                       growth disturbance
ωp,t                      upside macroeconomic shock
ωn,t                      downside macroeconomic shock
Ytmac                     macroeconomic state variables consisting of {θt , pt , nt }
lt                        log corporate bond loss rate
ult                       loss rate-specific shock
ωlp,t                     upside loss rate (cash flow) shock
ωln,t                     downside loss rate (cash flow) shock
lpt                       upside loss rate (cash flow) uncertainty state variable,
                          or shape parameter of the upside loss rate shock
Ytf in                    financial state variables consisting of {lt , lpt }
gt                        change in log earnings
ugt                       earnings growth-specific disturbance
ωg,t                      standardized earnings growth-specific shock
κt                        log consumption-earnings ratio
uκt                       consumption-earnings ratio-specific disturbance
ωκ,t                      standardized consumption-earnings ratio-specific shock
ηt                        log dividend payout ratio
uηt                       dividend payout ratio-specific disturbance
ωη,t                      standardized dividend payout ratio-specific shock
∆dt                       log change in dividend
uqt                       risk aversion-specific disturbance
ωq,t                      risk aversion shock
πt                        inflation
uπt                       inflation-specific disturbance
ωπ,t                      standardized inflation-specific shock
Ytother                   a vector of non-macro state variables, [πt , lt , gt , κt , ηt , lpt , qt ]0
Yt                        a vector of all 10 state variables, [Ytmac,0 , Ytf in,0 ]0
ωt                        a vector of 9 independent shocks, [ωp,t , ωn,t , ωπ,t , ωlp,t , ωln,t , ωg,t , ωκ,t , ωη,t , ωq,t ]0
met                       log nominal pricing kernel
rf
f
     t                    nominal risk free rate
pc1t                      log price-coupon ratio of one period defaultable bond portfolio
pcN  t                    log price-coupon ratio of N-period defaultable bond portfolio
P Dt                      price-dividend ratio
r̃ti                     log nominal asset return for asset i, i ∈ {eq, cb}
       i
Et rt+1                   expected return for asset i
RPti                      model-implied one-month expected excess returns for asset i
V ARti ≡ V ARt (r̃t+1
                  i
                      )   model-implied one-month expected physical variances for asset i
       i,Q       Q i
V ARt ≡ V ARt (r̃t+1 )    model-implied one-month expected risk-neutral variances for asset i
RV ARti                   empirical benchmark of one-month realized physical variances for asset i


                                                      11
QV ARteq                  empirical benchmark of one-month expected risk-neutral variances for equity
Et                        monthly earnings
raBEX
  t                       Bekaert-Engstrom-Xu’s financial proxy to risk aversion
uncBEX
    t                     Bekaert-Engstrom-Xu’s financial proxy to macroeconomic uncertainty


                                       Table C.2: Parameters.

   Symbol
   γ            constant utility curvature parameter
   a, b         parameters in Qt
   β            constant discount factor
   θ̄           unconditional mean of growth
   ρθ           AR(1) coefficient of growth
   mp           sensitivity of output growth on lagged upside macroeconomic uncertainty
   mn           sensitivity of output growth on lagged downside macroeconomic uncertainty
   p̄           unconditional mean of pt
   n̄           unconditional mean of nt
   σθp          scale parameter associated with the upside macroeconomic shock, ωp,t , in θt
   σθn          scale parameter associated with the downside macroeconomic shock, ωn,t , in θt
   ρp           AR(1) coefficient of pt
   ρn           AR(1) coefficient of nt
   σpp          sensitivity of pt on ωp,t
   σnn          sensitivity of nt on ωn,t
   l0           constant in the dynamic process of lt
   ρll          AR(1) coefficient of lt
   mlp          sensitivity of loss rate on lagged upside macroeconomic uncertainty
   mln          sensitivity of loss rate on lagged downside macroeconomic uncertainty
   σlp          sensitivity of loss rate on the upside macroeconomic shock ωp,t
   σln          sensitivity of loss rate on the downside macroeconomic shock ωn,t
   σllp         scale parameter associated with ωlp,t in lt
   σlln         scale parameter associated with ωln,t in lt
    ¯
   lp           unconditional mean of lpt
    ¯
   ln           constant shape parameter of ωln,t
   σlplp        sensitivity of lpt on ωlp,t
   ρlp          AR(1) coefficient of lpt
   j0 *         constant in the dynamic process of variable jt
   ρjj *        AR(1) coefficient of variable jt
   ρj,mac *     sensitivities of variable jt on lagged macroeconomic state variables Ytmac
   ρj,f in **   sensitivities of variable jt on lagged financial state variables Ytf in
   σjp *        sensitivity of variable jt on the upside macroeconomic shock ωp,t
   σjn *        sensitivity of variable jt on the downside macroeconomic shock ωn,t
   σjlp **      sensitivity of variable jt on the upside loss rate shock ωlp,t
   σjln **      sensitivity of variable jt on the downside loss rate shock ωln,t
   σjj *        standard deviation of the variable jt residual
   q0           constant in the dynamic process of risk aversion qt
   ρqq          AR(1) coefficient of qt
   ρqp          sensitivity of risk aversion on lagged upside macroeconomic shock
   ρqn          sensitivity of risk aversion on lagged downside macroeconomic shock
   σqp          sensitivity of risk aversion on the upside macroeconomic shock ωp,t
   σqn          sensitivity of risk aversion on the downside macroeconomic shock ωn,t
   σqq          scale parameter associated with the risk aversion shock ωq,t
   µ            constant vector in the state variable system (10 × 1)
   A            autocorrelation vector in the state variable system (10 × 10)
   Σ            scale / volatility parameter matrix of the 9 shocks (10 × 9)

                                                 12
    m0      constant in the real pricing kernel process
    m1      sensitivity vector of real pricing kernel to state variable shocks
    m2      sensitivity vector of real pricing kernel to state variable levels
    m̃0     constant in the nominal pricing kernel process
    m
    f1      sensitivity vector of nominal pricing kernel to state variable shocks
    m
    f2      sensitivity vector of nominal pricing kernel to state variable levels
    b10     constant in the log price-coupon ratio of one period defaultable bond portfolio
    b11     sensitivity vector of the log price-coupon ratio on state variable levels
    bN0     constant in the log price-coupon ratio of N-period defaultable bond portfolio
    bN1     sensitivity vector of the log price-coupon ratio on state variable levels
    ξ˜i
    0       constant in the log return generating process of asset i
    ξ̃1i    sensitivity vector of log asset return i on lagged state variable levels
    r̃ i    asset return i loadings on state variable shocks
    σi      unconditional volatility of idiosyncratic return residuals
    χ       qt loadings on the instruments
    χunc    macroeconomic uncertainty loadings on the instruments
    Θ       a vector of unknown parameters in the GMM system
    Xb      estimates of X where X can be a parameter or a variable
                                    * for all j ∈ {g, κ, η, π}:
                                     ** for all j ∈ {g, κ, η}:




D       Additional Tables and Figures




                                             13
                  Table D.1: Financial Instruments Spanning Risk Aversion

This table presents summary statistics of the 6 financial instruments that are used to span our risk
aversion measure: “tsprd” is the difference between 10-year treasury yield and 3-month Treasury yield;
“csprd” is the difference between Moody’s Baa yield and the 10-year zero-coupon Treasury yield;
“EY5yr” (“DY5yr”) is the detrended earnings (dividend) yield where the moving average takes the 5
year average of monthly earnings yield, starting one year before; “rvareq” and “rvarcb” are realized
variances of log equity returns and log corporate bond returns, calculated from daily returns; “qvareq”
is the risk-neutral conditional variance of log equity returns; for the early years (before 1990), we use
VXO and authors’ calculations. Bold (italic) coefficients have <5% (10%) p-values. Block bootstrapped
errors are shown in parentheses. The sample period is from 1986/06 to 2015/02 (345 months).

                     tsprd      csprd     DY5yr      EY5yr         rvareq      qvareq      rvarcb
                                    Correlation Matrix
         tsprd         1       0.3524 0.2595 0.2526                0.1269     0.1244      0.2952
         csprd                    1       0.4990 0.5083            0.4786     0.5988      0.5330
        DY5yr                             1.0000 0.8966            0.1678     0.1650      0.3101
        EY5yr                                          1           0.1399     0.1564      0.3359
        rvareq                                                        1       0.8431      0.5943
        qvareq                                                                   1        0.5376
        rvarcb                                                                               1
                                    Summary Statistics
       Mean         0.0179     0.0231 -0.0030 -0.0074             0.0029      0.0040      0.0002
      Boot.SE      (0.0006)    (0.0004) (0.0003) (0.0008)         (0.0003)    (0.0002)    (0.0000)
        S.D.        0.0116     0.0075 0.0061 0.0149               0.0059      0.0037      0.0003
      Boot.SE      (0.0003)    (0.0005) (0.0003) (0.0007)         (0.0014)    (0.0005)    (0.0000)
      Skewness     -0.2322     1.7891    0.0959 -0.3495           8.1198      3.7225      4.2227
      Boot.SE      (0.0810)    (0.2515) (0.1882) (0.1502)         (1.5951)    (0.5123)    (0.6872)
       AR(1)        0.9668     0.9640 0.9822 0.9843               0.4312      0.7462      0.5775
         SE        (0.0137)    (0.0143) (0.0083) (0.0068)         (0.0488)    (0.0360)    (0.0441)




                                                   14
               Table D.2: Projecting Pure Cash Flow Uncertainty using OLS

This table presents regression results of the estimated monthly pure cash flow uncertainty (from loss
rate) on a set of monthly asset prices; some are used to span the time-varying risk aversion. The
dependent variable is lpt , the time-varying shape parameter of the pure right-tail loss rate residual
(after controlling for macroeconomic shocks) as demonstrated in Table 2. ×10−3 ” in the header means
that the coefficients and their SEs reported are divided by 1000 for reporting convenience. “VARC”
reports the variance decomposition. Bold (italic) coefficients have <5% (10%) p-values. Robust and
efficient standard errors are shown in parentheses. Adjusted R2 s are reported. The sample period is
1986/06 to 2015/02 (345 months).

                                                 (×10−3 )
                                                     lpt      VARC
                                   constant       -0.001
                                                  (0.001)
                                     χtsprd       -0.058      -2.33%
                                                  (0.011)
                                     χcsprd        0.202     62.69%
                                                  (0.025)
                                    χDY 5yr        0.234     41.57%
                                                  (0.046)
                                    χEY 5yr       -0.061     -22.57%
                                                  (0.019)
                                    χrvareq        -0.026     -3.76%
                                                  (0.062)
                                    χqvareq        0.119     13.25%
                                                  (0.067)
                                    χrvarcb        1.779     13.67%
                                                  (0.593)
                                  χrvarcbSP EC     -0.223     -2.51%
                                                  (0.556)
                                       R2          9.11%




                                                  15
                                 conditional volatility

     0.015

      0.01

     0.005

         0
        194701 195504 196308 197112 198004 198808 199612 200504 201308

                              conditional scaled skewness
         0

       -0.2

       -0.4

       -0.6

        194701 195504 196308 197112 198004 198808 199612 200504 201308



Figure D.1: Model-implied conditional moments of industrial production growth. The
shaded regions are NBER recession months from the NBER website.




                                        16
