                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           IMPROVING EDUCATIONAL PATHWAYS TO SOCIAL MOBILITY:
                   EVIDENCE FROM NORWAY’S “REFORM 94”

                                      Marianne Bertrand
                                       Magne Mogstad
                                       Jack Mountjoy

                                     Working Paper 25679
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25679


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2019




We thank Lars Kirkebøen, Manudeep Bhuller, and Lasse Eika for their help in marshaling the
administrative registries involved in this project. Larry Katz and Markus Nagler provided
valuable feedback, along with seminar participants at Harvard, UC San Diego, UC Irvine, and the
EBE 2016 Summer Meeting. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Marianne Bertrand, Magne Mogstad, and Jack Mountjoy. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Improving Educational Pathways to Social Mobility: Evidence from Norway’s “Reform 94”
Marianne Bertrand, Magne Mogstad, and Jack Mountjoy
NBER Working Paper No. 25679
March 2019
JEL No. I24,I26,I28,J24,J62

                                           ABSTRACT

High school vocational education has a controversial history in the United States, largely due to a
perceived tradeoff between teaching readily deployable occupational skills versus shunting
mostly disadvantaged students away from the educational and career flexibility afforded by
general academic courses. We study the effects of a nationwide high school reform in Norway
that aimed to move beyond this tradeoff. Reform 94, implemented in one step in the fall of 1994,
integrated more general education into the vocational track, offered vocational students a pathway
to college through a supplementary semester of academic courses, and sought to improve the
quality of the vocational track through greater access to apprenticeships. We identify the impacts
of the reform through a difference-in-discontinuity research design, comparing students born just
before and after the reform’s birthdate eligibility cutoff to students born around the same cutoff in
placebo years. Linking multiple administrative registries covering the entire Norwegian
population, we find that the reform substantially increased initial enrollment in the vocational
track, but with different subsequent outcomes for different groups. More men complete the
vocational track at the expense of academic diplomas, but this has no detectable impact on
college-going and leads to reduced criminal activity and higher earnings in adulthood, especially
among disadvantaged men. For disadvantaged women, the initial surge in vocational enrollment
leads to fewer high school dropouts and more vocational degrees with the college-prep
supplement, and hence an increase in the share of college-eligible women; however, this
translates into only small and insignificant increases in college completion and adult earnings.
We show that men overwhelmingly pursue vocational education in higher-paying skilled trade
fields, while women almost exclusively pursue vocational education in lower-paying service-
based fields, which helps in interpreting some of these results. Overall, the reform succeeded at
improving social mobility, particularly among men, but it somewhat exacerbated the gender gap
in adult earnings.

Marianne Bertrand                                 Jack Mountjoy
Booth School of Business                          Industrial Relations Section
University of Chicago                             Princeton University
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue                        Louis A. Simpson International Bldg.
Chicago, IL 60637                                 Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER                                          mountjoy@princeton.edu
marianne.bertrand@chicagobooth.edu

Magne Mogstad
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
magne.mogstad@gmail.com
1     Introduction
Academic and vocational secondary schools can be viewed as two separate pathways into the labor
market. Academic schools deliver the general knowledge and learning skills that will prepare young
people for the demands of college, where they will start making specific human capital investments
into a career. In contrast, vocational schools deliver practical knowledge and occupation-specific skills
that directly map into entering a particular occupation. As shown in Figure 1, there is tremendous
variation across countries in how much they rely on these two types of education in upper secondary.
The US is at one extreme of the spectrum, with very limited investment in vocational (also known
as career and technical) education in high school compared to other OECD countries.1 At the other
extreme of the spectrum are countries such as Austria, Germany, and Switzerland, where between 60
and 70 percent of high schoolers are enrolled in a vocational program.
    The main appeal of academic secondary schools is that the general knowledge they aim to convey
to their students might be more portable across occupations, which is particularly valuable in the face
of rapid labor market changes such as those induced by technology or globalization (Goldin, 2001).
Moreover, by developing habits of learning, general education may make the process of re-skilling
in response to shifting labor demand less costly. There has also been, in the US in particular, a
more philosophical resistance to vocational education. John Dewey (1916) was famously opposed
to the expansion of vocational high schools. He viewed such efforts to build a two-track (academic
vs. vocational) education system as institutionalizing a social class distinction within the design of
secondary education. This view is also well captured in the writings of Jeannie Oakes (1985): “[M]any
educational scholars agree that an underlying function of vocational education has been to segregate
poor and minority students into occupational training programs in order to preserve the academic
curriculum for middle- and upper-class students.” And indeed, in the US but also other countries,
vocational education is often perceived as a dumping ground for underachieving students, those with
learning disabilities or other behavioral problems.
    Opposite arguments, however, can also be made, under which too little investment in vocational
education in high school may contribute to worse labor market outcomes and more constraints on
social mobility. First, the immediate marketability of the general skills learned in an academic high
school might be limited absent the complementary subsequent investment in a specific career in college.
This is important in that, while college participation has been on the rise throughout the developed
world, it remains true that most young people today will not graduate from college and many will
not even enroll. As of 2015, only 42 percent of 25-34 year-olds across the OECD had completed some
tertiary education. Also, as has been by now extensively documented, men have been particularly
struggling with college: of the six million students across the OECD that obtained a bachelor’s degree
in 2013, 58% were women.2 This means that many young people, but especially young men, still
enter the labor market with at most a high school degree and might be better equipped to succeed
in this transition from school to work with more occupation-specific skills. Furthermore, the abstract
    1 Federal government funding under the Perkins Act (the largest source of funding for career and technical education

in the US) has been on the decline since the mid 1980s. While American high school students are completing more course
work in academic fields such as mathematics, science, English and social studies, the number of vocational education
credits has been declining for the last three decades (Hudson, 2013).
    2 http://www.oecd.org/gender/data/gender-gap-in-education.htm.




                                                           2
       Figure 1: Vocational education and training as a share of the high school sector, 2006
Source: OECD (2008).



nature of the learning in academic schools may induce more high school dropouts as young people find
it hard to grasp the “real-world” value of the curriculum. This suggests the possibility that a pure
academic focus in high school may also contribute to fewer years of completed schooling, with more
young people out of school (and possibly out of work) at a time when their propensity to engage in
risky behavior is at its highest.
   Such arguments have been gaining traction in the US, where there has been a growing discussion of
the failure of the current US secondary education system in addressing the needs of the “forgotten half”
(Neumark, 2007) for which college has not been in the cards. In particular, there has been growing
interest in educational reforms that would strengthen vocational education in US high schools but
also move away from the rigid two-track model feared since Dewey and offer more flexible pathways
to success for students (Symonds et al., 2011).
   In this paper, we study the consequences of such an educational reform in Norway. In 1994,
Norway implemented changes in its high school vocational programs that were meant to both increase
the quality of vocational education and lower the switching costs out of the vocational track. This
reform, often referred to as “Reform 94,” was meant to address several concerns with the high school
system that had emerged by the early 1990s. In particular, Norway faced high drop-out rates and low
rates of on-time degree completion. The existing vocational system was characterized by very early
specialization, with students on the vocational track having to choose from more than a hundred
foundation vocational courses in the first year of high school. The number of quality apprenticeship
opportunities for vocational students was limited and the links between school-based learning and
industry were poor. Finally, entering the vocational track essentially closed the door to college:
students with a vocational high school degree considering attending college had to restart high school
on the academic track.


                                                   3
   Starting in the fall of 1994, the number of foundation courses in the first year of the vocational
track was streamlined to 10, with further specialization delayed to later years and investments made in
improving access to quality apprenticeships in the final two years. Much of the rigidity of the previous
two-track system was lifted by making general education a more integral part of the vocational track:
vocational students now had to complete a common core in language, math, natural sciences, and
social sciences, which allowed them to accumulate credits towards eligibility for tertiary education.
Graduates of and students in the vocational track faced reduced costs of transferring to the academic
track: vocational graduates could become eligible for university conditional on completing a supple-
mentary six months of general education courses, and current vocational students could transfer to
the academic track after the second year of high school and obtain an academic high school degree
(and hence be eligible for college) by the end of the third year. This comprehensive educational reform
was implemented in one step in the fall of 1994 with a strict eligibility cutoff: those born on or after
January 1, 1978 were enrolled into the new regime.
   In this paper, we study the impact of this educational reform on educational attainment, paying
close attention to the dynamics of enrollment and completion of different programs (vocational high
school, academic high school, and college). We also study the impact of this reform on labor market
participation and earnings in adulthood. We complement our study of educational and labor market
outcomes with a glance into social outcomes such as criminal behavior, teen parenthood, and marriage.
By comparing impacts across gender and socioeconomic status, we assess this educational reform’s
implications for gender gaps and social mobility.
   We use a difference-in-discontinuity research design to identify causal effects of the reform. In
particular, we leverage the sharp eligibility cutoff and compare outcomes for those born right after
January 1, 1978 (eligible) and those born right before January 1, 1978 (not eligible). To eliminate the
confounding effect of school starting age, we compare outcomes around the January 1, 1978 reform
threshold to outcomes around January 1 in other (control) years.
   We find that the reform substantially increased enrollment in the vocational track, as well as
enrollment in high school overall. Subsequent outcomes, however, differed across groups. Among
men, especially those from disadvantaged backgrounds, more completed the vocational track; however,
this increase in the share of men with a vocational high school degree is roughly equal in magnitude
to the decline in the share of men with an academic high school degree, and hence the reform did
not succeed in reducing men’s dropout rate from high school. Despite the decline in the share of
men with an academic high school degree, the reform did not decrease male college attendance and
completion, suggesting that the reform brought into the vocational track men who would not have
attended college anyway. Following these students into the labor market, we find that the average
annual earnings of disadvantaged men increased by 5 percent post-reform. We also find evidence
of reform-induced reductions in criminal charges among disadvantaged men in their teenage years,
likely the result of an incapacitation effect due to the higher rates of high school attendance during
peak ages of criminal activity. In contrast, among women, but especially disadvantaged women, the
initial surge in vocational enrollment leads to fewer high school dropouts: the share of disadvantaged
women without high school credentials dropped by about 6 percentage points, or roughly a 20 percent
decrease. The share of women with solely a vocational high school degree or solely an academic high



                                                    4
school degree did not change; instead, the reform led to a large increase in the percentage of women
holding both vocational and academic high school degrees, virtually all of whom first completed the
vocational track and then completed the six-month supplementary academic degree. Yet, despite the
greater share of college-eligible women, the reform did not significantly increase the share of women
who completed college and it had only small (and statistically insignificant) impacts on their adult
earnings. Much of the difference in terms of how much men financially benefit from accumulating more
vocational education compared to women can be traced to sharp gender segregation across vocational
fields of study, with men concentrating in higher-paying skilled trade fields and women in lower-paying
service fields.
   Overall, the reform reduced the gap in adult earnings between disadvantaged and less disadvan-
taged children by about 20 percent, and it was particularly effective at improving social mobility
among men, with the gap in adult earnings between disadvantaged and less disadvantaged men de-
creasing by close to 30 percent. However, given that male earnings gains dominated female earnings
gains, the reform exacerbated the overall gender gap in adult earnings by about 8 percent.
   We also perform a simple back-of-the-envelope exercise to assess how much of the observed la-
bor market gains induced by the reform can be attributed to compositional changes in educational
achievement versus changes in degree-specific returns. We estimate that only about 20 percent of the
earnings gains for disadvantaged men can be accounted for by their switching out of academic high
school degrees and into vocational degrees, implying that improvement in the quality of the vocational
track might play a large role in generating these earnings gains. Among disadvantaged women, on the
other hand, nearly all of their (statistically insignificant) earnings gains can be rationalized solely via
the change in educational achievement (e.g. fewer women with no high school degrees, more women
with both academic and vocational high school degrees).
   While there is a vast literature on the returns to schooling, research on the returns to different
educational curricula in high school, or different ways to structure educational tracks in high school,
is much more limited. Most of the research on the returns to vocational vs. general education in
high school is correlational, and hence unable to robustly address selection concerns. The findings of
this literature are overall quite mixed. Some papers (Mane, 1999; Bishop & Mane, 2005; Meer, 2007)
have reported on a positive relationship between vocational secondary education and earnings. City-
level, state-level, and national-level quasi-experimental studies commissioned by the US Department
of Education as part of a national assessment of vocational education found more mixed evidence on
the impact of vocational education on educational and labor market outcomes (US DOE, 2014). In a
summary of earlier evidence from France, the UK, and the US, Ryan (2001) finds a positive associa-
tion between vocational education and employment probabilities, but no clear association with labor
market earnings. Using individual-level data that span multiple countries, Hanushek et al. (2017) and
Hampf and Woessmann (2017) find that the positive association between employment and vocational
education declines with age, consistent with the view that vocational education may ease the transi-
tion from school to work but that the specific skills acquired in vocational school become more rapidly
obsolete than the general skills acquired in an academic program. A related literature, summarized in
Altonji, Blom, and Meghir (2012), has studied the correlation between different curriculum choices in
high school and earnings, with a heavy focus on the positive association between math course-taking



                                                    5
and later-life earnings. Laforest (2017) extends this literature by studying the association between
the number of vocational courses students take and their earnings in adulthood.3 He finds that trade
vocational courses are associated with higher earnings for non-college bound students, as well as a
greater likelihood of being employed in a skilled occupation, while business vocational courses are
associated with higher earnings in low-wage occupations; he also finds that increased access to voca-
tional courses are associated with a lower likelihood of dropping out of high school among non-college
bound students but also a lower likelihood of post-secondary education. Finally, another related lit-
erature has studied the effects of school-to-work programs on education and labor market outcomes.
Neumark and Rothstein (2006) find some positive benefits on college attendance and employment for
males in school-to-work programs that create a direct link to the labor market (including internships
and cooperative education); focusing on tech-prep programs, Cellini (2006) finds positive effects of
these programs on high-school completion and community-college attendance, but negative effects on
4-year college attendance.
   Our research is most directly related to a few papers that have also leveraged educational policy
reforms to learn about the relative benefits of vocational vs. academic education in high school, and
alternative ways to structure high school tracking. Most of these previously studied reforms have
centered around forcing more general schooling onto vocational students, and hence are narrower
than Reform 94. Overall, this work fails to find much evidence that more general schooling benefits
vocational track students, and sometimes suggests evidence of perverse effects. Oosterbeek and Web-
bink (2007) use a difference-in-difference approach to study a reform in the Netherlands in 1975 that
prolonged three-year vocational tracks with an additional year of general education; using students
in tracks that did not change length as the control group, they fail to find any positive effect of the
extra year of general schooling on the earnings of vocational students post-reform. Malamud and
Pop-Eleches (2011) study a reform in Romania in 1973 that shifted a large number of students out of
vocational and into general education; using a regression discontinuity design, they find no significant
differences in university completion, employment, or earnings between the post- and pre-reform co-
horts. Zilic (2018) studies the effect of a high school reform in Croatia in the mid-1970s that reduced
tracking in high school by forcing all students to attend two years of general curriculum before enter-
ing a vocational school; using a regression discontinuity design, he finds that the reform reduced high
school and university completion rates among males but had no adverse effects on females. Finally,
Hall (2012, 2016) studies the pilot phase of a major education reform conducted in Sweden in 1991
that increased the academic content of the vocational tracks in upper secondary and gave students
graduating from these vocational tracks basic eligibility for university studies. Focusing on students
that start in the vocational track and exploiting variation in exposure to the pilot scheme across
municipalities, Hall (2012) finds that the reform increased the number of years of completed upper
secondary schooling among these students, but did not impact their college outcomes or earnings;
furthermore, she finds that the reform increased the probability of dropping out of high school among
students with low compulsory school GPAs. Furthermore, Hall (2016) shows that while the reform
overall reduced the risk of experiencing unemployment for vocational students, it increased that risk
among students with low GPAs (likely due to their higher drop out rates).
  3 See   also Kreisman and Stange (2017).



                                                   6
    Finally, the reformed educational system in Norway, with its emphasis on creating more flexible
pathways to success in high school, can be likened to the Career Academies that were established in
the US more than 30 years ago. Career Academies combine academic and vocational curricula and
provide work-based learning with employers, with the aim of further engaging students in school and
preparing them for transition to either tertiary education or work. A randomized controlled trial
evaluation conducted by MDRC in 1993 shows that participation in such an educational program
increases earnings, employment stability, and hours worked later in life, especially among men; those
gains, however, did not appear to be driven by improvement in years of completed schooling (Kemple,
2008).


2     Data
Below we describe our data and sample selection. Details about the data sources and each of the
variables are given in Appendix Table A.1.


2.1      Data sources
The starting point for our study is the Central Population Register, which contains records for every
Norwegian from 1967 to 2015. Importantly for our analysis, these records include information about
the exact date of birth, as well as basic demographic measures like gender and immigrant status.
Using unique identifiers for each individual, we link this data to several other data sources.

Educational enrollments and degrees.
Information on educational enrollments and degrees comes from the national educational registers.
We observe the school and track in which students enroll, and which degrees, if any, they complete.
This information is available for virtually all students in every school and track for the years 1985-
2015. Educational choices and attainment are reported by the schools directly to Statistics Norway,
thereby minimizing any measurement error due to misreporting. Starting with the 1985 birth cohort,
we also observe each individual’s grade point average (GPA) in 10th grade (age 15), the last year of
compulsory schooling.

Labor market outcomes and criminal charges.
To perform a comprehensive evaluation of Reform 94, we consider a number of outcome variables in
addition to educational choices and attainment. Starting in 1992, we have complete annual records of
labor market earnings from tax records, as well as criminal charges from administrative police records.
Starting in 2003, we also observe hours worked and hourly wages in a matched employer-employee
annual panel.

Family linkages.
Measures of family background, teenage parenthood, and marriage outcomes start by linking students
in our sample to their parents, children, and spouses using family identifiers in the Central Population
Register. With these linkages established, we measure parental and spousal outcomes in the same
administrative registries as our sample members.



                                                   7
2.2    Sample selection
Our main analysis focuses on individuals who were born in Norway around the years 1975-1981. On
average, there are about 50,000 individuals per cohort. We exclude the small number of individuals
who emigrated or died by age 30. In addition, we drop the roughly one percent of the sample with
missing parental identifiers. This yields an analysis sample of 339,793 individuals whom we can follow
from high school entry at age 16 into adulthood. We partition this sample into what we call reform
window and control window cohorts. The reform window cohort includes individuals born within
± 6 months of January 1, 1978 (the Reform 94 eligibility cutoff date), i.e. July 1977 through June
1978. The control window cohorts consist of individuals born within ± 6 months of January 1 in
the three years prior to the reform window (1975-1977) and the three years after the reform window
(1979-1981).
   For some outcomes, we restrict attention to a subset of the 1975-1981 analysis cohorts due to data
constraints. For example, earnings data coverage ends in 2015, so we drop the younger set of control
cohorts when studying earnings at the older ages of 35-37. For criminal charges in the teenage years,
we drop the older set of control cohorts, as we do not have information on criminal charges prior to
1992. We also use the 1985 birth cohort for some of the descriptive results, as they are the first to
have data on grade point average (GPA) in 10th grade, the last year of compulsory schooling.
   We focus many of our main results on individuals with low predicted 10th grade GPA as an
indicator of disadvantage. Low-scoring students are the policy-relevant subpopulation most likely to
be affected by the reform, as they are the most likely to participate in the vocational track and are also
at the highest risk of dropping out of high school. We do not observe actual 10th grade GPA in our
1975-1981 analysis cohorts, as the first cohort with GPA data is 1985, so we use family background
variables to predict GPA in the analysis cohorts using a random forest trained on the 1985 cohort.
In particular, we train a random forest on the 1985 birth cohort using family background covariates
available in both samples: mother’s education (11 categories), father’s education (11 categories),
mother’s long-run earnings (continuous), father’s long-run earnings (continuous), an indicator for
immigrant, an indicator for at least one immigrant parent, and number of siblings (continuous). The
random forest procedure grows one thousand regression trees in the training sample, each of which uses
only a random subset of the covariates, to produce a cross-validated prediction that maps covariates
to predicted outcome values (in this case, 10th grade GPA). We use two randomly sampled covariates
for each tree according to the rule of thumb f loor[K/3], where K is the number of available covariates,
equal to seven in our case. To predict 10th grade GPA in the 1975-1981 main analysis cohorts, the
random forest averages the predicted outcomes across all of the trees for each observation. Training
and prediction are performed separately by gender.
   The top panel of Figure 2 shows that actual 10th grade GPA strongly stratifies the 1985 birth
cohort by their probability of obtaining at most a vocational high school degree (including dropouts
who complete no degrees), and the bottom panel shows that predicted GPA reproduces much of this
strong stratification within the 1975-81 main analysis cohorts.




                                                    8
                                      Men, 1985 Birth Cohort                                                           Women, 1985 Birth Cohort
                1




                                                                                                 1
   Vocational degree at most




                                                                                    Vocational degree at most
                         .8




                                                                                                          .8
                  .6




                                                                                                   .6
           .4




                                                                                            .4
    .2




                                                                                     .2
                0




                                                                                                 0
                               0     20       40        60           80   100                                   0      20       40        60           80   100
                                              GPA percentile                                                                    GPA percentile


                                   Men, 1975−81 Analysis Cohorts                                                    Women, 1975−81 Analysis Cohorts
                1




                                                                                                 1
   Vocational degree at most




                                                                                    Vocational degree at most
                         .8




                                                                                                          .8
                  .6




                                                                                                   .6
           .4




                                                                                            .4
    .2




                                                                                     .2
                0




                                                                                                 0




                               0     20        40        60          80   100                                   0      20        40        60          80   100
                                          Predicted GPA percentile                                                          Predicted GPA percentile




Figure 2: Stratification by actual 10th grade GPA in 1985 cohort (top row) and predicted GPA in
analysis cohorts (bottom row)
Notes: The top two figures show the share of men (left) and women (right) who obtain at most a vocational high school
degree (including dropouts who obtain no degrees) by actual 10th grade GPA percentile, which is first observed in the
1985 birth cohort. The bottom two figures show the share who obtain at most a vocational degree by predicted GPA
percentile in the reform analysis cohorts (born 1975-1981), for whom actual GPA is not observed. GPA is predicted via
random forest as described in Section 2.2.


   Table 1 provides summary statistics for our main analysis sample and subgroups of interest. Dis-
advantaged men and women in the rightmost columns of the table, defined as being in the bottom
third of the distribution of predicted GPA within each gender, come from family backgrounds where
a college-educated parent is extremely rare, parental income is substantially lower, and siblings are
more numerous compared to the average men and women in our sample. Low predicted GPA is thus
synonymous with a disadvantaged background, so we simply refer to this subgroup as disadvantaged
throughout the text.




                                                                                9
                                         Table 1: Summary statistics

                                                                                        Disadvantaged
                                                   Pooled        Men       Women        Men     Women

        At least one college-educated parent         0.328       0.329       0.326      0.012       0.021

                   Parental income                  55,281      55,231      55,333     41,454      41,807
                        (SD)                       (20,771)    (20,806)    (20,734)   (13,763)    (14,097)

                      Immigrant                      0.029       0.027       0.031      0.033       0.043

            At least one immigrant parent            0.076       0.075       0.077      0.069       0.084

                  Number of siblings                 1.65        1.65        1.65        1.81        1.77
                       (SD)                         (1.07)      (1.07)      (1.07)      (1.24)      (1.23)

        Predicted 10th grade GPA percentile          50.5        37.0        64.6        9.9         36.5
                       (SD)                         (28.9)      (26.6)      (24.0)      (5.5)       (13.1)

           Enroll in vocational track at 16          0.356       0.426       0.283      0.589       0.415

           Complete vocational HS degree             0.284       0.337       0.228      0.417       0.310

            Complete academic HS degree              0.558       0.472       0.648      0.269       0.467

               Complete college degree               0.356       0.271       0.445      0.124       0.273

            Mean earnings over ages 25-34           43,831      50,755      36,586     47,108      31,685
                       (SD)                        (22,683)    (24,348)    (18,163)   (23,344)    (17,039)

        Any criminal charges over ages 16-30         0.121       0.192       0.047      0.266       0.072

                 Teenage parenthood                  0.025       0.009       0.042      0.014       0.074

                  Married by age 34                  0.436       0.378       0.496      0.347       0.473

                 Age at first marriage               28.14       28.87       27.55      28.61       27.06

              Spouse has college degree              0.378       0.474       0.302      0.329       0.176

                         N                         339,793     173,741     166,052      57,911      55,347
               N for criminal charges              189,319     97,042      92,277       32,346      30,757
            N for marriage characteristics         143,818     63,870      79,948       19,375      25,199


Notes: This table presents summary statistics for the main analysis sample. Family background and demographic
variables are measured at age 16 just prior to high school entry. Parental income is a long-run average of combined
mother and father earnings over the twenty years prior to the child turning 16. Degree completion is measured at age
30. The sample size for criminal charges is smaller than the other outcomes as it excludes the older control cohorts
for whom charge data are not available. Age at first marriage and spouse has college degree are conditional on being
married by age 34, the last commonly observable age among our main analysis cohorts. Disadvantaged is an indicator
for being in the bottom third of the distribution of predicted GPA within each gender.


                                                        10
3       Institutional Setting: Reform 94 and Descriptive Evidence
3.1         Background and reform
After completing 10 years of compulsory schooling at age 16, Norwegian students enter high school
(upper secondary). While high school is not compulsory, nearly everyone enrolls. There are generally
no tuition fees for attending high school. The vast majority of high schools are public and adminis-
trated locally by the nineteen counties. Schools may offer academic education to prepare for higher
education, vocational education and training in various fields, or both. Students may apply to several
schools and fields within their county. The admission process is centralized with students applying to
the combination of a high school and field. Schools or fields for which there is excess demand are filled
based on an application score that depends on the student’s performance in lower secondary school.

Pre-reform system.
Norway’s high school system broadly consists of two tracks. The first is the 3-year academic track,
offering theoretical education to prepare and become eligible for higher education at colleges and
universities. Curricula at all schools follow a national standard, focusing on language, math, natural
sciences, and social studies. Upon completion, students are awarded a general admission certificate
for higher education.4 The second is the vocational track, offering vocational education and training.
Prior to Reform 94, this track consisted of a theoretical introduction to a chosen vocational field
and practical training in school workshops (or occasionally an apprenticeship), with limited general
education. Depending on the subject area, the length of the vocational track varied from 3 to 4 years.
     Figure 3 plots the distribution of educational attainment by gender under the pre-reform system.
Norway, like much of the developed world, is characterized by higher educational attainment for
women. Nearly half of pre-reform women have completed a college degree by age 30, compared to less
then 30 percent of men. Among the remaining women who do not complete college, they are more
likely to have an academic high school degree as their highest educational attainment relative to a
vocational degree or no degrees at all. One quarter of men, in contrast, have a vocational high school
degree as their highest attainment—nearly double the share of women in the same category—and men
are more likely to drop out with no degrees at all. Only a small share of pre-reform men and women
(less than 5 percent) complete both vocational and academic high school degrees (without having also
completed college).
     Figure 4 shows the distribution of completed vocational fields of study among pre-reform men and
women. Men overwhelmingly pursue vocational education in skilled trade fields, while women almost
exclusively pursue vocational education in service-based fields. The three more common vocational
fields among men are industrial, electrical, and construction. Among women, the most common voca-
tional degrees are in the health and social care sector, followed by sales/service/communication. The
only truly gender-mixed vocational fields are in sales/service/communication and hotel/foodservice.
   Figure 5 shows that these vocational fields are distinct not only in their content and gender
composition, but also in their remuneration. For each field, we plot mean hourly wages among
individuals with a vocational degree in that field as their highest educational attainment. Given the
stark gender segregation by field observed in Figure 4, we do not report these hourly wages separately
    4 See   Kirkeboen et al. (2016) for a description of the admission process to higher education in Norway.


                                                             11
                                                         .5
                                                                                                               Men                       Women




                                                         .4
                   Within−gender share

                                                         .3
                                                         .2
                                                         .1
                                                         0




                                                                     No degrees              Vocational            Academic             Vocational               College
                                                                                               only                  only               + Academic

                                                                                                     Highest degree completed


                    Figure 3: Highest degree completed by gender, pre-reform cohorts
Notes: This figure shows the distribution of highest degree completed, separately for men and women, among the
pre-reform cohort born in 1977. These degree categories are mutually exclusive and exhaustive, and measured as of age
30.




                                                                                                               Men                      Women
                                                               .1
                                                               .08
                                         Within−gender share

                                                               .06
                                                               .04
                                                               .02
                                                               0




                                                                          al           cal      tion       stry              mm          od            ign           are
                                                                     ustri        ctri       ruc h/fore                  /co         l/fo          des           al c
                                                                 Ind           Ele      o nst        i s            v ice      H ote        a fts/         s oci
                                                                                     C           / f               r                      r              /
                                                                                              Ag            les
                                                                                                               /se
                                                                                                                                 Art
                                                                                                                                      s/c           alth
                                                                                                         Sa                                     He

                                                                                          Trades                                               Services



         Figure 4: Distribution of high school vocational fields by gender, pre-reform cohorts
Notes: This figure shows the distribution of high school vocational fields completed, separately for men and women,
among the pre-reform cohort born in 1977. Completion is measured as of age 30. Within-gender shares in this graph
do not sum to one, but rather to the overall within-gender share completing any vocational degree; the complement
consists of those who complete an academic degree or no high school degree.




                                                                                                                  12
                                                   35
                       Mean hourly wage (2015 $)

                                                   30
                                                   25
                                                   20




                                                            rial        cal     ion restry                          m            d
                                                                                                                  om tel/foo /desig ial ca
                                                                                                                                               n    re
                                                        ust         ctri struct          fo                   e/c
                                                    Ind         Ele       n          sh/                  vic       Ho           a fts         s oc
                                                                       Co   Ag
                                                                               / f i
                                                                                                   /s e r
                                                                                                                          s/ c r
                                                                                                                                       alt h /
                                                                                               les                    Art           He
                                                                                            Sa
                                                                          Trades                                              Services



                                        Figure 5: Mean hourly wage by high school vocational field
Notes: This figure shows mean hourly wages associated with each high school vocational field among the pre- and
post-reform 1977 and 1978 cohorts. Wages are first averaged within person over ages 28-33, which is the maximal
age span for which we can measure wages for all analysis cohorts at the same ages. These means exclude vocational
completers who also complete an academic high school degree or a college degree to reflect the wage earning potential
of a terminal vocational degree in each field.


by gender. Figure 5 shows that the male-dominated vocational fields in skilled trades are associated
with higher hourly wages than the female-dominated service fields. Mean hourly wages are highest
for those having pursued vocational education in industrial or electrical trades and lowest for those
that have specialized in arts/crafts/design.


Challenges to the system.
In 1994, Norway implemented several changes to its high school system that were meant to both
increase the quality of vocational education and lower the switching costs out of the vocational track.
The motivation for this reform included several concerns that had emerged by the early 1990s. Norway
faced high drop-out rates and low rates of on-time high school degree completion, especially in the
vocational track. The existing vocational system was characterized by very early specialization, with
students on the vocational track having to pick one of more than a hundred subject areas in the first
year of high school. The number of quality apprenticeship opportunities for vocational students was
also limited, and the links between school-based learning and industry were poor. Finally, entering the
vocational track essentially closed the door to college: students with a vocational high school degree
considering attending college had to restart the entire high school process on the academic track.

Key elements of Reform 94.
To address these concerns, the Norwegian government reformed its high school system in a single step
the fall of 1994, known as Reform 94.5 While the academic track remained essentially unchanged, the
  5 See   Brinch et al. (2012) and OECD (2008) for descriptions of the Norwegian educational system in general and



                                                                                                  13
      Figure 6: Main pathways in the Norwegian high school system, pre- and post-Reform 94


vocational track experienced three main transformations, as visualized in Figure 6. First, the effort
to improve the quality of the vocational track included significantly increasing the availability of firm-
based apprenticeships. Instead of the typical pre-reform path of three years of school-based vocational
education, students in the post-reform system became more likely to undertake two years of school-
based study followed by two years of employment and training within a firm. To increase the supply of
apprenticeships, the government began subsidizing the wages of apprentices and partnering with firms
and trade unions. A second key element of Reform 94 was to broaden the vocational subject areas and
integrate more general education, thereby lowering switching costs both between vocational fields and
between the vocational and academic tracks. This was done in part by streamlining the first year of
the vocational track, reducing the choice set to ten subject areas with further specialization deferred to
the later years. Moreover, vocational students now had to complete a common core in language, math,
natural sciences, and social sciences, allowing them to accumulate transferable credits to the academic
track after the second year of vocational school. Finally, Reform 94 created a feasible pathway from
the vocational track to college: students who completed the reformed vocational track could now earn
an academic diploma and eligibility for higher education by completing a supplementary semester of
general education courses, rather than having to restart high school entirely.
Reform 94 in particular. Brinch et al. (2012) also study how the reform may have changed the educational attainment
of immigrant youth.




                                                        14
                                                                Men                                                                                      Women

                                       .8




                                                                                                                                  .8
      Share of cohort enrolled at 16




                                                                                                 Share of cohort enrolled at 16
                                       .6




                                                                                                                                  .6
                                       .4




                                                                                                                                  .4
                                       .2




                                                                                                                                  .2
                                       0




                                                                                                                                  0
                                            1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982                                               1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982
                                                             Birth cohort                                                                               Birth cohort

                                                     Academic track      Vocational track                                                       Academic track      Vocational track
                                                     Not enrolled                                                                               Not enrolled




                                                             Figure 7: Initial high school track by birth cohort
Notes: This figure shows initial high school track enrollment shares by birth cohort, measured at age 16. Students
choose between academic and vocational tracks upon high school entry, usually in the calendar year in which they turn
16, though note that some individuals do not enroll at 16. The dotted 1978 cohort is the first eligible for the reformed
high school system.


3.2                                    Descriptive evidence
Changes in enrollment and degree completion.
The time series evidence presented in Figure 7 suggests that the reform had a large and immediate
impact on students’ educational choices. This figure plots high school track enrollment shares by birth
cohort, as measured at age 16 (the age at which students typically enroll in high school). There is a
large and abrupt shift towards the vocational track and away from academic and non-enrollment with
the 1978 birth cohort, who are the first to be eligible (by law) for the reformed high school system.
    Moving from initial enrollments to final degrees, Figure 8 shows how the ultimate educational
attainment of men and women changed in the wake of Reform 94. Men and women both become
less likely to end up with only an academic high school degree as their highest attainment. For men,
this is almost entirely offset by an increase in the share who have only a vocational degree, while the
offsetting increases for women are roughly equally split between having only a vocational degree and
having both types of high school degrees, likely driven by women completing the vocational track first
and then tacking on the new academic supplement that grants college eligibility.6 We see little change
in the shares of men and women with the highest (college) and lowest (no degrees) levels of educational
attainment, suggesting that the reform mainly impacted educational choices on the internal margin
of high school specialization, a point we return to below in the main analysis.
   6 We                           probe this particular sequence of high school degree completion in Table 8 below.



                                                                                            15
                 Within−gender change in share, pre/post reform
                                                                                                   Men          Women




                                                                  .04
                                                                  .02
                                                                  0
                                                                  −.02
                                                                  −.04




                                                                         No degrees   Vocational     Academic   Vocational   College
                                                                                        only           only     + Academic

                                                                                           Highest degree completed


                                                  Figure 8: Changes in highest degree completed, pre- vs. post-reform
Notes: This figure shows the change in the share of men and women in each degree category, comparing the pre-
reform 1977 cohort to the post-reform 1978 cohort. These degree categories are mutually exclusive and exhaustive, and
measured at age 30.


Changes in apprenticeships and vocational fields of study.
Within the post-reform increase in vocational degrees lie two important phenomena: a significant
increase in vocational students completing apprenticeships (as the reform intended), and changes
in the distribution of vocational fields of study. Figure 9 confirms that the reform substantially
increased the availability of apprenticeships within the vocational track, as the share of each birth
cohort completing a vocational degree with an apprenticeship sharply increases with the 1978 reform
cohort while vocational degree completion without an apprenticeship steadily declines.
   Figure 10 decomposes the post-reform increase in vocational degrees into fields of study. Men and
women both primarily switch out of sales/service/communication, with men seeing the greatest gains
in electrical studies and women seeing the greatest gains in health and social care. Figure 11 further
decomposes the post-reform increase in each vocational field into whether the degree was completed
with an apprenticeship, showing that both men and women switch out of vocational degrees without
apprenticeships and into degrees with apprenticeships.




                                                                                                    16
                                                                                                     Men                                                                              Women

                           .4




                                                                                                                                                               .4
                           .3




                                                                                                                                                               .3
         Share of cohort




                                                                                                                                             Share of cohort
                           .2




                                                                                                                                                               .2
                           .1




                                                                                                                                                               .1
                           0




                                                                                                                                                               0
                                1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982                                                                                        1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982
                                                 Birth cohort                                                                                                                        Birth cohort

                                                                                      Vocational degree with apprenticeship                                                  Vocational degree with apprenticeship
                                                                                      Vocational degree without apprenticeship                                               Vocational degree without apprenticeship




                                Figure 9: Vocational degree and apprenticeship completion by birth cohort
Notes: This figure shows vocational degree completion shares by birth cohort, split by whether the degree included an
apprenticeship. Completion is measured at age 30. The dotted 1978 cohort is the first eligible for the reformed high
school system.
                                  Within−gender change in share, pre/post reform




                                                                                                                                    Men                                   Women
                                                                                   .04
                                                                                   .02
                                                                                   0
                                                                                   −.02
                                                                                   −.04




                                                                                             rial           cal       tion    stry                  mm         foo
                                                                                                                                                                   d
                                                                                                                                                                             sig
                                                                                                                                                                                 n
                                                                                                                                                                                           car
                                                                                                                                                                                               e
                                                                                          ust          ctri       truc h/fore                   /co       tel/           /de           ial
                                                                                      Ind           Ele       n s                         i c e       H o           f ts           o c
                                                                                                          Co           /fis            rv                        ra             /s
                                                                                                                    Ag         les
                                                                                                                                   /se
                                                                                                                                                        Art
                                                                                                                                                             s/c           alth
                                                                                                                            Sa                                         He

                                                                                                              Trades                                                           Services


                                  Figure 10: Changes in completed vocational fields, pre- vs. post-reform
Notes: This figure shows the change in the share of men and women completing each vocational field, comparing the
pre-reform 1977 cohort to the post-reform 1978 cohort.



                                                                                                                                        17
                                                                                          Men                                                                                                                           Women
                                                    .04




                                                                                                                                                                                     .04
                                                                   Without apprenticeship                With apprenticeship                                                                        Without apprenticeship                With apprenticeship
   Change in within−gender share, pre/post reform




                                                                                                                                    Change in within−gender share, pre/post reform
                                                    .02




                                                                                                                                                                                     .02
                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                    −.02




                                                                                                                                                                                     −.02
                                                    −.04




                                                                                                                                                                                     −.04




                                                              rial   cal ion           try            m
                                                                                                  om /foo
                                                                                                                 d ign are                                                                     rial   cal ion          try             m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   om /foo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   d ign are
                                                           ust lectri struct /fores            e/c Hotel fts/de ocial
                                                                                                                         s c                                                                ust lectri struct /fores            e/c Hotel fts/de ocial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          s c
                                                     Ind       E on fish                  v i c                                                                                       Ind       E on fish                    ic
                                                                   C Ag/
                                                                                 s / se r
                                                                                                     r t s/ cr a
                                                                                                                 a l t s
                                                                                                                      h /                                                                           C Ag/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  s /s e r v
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      r t s/ c r a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   a lt s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       h /
                                                                           Sa
                                                                              le                   A          He                                                                                            Sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                               le                   A           He

                                                                        Trades                           Services                                                                                        Trades                           Services



  Figure 11: Changes in completed vocational fields by apprenticeship status, pre- vs. post-reform
Notes: This figure shows the change in the share of men and women completing each vocational field with or without
an apprenticeship, comparing the pre-reform 1977 cohort to the post-reform 1978 cohort.




                                                                                                                               18
Earnings profiles and premia by highest degree.
So far, we have focused on educational choices and how they may have changed in the wake of Reform
94. Figure 12 complements this analysis by showing the earnings profiles associated with each level
of educational attainment. As above, we separate men and women. We also separate birth cohorts
that pre-date and post-date Reform 94: the pre-reform cohorts (top row of the figure) include those
born before 1978 while the post-reform cohorts (bottom row) include those born in 1978 and after.
For both genders and time periods, the earnings of college graduates overtake those of other degree
holders by the late 20s. Not surprisingly, those that did not complete high school have the lowest
earnings, and their earnings deficit only increases with age. The earnings profiles of women with
academic vs. vocational high school degrees do not differ much, and this is true both pre- and post-
reform. In contrast, men with a vocational high school degree earn more than men with an academic
high school degree throughout their twenties, with convergence happening in the 30s. Moreover, the
earnings premium for men with a vocational high school degree compared to those with an academic
high school degree is greater for the post-reform cohorts. While extrapolating beyond the available
data suggests eventual convergence in the late 30s, post-reform men with a vocational degree earn
substantially more than their counterparts with an academic high school degree throughout their 20s
and well into their 30s. This offers preliminary suggestive evidence that Reform 94 may have increased
the quality of the vocational track in high school, with earnings benefits flowing predominantly to
men, but the possibility of differential selection into vocational education in the post-reform period
motivates our difference-in-discontinuity research design below.
   As a first look into the role selection, we report in Figure 13 estimates of the premia associated
with each level of educational attainment (relative to having no degrees) after flexibility controlling
for a rich set of covariates: 10th grade GPA, parental education, parental income, parent and child
immigration status, and number of siblings. We do this for the 1985 birth cohort, which is the
oldest cohort for which we have 10th grade GPA data. We focus on earnings averaged over 29
and 30, the latest available ages for this cohort. Figure 13 shows that these detailed controls do
not diminish the large vocational-over-academic high school earnings premium for men; in fact, the
vocational-academic difference increases with controls, and predicted vocational earnings actually
dominate predicted college earnings for men in this age range after controlling for observables.7 Note
that we also observe somewhat greater controlled earnings premia for women with a vocational high
school degree compared to those with an academic high school degree, but the magnitude of this
earnings premium is much smaller for women than it is for men.
  7 We   obtain similar results if we estimate educational premia separately by 10th grade GPA categories.




                                                          19
                                           Men, Pre−Reform Cohorts                                                                Women, Pre−Reform Cohorts
                   100




                                                                                                             100
    Earnings (1000s of 2015 $)




                                                                                              Earnings (1000s of 2015 $)
                          80




                                                                                                                    80
                   60




                                                                                                             60
            40




                                                                                                      40
     20




                                                                                               20
                   0




                                                                                                             0
                                 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38                                     21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38
                                                          Age                                                                                       Age

                                    No degrees     Vocational only       Academic only                                        No degrees     Vocational only       Academic only
                                                   Vocational+Academic   College                                                             Vocational+Academic   College



                                          Men, Post−Reform Cohorts                                                                Women, Post−Reform Cohorts
                   100




                                                                                                             100
    Earnings (1000s of 2015 $)




                                                                                              Earnings (1000s of 2015 $)
                          80




                                                                                                                    80
                   60




                                                                                                             60
            40




                                                                                                      40
     20




                                                                                               20
                   0




                                                                                                             0




                                 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38                                     21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38
                                                          Age                                                                                       Age

                                    No degrees     Vocational only       Academic only                                        No degrees     Vocational only       Academic only
                                                   Vocational+Academic   College                                                             Vocational+Academic   College




                                          Figure 12: Earnings profiles by highest degree, pre- and post- reform
Notes: This figure shows the mean earnings profiles associated with the mutually exclusive and exhaustive degree
categories from Figure 3. Degree completion is measured at age 30, and each individual is assigned to that constant
degree category over the lifecycle. Pre-reform cohorts are those born prior to 1978; post-reform cohorts are those born
in 1978 and after. The pre-reform profiles end at age 38 as the earnings data end in 2015 and the 1977 cohort turns 38
that year; likewise the post-reform profiles end at age 34 since the 1981 cohort turns 34 in 2015.




                                                                                         20
                                                                           Men                                                                                               Women
                                               30000




                                                                                                                                                    30000
    Earnings premium over no degree (2015 $)




                                                                                                         Earnings premium over no degree (2015 $)
                                               20000




                                                                                                                                                    20000
                                               10000




                                                                                                                                                    10000
                                               0




                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                       Vocational   Academic Vocational   College                                                           Vocational   Academic Vocational   College
                                                         only         only   + Academic                                                                       only         only   + Academic

                                                                     Raw           Controlled                                                                             Raw           Controlled




    Figure 13: OLS earnings premia for each educational attainment category relative to no degree
Notes: This figure plots raw and controlled earnings premia associated with the degree categories from Figures 3 and
12. The sample is limited to the 1985 birth cohort, who are the first to have 10th grade GPA data. Controlled
earnings premia come from a regression of within-person mean earnings over ages 29-30 on degree dummies (omitting
the “no degrees” category as the base case) and flexible controls for 10th grade GPA (deciles), mother’s education (11
categories), father’s education (11 categories), mother’s earnings (deciles), father’s earnings (deciles), an indicator for at
least one immigrant parent, an indicator for the child being an immigrant, and number of siblings (quadratic). Robust
95% confidence intervals appear in brackets.


4                                              Research Design: Graphical Evidence and Regression Model
The descriptive evidence presented in the previous section motivates our research design. It suggests
that Reform 94 had a large and immediate impact on students’ educational choices. Instead of a raw
comparison of outcomes across students born in different years, however, our research design leverages
the sharp eligibility cutoff by date of birth. In particular, we apply a regression discontinuity design
comparing outcomes for those born right after January 1, 1978 (eligible for the new system) and
those born right before January 1, 1978 (not eligible). A concern, however, is that this comparison
confounds the impact of Reform 94 with a general effect of being born at the beginning of a calendar
year instead of at the end of the previous one. For example, it could be that children born right after
January 1st do better because there are direct benefits to starting school at an older age (see e.g.
Black et al., 2011).
        To estimate causal impacts of the reform, we therefore use a difference-in-discontinuity design.
This design first estimates the discontinuity in outcomes around the exact eligibility threshold of Jan-
uary 1st, 1978, and then purges any effect of being born early in the year by differencing out any
discontinuity found around January 1st in non-reform control years. Figure 14 provides a graphical



                                                                                                    21
depiction of the difference-in-discontinuity design, before turning to the formal econometric model.
This figure shows the share of individuals who completed vocational high school by day of birth in
windows of ±180 days surrounding January 1st in different years. In each figure, we plot the unre-
stricted monthly means and the predicted monthly means using linear regression applied separately
to each side of the January 1st thresholds. Whereas the regression lines better illustrate the trends in
the data and the size of the jumps at the cutoff, the unrestricted means indicate the underlying noise
in the data.
   The 1975-1977 windows, shown in Panel A of Figure 14, display how the share of individuals that
completed vocational high school varies with date of birth prior to the reform. In each year, students
born right after January 1st are less likely to complete vocational high school as compared to students
born right before January 1st. This pattern stands in stark contrast to what we observe for the 1978
window, covering the individuals who are the first to be treated by the reformed high school system.
In particular, individuals born right after January 1, 1978 (and thus treated by the reform) are equally
likely to complete vocational high school as those born right before January 1, 1978.
   To gain precision, Panel B of Figure 14 pools data for three control years before (1975-1977) and
three control years after (1979-1981) the reform year window (1978). The difference-in-discontinuity
design identifies the reform effect by comparing the change in the outcome around the January 1st,
1978 reform eligibility cutoff (left graph of Panel B) to the change in the outcome around the January
1st threshold in the years other than the reform year (right graph of Panel B). Interpreted through
the lens of this research design, the difference in these discontinuities suggests the reform caused a
significant increase in the probability that students complete vocational high school.
   Figure 14 motivates and guides our specification of the regression model. Using the pooled data,
the model is given by:

                  Yi   = α + δ1 Ref ormi + δ2 P osti + βRef ormi × P osti
                       +Dayi (δ3 + δ4 Ref ormi + δ5 P osti + δ6 Ref ormi × P osti ) + i
where Yi is an outcome of student i, Dayi is the running variable measured as day of birth minus
January 1st within each window, Ref ormi is an indicator variable equal to 1 if student i was born
in the reform window of ± 180 days surrounding the cutoff date January 1, 1978, and P osti is an
indicator variable that is equal to 1 if she was born after the January 1st cutoff within each window.
The interactions with Dayi allow slopes to vary arbitrarily on each side of the January 1st cutoff as
well as across reform vs. control windows.
   This research design assumes that unobserved characteristics evolve similarly around January 1st,
1978 as compared to the years other than the reform year. In Appendix Table A.2, we estimate
balancing checks of the reform on pre-determined covariates using our main specification. We find
little evidence of differential selection across the reform vs. control window thresholds: out of 25
estimates across covariates and subgroups, only one is marginally significant at the ten percent level.
In Section 5.5, we show that our baseline estimates are not sensitive to controlling for pre-determined
covariates as one of several robustness checks probing the stability of our estimates to alternative
specifications.




                                                    22
Panel A: Separate control windows

                                                                                    1975 Window                                                                                  1976 Window                                                                                                              1977 Window
                    .31




                                                                                                                                            .31




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .31          .3
                                  .3




                                                                                                                                                          .3
     Complete vocational HS degree




                                                                                                                             Complete vocational HS degree




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Complete vocational HS degree
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .25 .26 .27 .28 .29
                           .29




                                                                                                                                                   .29
                     .28




                                                                                                                                             .28
               .27




                                                                                                                                       .27
        .26




                                                                                                                                .26
   .25




                                                                                                                           .25




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .24
                    .24




                                                                                                                                            .24
                                       −180   −120     −60         0       60       120                            180                                         −180   −120     −60         0       60       120                              180                                        −180   −120     −60         0       60       120     180
                                              Day of birth relative to January 1st cutoff                                                                             Day of birth relative to January 1st cutoff                                                                              Day of birth relative to January 1st cutoff


                                                                                                                                                                                 1978 Window
                                                                                                                                            .31           .3
                                                                                                                             Complete vocational HS degree
                                                                                                                           .25  .26    .27   .28
                                                                                                                                            .24    .29




                                                                                                                                                               −180   −120     −60         0       60       120                              180
                                                                                                                                                                      Day of birth relative to January 1st cutoff




Panel B: Pooled control windows

                                                                                                          Reform Window                                                                                                                    Pooled Control Windows
                                                                     .31




                                                                                                                                                                                                            .31
                                                                                   .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .3
                                                      Complete vocational HS degree




                                                                                                                                                                                             Complete vocational HS degree
                                                                            .29




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .29
                                                                      .28




                                                                                                                                                                                                             .28
                                                                .27




                                                                                                                                                                                                       .27
                                                         .26




                                                                                                                                                                                                .26
                                                    .25




                                                                                                                                                                                           .25
                                                                     .24




                                                                                                                                                                                                            .24




                                                                                        −180   −120      −60          0        60        120                                     180                                           −180   −120      −60          0        60        120                                      180
                                                                                                 Day of birth relative to January 1st cutoff                                                                                            Day of birth relative to January 1st cutoff




                                        Figure 14: Difference-in-discontinuity visualization: reform window and control windows
Notes: Panel A plots mean vocational degree completion (as an example outcome) within 30-day birth bins (dots),
linear fits through 180-day bandwidths on each side of each year’s January 1st cutoff (solid lines), and robust 95%
confidence intervals (curved dotted lines). The 1975, 1976, and 1977 control windows illustrate the school starting age
effect that is present each year at the January 1st birthdate cutoff. The 1978 window contains the reform eligibility
cutoff. The left plot in Panel B is again the 1978 reform window; the control windows of 1975-1977 and 1979-1981
have been pooled to form the right plot of Panel B. The reform window discontinuity minus the pooled control window
discontinuity yields the difference-in-discontinuity estimate of the reform effect.




                                                                                                                                                                                     23
                          Table 2: Reform effects on initial high school enrollments

                                                                                          Disadvantaged
                                             Pooled           Men        Women           Men       Women

      Enroll in vocational track at 16      0.083***       0.065***      0.100***      0.118***      0.127***
                   (SE)                     (0.010)        (0.014)       (0.013)       (0.024)       (0.025)
               Outcome mean                   0.356          0.426         0.283         0.589         0.415

      Enroll in academic track at 16        -0.059***     -0.038***     -0.080***      -0.073***     -0.110***
                                             (0.010)       (0.014)       (0.014)        (0.023)       (0.025)
                                              0.572         0.503         0.644          0.304         0.469

             Not enrolled at 16             -0.024***     -0.027***      -0.020**      -0.046***       -0.018
                                             (0.006)       (0.008)       (0.008)        (0.016)       (0.017)
                                              0.074         0.073          0.075         0.109         0.117

                      N                      339,793       173,741        166,052       57,911         55,347

Notes: Estimates come from separate difference-in-discontinuity regressions for each outcome and subgroup as described
in Section 4. Disadvantaged is an indicator for being in the bottom third of the distribution of predicted GPA within
each gender.


5     Results
5.1     How the reform changed educational choices
Effects on enrollment.
We start in Table 2 by studying how Reform 94 impacted initial high school enrollment choices. In this
table, as in all subsequent tables, we present pooled results (column 1), results by gender (columns 2
and 3), and results by gender among disadvantaged students (columns 4 and 5). Row 1 shows that
the reform resulted in an increase in the share of 16-year-olds who begin high school in the vocational
track. This is true overall (column 1) as well as across gender groups. The magnitudes are large. In
the pooled sample, vocational enrollment at 16 went up by 8 percentage points, which corresponds to
a more than 20 percent increase. Across all groups, the increased enrollment in the vocational track
at age 16 was accompanied by a decrease in enrollment in the academic track (row 2). The absolute
value of this decrease in academic enrollment is smaller in magnitude, however, than the vocational
enrollment increase, so the reform succeeded in increasing overall enrollment in high school at age 16
(row 3). The magnitude is largest for disadvantaged men (column 4), who experienced a 4.6 percentage
point decrease in the likelihood of not being enrolled in high school at age 16, comprising close to a
50 percent decrease. Overall, we conclude from Table 2 that Reform 94 succeeded in substantially
increasing intial high school enrollment along the vocational track. While part of these gains reflected
a switch out of the academic track, total enrollment in high school at age 16 went up, particularly for
disadvantaged men.




                                                         24
Effects on degree completion.
Table 3 reports on the impact of Reform 94 on educational attainments by age 30. We focus here
on non-mutually exclusive categories and consider any degree a person has completed by age 30, not
solely the person’s highest educational attainment. Row 1 shows that the reform not only increased
the likelihood of initially enrolling in the vocational track but also increased the share of individuals
who actually completed a vocational high school degree. This is true for both men and women.
However, the rest of the table shows quite different patterns by gender on how the reform impacted
other educational attainments. For men, the gains in the share of individuals with a vocational
high school degree are roughly equal in magnitude to the declines in the share of individuals having
completed an academic high school degree (row 2), and thus the reform did not succeed in ultimately
reducing the male high school dropout rate (row 4). Despite declines in the share of men with an
academic high school degree, the reform does not appear to have negatively affected men’s likelihood
of attending college at any point before age 30 or of having completed a college degree (rows 5 and
6, respectively). In summary, the results do not suggest that men leveraged the new flexibility of the
educational pathways in high school embedded in the reform, but rather simply swapped terminal
academic high school degrees for terminal degrees from the newly reformed vocational track.
   The patterns for women, particularly disadvantaged women (column 5), are quite different. Un-
like for men, the reform was not accompanied by a parallel decline in the share of women with an
academic high school degree. In fact, among disadvantaged women, the reform increased the share
who completed such an academic high school degree by 6.1 percentage points (from a mean of .47).
The reform also increased the share of disadvantaged women holding both vocational and academic
high school degrees by about the same amount (6.4 percentage points), suggesting that most of these
new academic high school degree holders also earned a vocational degree. Most logically given the
pattern in the prior table, these new academic high school degree holders first enrolled in vocational
school, completed it, and then performed the now more limited additional coursework required to also
receive an academic high school degree. We confirm this hypothesis below. Remarkably, the reform
succeeded in substantially reducing the high school dropout rate among disadvantaged women by 5.6
percentage points (from a mean of .30). While the higher percentage of disadvantaged women with
an academic high school degree due to the reform suggests the possibility of also a higher share of
such women completing college, we do not find strong evidence of this. The impacts of the reform
on disadvantaged women’s probabilities of college attendance and completion are positive but not
statistically significant. The point estimates in column 5 suggest that about half of the additional
disadvantaged women with academic high school degrees might have at some point attended college,
but that only 15 percent completed college. It might be puzzling as to why women with a vocational
degree would also complete an academic high school degree if they do not plan to at least try out
college. While the evidence in Section 3 suggests that the female-dominated high school vocational
fields are not as remunerative as the male-dominated fields, the value of completing an academic high
school degree and not going on to college does not seem to strongly dominate that of a vocational
high school degree for women, at least up to the mid-30s.




                                                   25
                 Table 3: Reform effects on degree completion (non-exclusive categories)

                                                                                      Disadvantaged
                                           Pooled        Men         Women           Men       Women

            Vocational degree by 30       0.034***      0.033**      0.034***      0.070***      0.058**
                     (SE)                 (0.009)       (0.014)      (0.012)       (0.024)       (0.024)
                Outcome mean                0.284        0.337         0.228         0.417        0.310

            Academic degree by 30           -0.009      -0.035**      0.021       -0.061***      0.061**
                                           (0.010)      (0.014)      (0.014)       (0.022)       (0.025)
                                            0.558         0.472       0.648         0.269         0.467

             Both HS degrees by 30        0.025***       0.005       0.046***       0.004        0.064***
                                          (0.005)       (0.006)      (0.007)       (0.010)       (0.014)
                                            0.058        0.050         0.067        0.043          0.076

              No HS degree by 30            0.000        0.008        -0.008        -0.004       -0.056**
                                           (0.008)      (0.012)      (0.011)       (0.023)       (0.023)
                                            0.217        0.240         0.192         0.357         0.299

              Enroll college by 30          0.011        0.014        0.010         -0.018        0.027
                                           (0.010)      (0.014)      (0.014)       (0.022)       (0.025)
                                            0.562        0.486        0.641         0.261         0.431

              College degree by 30          0.003        0.005        0.003         0.001         0.009
                                           (0.010)      (0.013)      (0.015)       (0.016)       (0.023)
                                            0.356        0.271        0.445         0.124         0.273

                        N                  339,793      173,741      166,052        57,911        55,347

Notes: Estimates come from separate difference-in-discontinuity regressions for each outcome and subgroup as described
in Section 4. These degree indicators are not mutually exclusive. Disadvantaged is an indicator for being in the bottom
third of the distribution of predicted GPA within each gender.




                                                          26
               Table 4: Reform effects on highest degree completed (exclusive categories)

                                                                                    Disadvantaged
                                          Pooled        Men         Women          Men       Women

                  No degrees              -0.016*       -0.010      -0.022**       -0.013      -0.061***
                     (SE)                 (0.008)      (0.012)      (0.011)       (0.023)       (0.023)
                 Outcome mean              0.197         0.225        0.168         0.349        0.282

                Vocational only           0.018**      0.032**       0.003       0.065***        0.011
                                          (0.008)      (0.013)      (0.010)      (0.024)        (0.021)
                                           0.207        0.272        0.139         0.361         0.211

                 Academic only           -0.016**     -0.025**       -0.007      -0.048***       0.003
                                         (0.008)      (0.011)       (0.012)       (0.017)       (0.019)
                                           0.198        0.195         0.201        0.132         0.179

            Vocational + Academic         0.010**       -0.001     0.023***        -0.005      0.039***
                                          (0.004)      (0.005)     (0.006)        (0.009)      (0.012)
                                           0.042        0.037        0.047         0.034         0.056

                     College               0.003        0.005        0.003         0.001         0.009
                                          (0.010)      (0.013)      (0.015)       (0.016)       (0.023)
                                           0.356        0.271        0.445         0.124         0.273

                        N                 339,793      173,741      166,052       57,911         55,347

Notes: Estimates come from separate difference-in-discontinuity regressions for each outcome and subgroup as described
in Section 4. These highest degree categories are mutually exclusive and exhaustive. Disadvantaged is an indicator for
being in the bottom third of the distribution of predicted GPA within each gender.


    Table 4 focuses on the impact of the reform on exclusive categories of highest educational attain-
ment by age 30, helping to understand the linkages between the non-exclusive outcomes in Table
3. Reform 94 led to a greater percentage of men, especially disadvantaged men, completing their
schooling with a vocational high school degree, and nearly all of this increase was compensated by a
decrease in the percentage of men completing their schooling with an academic high school degree.
This confirms that the reform did not succeed in reducing the share of men without any high school
credentials, nor did it affect the share of men with college degrees, but rather induced a composi-
tional shift in the types of high school degrees earned by non-college-bound men. Among women, but
especially disadvantaged women, the reform did not increase the share with solely a vocational high
school degree; instead it led to large increases in the percentage of women holding both vocational and
academic high school degrees. There is no increase in the share of women holding only academic high
school degrees as their highest credential, suggesting that the many additional women who began high
school in the vocational track post-reform did not leverage the increased flexibility of transferring to
the academic track prior to graduation, but instead completed their vocational degree first and then
completed the academic supplement; Table 8 confirms this below. Finally, echoing the non-exclusive
degree results from Table 3, we see that the reform resulted in about a 6 percentage point drop in the


                                                         27
                            Table 5: Reform effects on completed vocational fields

                                                                                        Disadvantaged
                                             Pooled         Men        Women           Men       Women

             Complete services field          0.009       -0.012*      0.033***       -0.004      0.061***
                     (SE)                    (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.012)       (0.013)      (0.023)
                Outcome mean                  0.135        0.063         0.210         0.068        0.288

          Complete skilled trades field     0.025***      0.043***       0.001       0.076***      0.000
                                            (0.007)       (0.013)       (0.004)      (0.023)      (0.008)
                                              0.151         0.278        0.019         0.353       0.024

          Complete an apprenticeship        0.042***      0.047***     0.035***      0.067***     0.046**
                                            (0.008)       (0.012)      (0.009)       (0.023)      (0.018)
                                              0.182         0.257        0.104         0.326       0.147

                        N                    339,793      173,741       166,052       57,911       55,347

Notes: Estimates come from separate difference-in-discontinuity regressions for each outcome and subgroup as de-
scribed in Section 4. Outcomes are not mutually exclusive. Services and skilled trades fields are defined in Figure 4.
Disadvantaged is an indicator for being in the bottom third of the distribution of predicted GPA within each gender.


share of disadvantaged women without any high school credentials but did not increase the share of
women who ultimately complete a college degree.

Effects on vocational trajectories.
The remaining tables in this Section explore in greater detail the content of the newly completed
vocational degrees under Reform 94 and probe further into which specific educational trajectories
were impacted by the reform. First, as documented above, fields of specialization in vocational
education are very segregated by gender. Table 5 shows that Reform 94 did not change this pattern:
virtually all of the additional vocational degrees completed by women were in service fields, while
men remained focused on skilled trades. Table 5 also shows that both men and women, but especially
disadvantaged men, were substantially more likely to complete an apprenticeship as part of their
high school education; recall that an important aspect of Reform 94 was to increase the supply of
quality apprenticeships for vocational students. Appendix Table A.3 further links these two results
by showing that the increase in apprenticeship completion was driven by men completing more skilled
trade degrees with an apprenticeship component and by women completing more service degrees with
an apprenticeship component.
    Table 6 shows that Reform 94 also increased persistence on the vocational track. The reform
increased the joint likelihood of both enrolling in and completing vocational high school, especially
among disadvantaged men, and decreased the joint likelihood of both enrolling in and dropping out
of vocational high school, especially among disadvantaged women. On the one hand, this shows that
Reform 94 succeeded in reducing dropout rates among those that enrolled in high school, which was
one key goal of the reform. On the other hand, this is also consistent with our prior inference that few
of the additional youth drawn into high school via the strengthening of the vocational track leveraged


                                                         28
                              Table 6: Reform effects on vocational persistence

                                                                                                Disadvantaged
                                                     Pooled         Men        Women           Men       Women

                         Complete vocational        0.034***      0.033**      0.034***      0.070***      0.058**
   Ever enroll in              (SE)                 (0.009)       (0.014)      (0.012)       (0.024)       (0.024)
  vocational and:          Outcome mean               0.284        0.337        0.228         0.417         0.310

                       Drop out of vocational      -0.041***     -0.054***     -0.026**      -0.055**    -0.074***
                                                    (0.009)       (0.012)       (0.013)       (0.024)     (0.024)
                                                     0.268         0.263         0.274         0.365       0.367



Notes: Estimates come from separate difference-in-discontinuity regressions as described in Section 4. Second column
outcomes are mutually exclusive and exhaustive conditional on the first column, providing a decomposition of the reform
effect on the first column outcome. Outcomes are measured as of age 30. Disadvantaged is an indicator for being in the
bottom third of the distribution of predicted GPA within each gender.


the added flexibility to transfer out of the vocational track and into the academic track prior to
completing their first degree.

Effects on college attendance.
We showed above that Reform 94 caused a decrease in the number of men holding academic high
school degrees but did not affect the share of men completing college. Table 7 confirms that the
drop in academic high school degrees induced by Reform 94 was concentrated among men who would
not have gone to college. More specifically, Reform 94 did not impact the share of men who both
completed academic high school and college; it only reduced the likelihood of completing one’s formal
education with at most an academic high school degree.
    Finally, the remaining two tables in this Section focus on women and confirm our inferences above
about how women’s, especially disadvantaged women’s, educational trajectories were impacted by Re-
form 94. First, Table 8 confirms that virtually all of the increase in women completing both vocational
and academic high school degrees is driven by women who first obtain their vocational high school
degree and then complete the supplemental coursework required to also receive an academic degree
and college eligibility. Second, Table 9 shows that Reform 94, while boosting the share of disadvan-
taged women with academic high school degrees, did not affect the share of women going beyond
such academic high credentials and succeeding in leveraging their eligibility for tertiary education
with a college degree. In other words, while the reform succeeded in inducing more disadvantaged
women into completing high school and opening college doors to them, these new opportunities did
not translate into higher rates of tertiary education.




                                                          29
Table 7: Reform effects on men switching out of the academic track: would they have gone to college?

                                                                        All Men     Disadvantaged Men

                                                   College degree         -0.009            -0.008
                                                        (SE)             (0.012)           (0.015)
            Complete academic degree and:          Outcome mean            0.240            0.103

                                                  No college degree     -0.027**          -0.054***
                                                                         (0.012)           (0.019)
                                                                          0.232             0.166



Notes: Estimates come from separate difference-in-discontinuity regressions as described in Section 4. Second column
outcomes are mutually exclusive and exhaustive conditional on the first column, providing a decomposition of the reform
effect on the first column outcome. Outcomes are measured as of age 30. Disadvantaged is an indicator for being in the
bottom third of the distribution of predicted GPA within each gender.




         Table 8: Reform effects on women completing both high school tracks: which order?

                                                                        All Women      Disadvantaged Women

                                                    Vocational first     0.051***              0.070***
                                                        (SE)              (0.006)               (0.011)
      Complete both vocational & academic:          Outcome mean           0.034                 0.041

                                                    Academic first         -0.003                -0.002
                                                                          (0.005)               (0.009)
                                                                            0.035                 0.037



Notes: Estimates come from separate difference-in-discontinuity regressions as described in Section 4. Second column
outcomes are mutually exclusive and exhaustive conditional on the first column, providing a decomposition of the reform
effect on the first column outcome. Outcomes are measured as of age 30. Disadvantaged is an indicator for being in the
bottom third of the distribution of predicted GPA within each gender.




                                                          30
  Table 9: Reform effects on disadvantaged women completing high school: on to college as well?

                                                                              Disadvantaged Women

                                                         College degree                0.003
                                                              (SE)                    (0.022)
               Complete high school degree and:          Outcome mean                  0.256

                                                       No college degree              0.053**
                                                                                      (0.025)
                                                                                       0.446



Notes: Estimates come from separate difference-in-discontinuity regressions as described in Section 4. Second column
outcomes are mutually exclusive and exhaustive conditional on the first column, providing a decomposition of the reform
effect on the first column outcome. Outcomes are measured as of age 30. Disadvantaged is an indicator for being in the
bottom third of the distribution of predicted GPA within each gender.


5.2     Labor market impacts of the reform
Table 10 presents the effects of Reform 94 on labor market outcomes. As for our analysis of educational
outcomes, we present pooled results (column 1), results by gender (columns 2 and 3) and results by
gender for disadvantaged students (columns 4 and 5). Our main outcome of interest is average real
annual earnings between the ages of 25 and 34 (Panel A), which we obtain from the tax data. Overall,
students enrolled under the new educational regime experienced higher earnings, but the magnitude
under the pooled specification is not large, corresponding to about a 2 percent increase. The analysis
by subgroup, however, shows that the labor market effects were not uniform. In particular, the labor
market gains are concentrated among men, and in particular disadvantaged men. The average annual
earnings of disadvantaged men increased by 5 percent (2,329 2015 USD). In contrast, we see no average
impact for women. When we focus on disadvantaged women (column 5), we estimate a roughly 2
percent increase in earnings, but this effect is not statistically significant. On average across all men
and women (columns 2 and 3), the reform appears to have exacerbated the gender gap in real annual
earnings between the ages of 25 and 34 by about 8 percent.
   Panel B of Table 10 focuses on individuals for whom we can observe hours of work, and thus
compute hourly wages, in the matched employer-employee administrative data.8 This data is only
available from 2003-2014, so we are constrained to averaging these outcomes over the ages of 28 to
33. The first row of Panel B shows that the annual earnings changes we estimate in the matched
employer-employee data among this more limited age range and sample are similar to those estimated
in the universal tax data in Panel A, with slightly larger estimated gains for men. Rows 2 and 3 of
Panel B show that the male earnings gains can be decomposed into both an increase in average hourly
wage and an increase in hours worked, with disadvantaged men working over an hour more per week
post-reform.
    The fact that our analysis cohorts are around age 16 at the time of the reform in 1994 limits our
  8 We find no evidence of reform-induced sample selection bias in hourly wages, as the reform has no impact on

appearing in the employer-employee data.



                                                          31
                            Table 10: Reform effects on labor market outcomes

                                                                                    Disadvantaged
                                               Pooled         Men      Women        Men      Women

            Panel A: Full sample

                    Earnings 25-34               867*       1,322*        196      2,329**       754
                        (SE)                     (465)       (693)       (535)     (1,132)      (871)
                    Outcome mean                43,831      50,755      36,586      47,108     31,685
                          N                    339,793     173,741     166,052     57,911      55,347


            Panel B: Wage sample

             Earnings in wage data 28-33       1,197**    1,955***       230      3,167***       875
                                                (487)       (725)       (547)     (1,113)       (849)
                                               46,722      54,297      38,850      49,956       34,047

                  Hourly wage 28-33             0.47*         0.87**    0.02         0.85         0.04
                                                (0.24)        (0.35)   (0.33)       (0.56)      (0.52)
                                                30.42         31.77    29.03         29.44       26.83

            Average hours per week 28-33        0.40**      0.56**       0.16      1.17***        0.37
                                                (0.19)      (0.23)      (0.27)     (0.42)       (0.50)
                                                30.49       33.19       27.67       33.04        26.43
                           N                   315,818     160,957     154,861     52,477      50,187


            Panel C: Older control cohorts only

                    Earnings 25-34               943*         1,366*     386       2,754**       748
                                                 (488)         (726)    (561)      (1,181)      (910)
                                                42,298        49,260   35,023       45,574      30,353

                    Earnings 35-37                596       1,047        -30         2,807       717
                                                 (768)     (1,174)      (874)      (1,810)     (1,363)
                                                57,380      67,257     47,061       58,521      39,861
                           N                   197,301     100,814     96,487      33,603      32,160



Notes: Estimates come from separate difference-in-discontinuity regressions as described in Section 4. Outcomes are
averaged within person over the specified ages; age ranges vary across outcomes due to different start and end years
of data availability. Panel B is limited to individuals who appear in employer-employee spell data, which excludes
informal and self-employment. Panel C is limited to the pre-reform 1975-1977 control window cohorts and the 1978
reform window cohort, excluding the post-reform 1979-1981 control window cohorts to allow for later common ages of
earnings measurement. All monetary amounts are measured in real 2015 US dollars. Disadvantaged is an indicator for
being in the bottom third of the distribution of predicted GPA within each gender. See Appendix Table A.1 for more
details on data sources and variable definitions.




                                                         32
ability to study labor market effects at ages beyond the mid-30s. Looking at effects at later ages could
be relevant, though, as the labor market returns to vocational education might decline more rapidly
over time than those of general education (see Hanushek et al., 2017, and Hampf and Woessmann,
2017). In Panel C of Table 10, we are able to extend the analysis a bit further to age 37 by restricting
the control group to the older pre-reform cohorts. Note first that the earnings gain we observe between
the ages 25 and 34 (row 1) are similar under this alternative control group specification to those we
observed under the main specification. Row 2 then focuses on average earnings between the extended
ages of 35 and 37. While more noisily estimated, the magnitudes of the earnings gains for men are
comparable at these older ages to those at younger ages. The effects for disadvantaged women remain
positive (about a 2 percent gain) but statistically insignificant.
   Additional evidence of persistence over time in the labor market gains for disadvantaged men can be
gleaned from Figure 15, where we plot the earnings effects by age for disadvantaged men and women.
Among men, we observe positive and stable earnings effects across ages (top panel). Disadvantaged
male earnings gains are roughly constant in dollar terms over these ages (middle panel), but as a
percentage of their mean pre-reform potential earnings level (bottom panel), the greatest gains occur
in the early years after high school and decline somewhat thereafter. In summary, while we of course
cannot assess impacts even later in life, Figure 15 confirms that the reform causes disadvantaged men
to experience higher earnings throughout the first two decades of their adult life. As expected, we
see no statistically significant earnings effects across ages for disadvantaged women, though the point
estimates suggest a roughly 2 percent steady gain after an initial transition period in the early 20s.
   Figure 16 replicates Figure 15 for non-disadvantaged men and women, the complement of the
disadvantaged sample. It is apparent from all panels that the pooled effects of the reform across all
men are very much driven by the subset of disadvantaged men. The effect on non-disadvantaged men’s
and women’s earnings are negligible across all ages, confirming that non-disadvantaged individuals
were inframarginal to Reform 94. In other words, the reform improved social mobility, especially
among men. Based on the point estimates reported in Appendix Table A.4, the gap in real annual
earnings (ages 25 to 34) between disadvantaged and non-disadvantaged students went down by 20
percent, and by close to 30 percent when we focus on male students only.


5.3    Linking the education and labor market effects
In a final step in this section, we propose to better understand how the educational changes induced by
the reform map into the labor market changes documented. Recall that, among men, the main effect
of the reform was to induce some men to switch from completing academic high school to completing
vocational high school instead, with no significant effects on high school or college completion rates.
How much of the earnings gain that we observe for men can be solely attributed to this compositional
change in high school credentials? Similarly, we have shown that the reform reduced the likelihood
of disadvantaged women dropping out of high school and increased their likelihood of obtaining both
an academic and a vocational high school degree, with no measured effect on college completion.
How much of a gain in earnings should we have expected to see for disadvantaged women given these
improved educational achievements? We try to provide some back-of-the-envelope calculations toward
this end in Table 11.


                                                   33
                                                                   Disadvantaged Men                                                                        Disadvantaged Women
    10000 20000 30000 40000 50000 60000 70000




                                                                                                    10000 20000 30000 40000 50000 60000 70000
         Real annual earnings (2015 USD) (levels)




                                                                                                         Real annual earnings (2015 USD) (levels)
                                                    22−25           26−29         30−33     34−37                                                   22−25    26−29         30−33   34−37
                                                                            Age                                                                                      Age




                                                                                                                        1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
                      1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
          Real annual earnings (2015 USD) (effect)




                                                                                                          Real annual earnings (2015 USD) (effect)
                                                                                                                  0
    −2000−1000 0




                                                                                                    −2000 −1000




                                                    22−25           26−29         30−33     34−37                                                   22−25    26−29         30−33   34−37
                                                                            Age                                                                                      Age
                                                    .08




                                                                                                                                                    .08
      Real annual earnings (2015 USD) (percent change)




                                                                                                      Real annual earnings (2015 USD) (percent change)
                                           .06




                                                                                                                                           .06
                                  .04




                                                                                                                                  .04
                        .02




                                                                                                                        .02
               0




                                                                                                               0
    −.02




                                                                                                    −.02




                                                    22−25           26−29         30−33     34−37                                                   22−25    26−29         30−33   34−37
                                                                            Age                                                                                      Age



                                                          Figure 15: Reform effects on earnings across ages: disadvantaged men and women
Notes: The middle figures plot difference-in-discontinuity earnings effect estimates (and robust 90% confidence intervals)
separately by age bins. Only the older control cohorts are used at the latest ages (34-37), since earnings data are not yet
available for the younger control cohorts at these ages. The top figures plot mean potential earnings levels: post-reform
in blue circles and the pre-reform counterfactual in red x’s. The bottom figures plot the reform effect estimate divided
by the pre-reform counterfactual earnings level to measure the effect in percentage terms. All monetary amounts are
measured in real 2015 US dollars. Disadvantaged is an indicator for being in the bottom third of the distribution of
predicted GPA within each gender.                           34
                                                                   Non−Disadvantaged Men                                                                      Non−Disadvantaged Women




                                                                                                      10000 20000 30000 40000 50000 60000 70000
    10000 20000 30000 40000 50000 60000 70000
         Real annual earnings (2015 USD) (levels)




                                                                                                           Real annual earnings (2015 USD) (levels)
                                                    22−25             26−29         30−33     34−37                                                   22−25      26−29         30−33    34−37
                                                                              Age                                                                                        Age
                       1000 2000 3000 4000 5000




                                                                                                                          1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
       Real annual earnings (2015 USD) (effect)




                                                                                                           Real annual earnings (2015 USD) (effect)
    −2000 −1000 0




                                                                                                      −2000 −1000 0




                                                    22−25             26−29         30−33     34−37                                                   22−25      26−29         30−33    34−37
                                                                              Age                                                                                        Age
                                                    .08




                                                                                                                                                      .08
      Real annual earnings (2015 USD) (percent change)




                                                                                                        Real annual earnings (2015 USD) (percent change)
                                           .06




                                                                                                                                             .06
                                  .04




                                                                                                                                    .04
                        .02




                                                                                                                          .02
               0




                                                                                                                 0
    −.02




                                                                                                      −.02




                                                    22−25             26−29         30−33     34−37                                                   22−25      26−29         30−33    34−37
                                                                              Age                                                                                        Age



                                                          Figure 16: Reform effects on earnings across ages: non-disadvantaged men and women
Notes: The middle figures plot difference-in-discontinuity earnings effect estimates (and robust 90% confidence intervals)
separately by age bins. Only the older control cohorts are used at the latest ages (34-37), since earnings data are not yet
available for the younger control cohorts at these ages. The top figures plot mean potential earnings levels: post-reform
in blue circles and the pre-reform counterfactual in red x’s. The bottom figures plot the reform effect estimate divided
by the pre-reform counterfactual earnings level to measure the effect in percentage terms. All monetary amounts are
measured in real 2015 US dollars. Non-disadvantaged is an indicator for being in the top two thirds of the distribution
of predicted GPA within each gender, the complement of the  35 disadvantaged (bottom third) group.
        Table 11: Decomposition of earnings effects into compositional versus quality changes

                                                                                               Disadvantaged
                                                               Pooled     Men      Women       Men    Women

                     Actual earnings effect                     867       1,322      196       2,329      754

        Predicted effect due solely to compositional            296        340       259        490       726
         changes in degrees, holding returns fixed

       Increase in mean potential vocational earnings          2,167      3,046      -313      4,235       94
          required to equate actual and predicted

      Naive diff-in-diff estimate of increase in potential     1,100      2,655      -895      3,509      -715
         vocational earnings pre/post reform (SE)              (170)      (227)     (190)      (362)     (287)



Notes: Actual earnings effects come from Table 10. Predicted earnings effects come from multiplying the estimated
changes in the probability of each highest degree category (college, both HS, academic HS, vocational HS, none) by
estimated mean potential earnings associated with those degrees, where mean potential earnings are estimated via OLS
in the pre-reform cohorts with the usual family background controls (parental education and income, immigration,
and siblings) and a linear cohort trend. The required inframarginal increase in mean vocational earnings assumes that
potential earnings for college, academic HS only, and none are unchanged by the reform. Naive diff-in-diff estimate of
the increase in potential vocational earnings comes from a regression of earnings on a post-reform dummy (born 1978
onward), a vocational degree dummy, their interaction (which yields the coefficient of interest), the family background
controls, and a linear cohort trend. Naive DD regression equation:


   Earningsi = αP ostRef ormi + γV ocationalDegreei + βP ostRef ormi × V ocationalDegreei + Controls0i θ + i
where β is the parameter of interest, P ostRef ormi ≡ 1{Birthyeari >= 1978}, V ocationalDegreei = 1 among individ-
uals who do not complete college and either complete only a vocational degree or complete both high school degrees, and
the Controlsi vector includes parental education and income, immigration status, number of siblings, and a linear birth
cohort trend. Each regression is run separately within the subsample defined in the top row of the table. Disadvantaged
is an indicator for being in the bottom third of the distribution of predicted GPA within each gender.


    In particular, we impute predicted effects of the reform solely due to educational compositional
changes as follows. We multiply the estimated changes in the probability of each highest degree
category (college, both high school degrees, academic high school degree only, vocational high school
degree only, no high school completed) from Table 4 by estimated mean potential earnings associated
with those degrees. We use OLS regressions in the pre-reform period to estimate the mean potential
earnings associated with each degree, adding as controls the same battery of family background
covariates as in Figure 13 (parental education and income, immigration status, number of siblings) as
well as a linear cohort trend. While row 1 of Table 11 reproduces the earnings effect estimates from
Table 10, row 2 shows what earnings effects we would have predicted solely due to the educational
compositional shifts. Only a small share (about 20 percent) of the earnings gains for disadvantaged
men can be accounted for by the switch out of academic high school degrees and into vocational
degrees. In other words, we can make sense of the earnings gains for men if the reform increased the
value of vocational degrees in the labor market, or if we allow for the possibility that the marginal
men who switched out of academic high school degrees and into vocational degrees were particularly
well suited to materially benefit from vocational education.


                                                          36
   To further inform this discussion, we report in row 3 of Table 11 our calculation of how much
mean potential earnings for vocational degrees would have had to increase to reconcile row 1 and
row 2. We then compare this number to a naive estimate of the change in the labor market value
of a vocational degree after the reform (row 4). This estimate is based on the following difference-
in-difference regression equation, which we estimate separately for each sample (pooled, all men, all
women, disadvantaged men, disadvantaged women):

                Earningsi = αP ostRef ormi + γV ocationalDegreei
                           + βP ostRef ormi × V ocationalDegreei + Controls0i θ + i

where β is the parameter of interest, P ostRef ormi ≡ 1{Birthyeari >= 1978}, V ocationalDegreei =
1 among individuals who do not complete college and either complete only a vocational degree or
complete both high school degrees, and the Controlsi vector includes the usual set of family back-
ground covariates (parental education and income, immigration status, and number of siblings) and
a linear birth cohort trend.
   We see that, for men, the increase in mean potential earnings from a vocational degree needed
to account for the earnings gain is in line with the naive estimate of the increase in the returns to
vocational high school post-reform. It does therefore appear that improvement in the quality of the
vocational track might play a large role in generating the earnings gains for men. Unfortunately,
we cannot go further inside this box. There were many dimensions to the reform of the vocational
track (adding more core academic requirements, streamlining the number of tracks and delaying
specialization, improving the supply and quality of apprenticeship opportunities), and we cannot
readily determine which of these dimensions of quality improvement was most relevant. And of course,
we cannot fully rule out that the reform was also effective at bringing under the vocational umbrella
men who would have benefited less from the academic track and more from vocational education.
   The decomposition exercise for women delivers a different story. In particular, focusing on disad-
vantaged women where we see the largest (but not significant) earnings gains among women, row 2
suggests that essentially all of these gains (726 vs. 754) could be rationalized only via the change in
educational achievement (e.g. fewer women with no high school degrees, more women with academic
and vocational high school degrees). In other words, compared to men, the noisy earnings gains we
estimate for women do not require large changes in the value of female vocational degrees to be ratio-
nalized (row 3). And indeed, our naive diff-in-diff estimates in row 4 do not suggest higher earnings
along the vocational track in the post-reform period for women. In fact, the naive diff-in-diff esti-
mate is negative, suggesting potential negative post-reform selection into the vocational track among
women, as the reform is bringing into the track women who otherwise would not have completed high
school.



5.4       Impacts of the reform on social outcomes
While our focus so far has been on educational and labor market outcomes, the reform may have
had broader social benefits. In particular, by inducing young men and women, especially more disad-


                                                  37
                                                                   .01
                                                                                                 28




                    Effect on Pr(any criminal charges) at each age
                                                                                            22
                                                                                                                                Correlation: −.73

                                                                                23                    27




                                                       0
                                                                                            26
                                                                                                                     30
                                         −.01
                                                                                                                                29                  17

                                                                                                                          19
                                                                                                           25
                                                                                                                                                     20
                            −.02




                                                                                                                           24
                                                                                                                21                                   18

                                                                                                                                                            16
                                              −.03




                                                                         −.06        −.04          −.02          0            .02        .04              .06
                                                                                            Effect on Pr(enrolled in school) at each age



Figure 17: Reform effects on criminal charges and school enrollment at each age: disadvantaged men
Notes: Effect estimates come from difference-in-discontinuity regressions as described in Section 4, estimated separately
at each age as labeled on each point. Sample is limited to disadvantaged men, i.e. those in the bottom third of the
male distribution of predicted GPA.


vantaged ones, to spend more time at school in the teenage years, the reform may have reduced the
incidence of risky behavior. We examine these additional outcomes in Table 12. The first outcome
we consider is involvement with the criminal justice system. Panel A of Table 12 studies the effect of
the reform on the likelihood of criminal charges between age 16 and 30. We observe a sharp reduction
in criminal activities for disadvantaged men. Not surprisingly, this is the group with the highest
propensity to commit crimes, with 26.6% of them facing some criminal charges by age 30. The reform
significantly reduces this propensity by 5.2 percentage points, which is roughly a 20% decrease. Figure
17 offers suggestive evidence that this drop in criminal activity is driven in part by an incapacitation
channel: the reform increases the likelihood that disadvantaged men are enrolled in school (horizontal
axis) during the late teenage years, and we also see much of the reform-induced reduction in criminal
charges (vertical axis) occurring during these same teenage years. We see no comparable effects for
disadvantaged women, who have a much lower rate of participation in criminal activity at baseline
(7.2%).
    The final two panels of Table 12 study the impacts of the reform on teenage parenthood and mar-
riage outcomes. Teen parenthood is relatively rare in Norway, with only 2.5% of individuals becoming
parents during their teenage years. The first row of Panel B shows no economically or statistically
significant effect of the reform on teen parenthood, even among the most at-risk group (disadvantaged
women). We also see no statistically significant effects on the likelihood of being married by age
34, the latest commonly observable age among our analysis cohorts. Conditional on being married,
however, the results in Panel C show that women, especially disadvantaged women, significantly delay
their age at first marriage in the wake of the reform. Furthermore, while not statistically significant,


                                                                                                                38
                                  Table 12: Reform effects on social outcomes

                                                                                          Disadvantaged
                                               Pooled         Men         Women          Men      Women

           Panel A: Criminal charges sample

           Any criminal charges 16-30         -0.017**     -0.039***       0.004       -0.052**       -0.001
                     (SE)                      (0.007)      (0.012)       (0.007)       (0.023)      (0.014)
                Outcome mean                    0.121         0.192        0.047         0.266        0.072
                      N                       189,319        97,042       92,277        32,346       30,757


           Panel B: Full sample

               Teenage parenthood              -0.004        -0.002        -0.006       -0.004        0.006
                                              (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.014)
                                                0.025         0.009         0.042        0.014        0.074

                Married by age 34              -0.004        0.004         -0.012       -0.006        -0.026
                                              (0.010)       (0.014)       (0.015)      (0.023)       (0.025)
                                               0.436         0.378          0.496        0.347         0.473
                         N                    339,793       173,741       166,052       57,911        55,347


           Panel C: Married sample

               Age at first marriage          0.326***       0.059        0.509***      -0.029      1.201***
                                              (0.116)       (0.162)       (0.160)      (0.312)      (0.298)
                                               28.136        28.873        27.547       28.605       27.062

            Spouse has college degree          0.013         0.030         -0.006       0.018         0.045
                                              (0.015)       (0.024)       (0.020)      (0.039)       (0.029)
                                               0.378          0.474         0.302        0.329        0.176
                         N                    143,818        63,870        79,948       19,375        25,199



Notes: Estimates come from separate difference-in-discontinuity regressions as described in Section 4. Sample sizes
are smaller for criminal charges due to data availability, as criminal charge histories are only available for more recent
cohorts. Marriage is measured through age 34 as this is the oldest commonly observable age across our main analysis
cohorts. Married sample is conditional on being married by age 34 and spouse appearing in registry data. Disadvantaged
is an indicator for being in the bottom third of the distribution of predicted GPA within each gender.




                                                           39
we find suggestive evidence that the educational gains for disadvantaged women were accompanied
by higher quality matches in the marriage market: a greater share of disadvantaged women marry
college-educated men post-reform (4.5 percentage point effect, from a baseline of .176). One interpre-
tation is that by reducing the odds of dropping out of high school, the reform succeeded in exposing
these disadvantaged women to a more educated pool of men in the dating market.


5.5     Specification checks
The preceding subsections offer evidence that Reform 94 substantially impacted the educational paths
and degree attainment of disadvantaged men and women, as well as earnings and criminal charges
among disadvantaged men. In this subsection, we conduct several specification checks to investigate
the robustness of these main results.9
    Tables A.5 and A.6 compare our main results for disadvantaged men and women, respectively, to
those obtained from several alternative specifications. Column (1) reproduces the estimates from our
baseline difference-in-discontinuity specification described in Section 4. Column (2) adds the full set of
family background controls: categorical indicators for mother’s education, father’s education, mother’s
long-run earnings decile, father’s long-run earnings decile, child immigrant dummy, parent immigrant
dummy, and a quadratic in number of siblings. Column (3) generalizes the baseline specification to
allow the school starting age effect to vary across cohorts by including a linear cohort trend and its
interaction with the P osti indicator for birth after January 1st within each RD window. To probe any
sensitivity to the selection of control cohorts, column (4) limits the control cohorts to those three born
before the 1978 reform window (1975-1977), and column (5) limits the control cohorts to those born
after the reform window (1979-1981). All of these alternative specifications deliver similar results to
our baseline specification in column (1).
    The next set of results explore whether the main estimates are sensitive to our choice of bandwidth
in the locally linear difference-in-discontinuity design. From our baseline bandwidth using all six
months (roughly 182 days) on each side of the January 1st birthdate cutoff in each RD window, column
(6) in Tables A.5 and A.6 reduces this bandwidth to 150 days, and column (7) to 120 days. Figures
A.1 and A.2 visualize and expand upon these results by plotting point estimates and 95% confidence
intervals across the range of bandwidths from 60 days to 180, showing that our six-month bandwidth
improves precision relative to smaller bandwidths without changing the qualitative conclusions of the
results.
    The final set of robustness checks compare our point estimates to placebo estimates in Figures A.3
and A.4. Each placebo estimate comes from a difference-in-discontinuity regression with a placebo
date cutoff instead of the actual January 1st cutoff, and we loop over the different birth years to
assign placebo “reform” cohorts. The placebo cutoff dates range from 120 to 240 days after January
1st within each calendar birth year, which allows for enough data on each side of each cutoff within
each birth year window (at least 120 days) while also avoiding including the actual January 1st cutoff.
The results, plotted in Figures A.3 and A.4, reinforce the conclusion that the significant impacts of
Reform 94 that we estimate are unlikely to have arisen by chance.
   9 We limit the presentation of the specification checks to six key outcomes for parsimony; analogous results for the

superset of all outcomes from the previous sections are available upon request.



                                                          40
6     Concluding Remarks
This paper contributes to an important debate on how secondary education can best be structured
to improve social mobility, and address the needs of those for whom college may not naturally be
in the cards. This is currently an active debate in the US. After decades of declines in career and
technical education (CTE) funding and enrollments, many states have recently passed laws aimed at
slowing or reversing these trends (Jacob, 2017). The push to revive CTE education in the US has
been accompanied by efforts to make more apprenticeships accessible to these students during high
school.10 There has also been a resurgence of interest in the decades-old Career Academies model,
with federal grants going to school districts that are prepared to develop curricula that combine
career/technical learning with academic coursework that meets high school graduation and college
entrance requirements.11
    We believe that the Norwegian experience from the mid-1990s is highly relevant to this current
debate, as it uniquely mixed an effort to strengthen vocational education (in particular via access to
more apprenticeship opportunities) with a desire, just like under the Career Academies model, to offer
vocational students a clear and feasible path to college, departing from more rigid two-track models
of high school education.
    We find that Reform 94 succeeded at improving social mobility, particularly among men, but
that it somewhat exacerbated the gender gap in adult earnings. In particular, our findings strongly
suggest that disadvantaged young men may greatly benefit from a stronger vocational track in high
school, both in terms of higher labor market earnings in adulthood but also lower involvement with
the criminal justice system due to more time spent at school during the teenage years. We find no
evidence, however, that these men make much use of the flexibility that was added into the system to
allow them to convert an initial vocational high school enrollment into a general education that would
open the doors to college. Our back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests that men mainly benefited
from the reform due to improvement in the quality of the vocational track. While nailing down the
exact nature of this improvement is difficult, the sharp contrast between our findings for this group
and the findings in earlier studies of educational reforms that were mainly focused on bringing more
general schooling into vocational tracks (e.g.: Oosterbeek and Webbink, 2007; Hall, 2012; Zilic, 2018)
leads us to suspect that the gains for men might be more directly related to the stronger apprenticeship
system and/or the streamlining of the vocational offerings.
    Our findings for disadvantaged women differ in that we observe many women embracing the new
flexibility built into the system. In particular, we find large increases in women first engaging with
high school via the vocational offerings but ultimately completing both the vocational and general
high school degrees; overall, the reform increased the share of women with the credentials required
to attend college. By making the transition into (and early years of) high school more enticing via
the vocational offerings, the reform succeeded in bringing more marginalized young women out of
the pool of high school dropouts and transforming them into college-eligible material. Unfortunately,
these gains in college eligibility among disadvantaged women did not translate into meaningful gains
  10 See    for  example     https://ctepolicywatch.acteonline.org/2018/05/new-grant-to-connect-apprenticeships-and-
secondary-cte.html.
  11 See for example https://www2.ed.gov/about/overview/budget/budget13/crosscuttingissues/careeracademies.pdf.




                                                        41
in college completion rates. Furthermore, these (high school) educational gains for women did not
translate into significantly higher earnings in adulthood. There is, however, some suggestive evidence
that these women did better in the marriage market, which suggests the possibility of enhanced
well-being.
   Much of the difference in terms of how much men financially benefited from accumulating more
vocational education compared to women can be traced to the sharp gender segregation across voca-
tional fields, with men overwhelmingly concentrating in higher-paying skilled trade jobs and women
concentrating almost exclusively in lower-paying service-sector jobs. Such strong sorting by gender is
not specific to Norway, nor are the differences in earnings between these male- and female-dominated
fields (Carnevale et al., 2012), which suggests that any attempt to make vocational education also
work for women may need to be accompanied by further efforts to make stereotypically male fields
more appealing to young women. It is also possible, however, that changes in the occupational struc-
ture of the economy induced by technological change, with manufacturing jobs being more prone to
automation than, say, health care jobs, will undo some of these gender differentials in the returns
to vocational education, even without changes in gender sorting. In any case, our findings strongly
suggest that considerations related to differential benefits by gender should be an integral part of the
policy conversation surrounding vocational education.
   One of the most disappointing aspects of the Norwegian reform might be that, as we indicated
above, while it succeeded in making a greater share of disadvantaged women college-eligible, it failed
at ultimately increasing their college completion rates. This result suggests that additional efforts to
support the college application process, as well as to encourage persistence while in college, might be
needed for the potential of these newly college-eligible women to be fully realized.


References
Altonji, Joseph G., Erica Blom and Costas Meghir. “Heterogeneity in Human Capital Investments:
High School Curriculum, College Major, and Careers.” Annual Review of Economics 4 (2012): 185-223.
   Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux and Kjell G. Salvanes. “Too Young to Leave the Nest? The
Effects of School Starting Age.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 93 (2011): 455-467.
   Bishop, John H. and Ferran Mane. “Raising Academic Standards and Vocational Concentrators:
Are They Better off or Worse off?” Education Economics 13 (2005): 171-187.
   Brinch, Christian N., Bernt Bratsberg and Oddbjorn Raaum. “The Effects of an Upper Secondary
Education Reform on the Attainment of Immigrant Youth.” Education Economics 20 (2012): 447-473.
   Carnevale, Anthony P., Stephen J. Rose, and Andrew R. Hanson. “Certificates: Gateway to
Gainful Employment and College Degrees.” Georgetown University Center on Education and the
Workforce, 2012.
   Cellini, Stephanie Riegg. “Smoothing the Transition to College? The Effect of Tech-Prep Programs
on Educational Attainment.” Economics of Education Review 25 (2006): 394-411.
   Dewey, John. Democracy and Education: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Education. New
York: MacMillan, 1916.
   Goldin, Claudia. “The Human-Capital Century and American Leadership: Virtues of the Past.”


                                                  42
Journal of Economic History 61 (2001): 263-292.
   Hall, Caroline. “The Effects of Reducing Tracking in Upper Secondary School: Evidence from a
Large-Scale Pilot Scheme.” Journal of Human Resources 47 (2012): 237-269.
   Hall, Caroline. “Does More General Education Reduce the Risk of Future Unemployment? Evi-
dence from an Expansion of Vocational Upper Secondary Education.” Economics of Education Review
52 (2016): 251-271.
   Hampf, Franziska, and Ludger Woessmann. “Vocational vs. General Education and Employment
over the Life-Cycle: New Evidence from PIAAC.” Working Paper, 2017.
   Hanushek, Eric A., Guido Schwerdt, Ludger Woessmann and Lei Zhang. “General Education,
Vocational Education, and Labor-Market Outcomes over the Life-Cycle.” Journal of Human Resources
52 (2016): 48-87.
   Hovdhaugen, Elisabeth. “Widening Participation in Norwegian Higher Education.” Report sub-
mitted to HEFCE and OFFA. HEFCE, 2013.
   Hudson, Lisa. “Trends in CTE Coursetaking.” National Center for Education Statistics, NCES
2014-90, 2013.
   Jacob, Brian A. “What We Know about Career and Technical Education in High School.” Brook-
ings, October 5, 2017. https://www.brookings.edu/research/what-we-know-about-career-and-technical-
education-in-high-school.
   Kemple, James J. “Career Academies: Long-Term Impacts on Work, Education and Transition
to Adulthood.” MDRC, June 2008. https://www.mdrc.org/publication/career-academies-long-term-
impacts-work-education-and-transitions-adulthood.
   Kirkeboen, Lars, Edwin Leuven and Magne Mogstad.         “Field of Study, Earnings, and Self-
Selection.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (2016): 1057-1111.
   Kreisman, Daniel, and Kevin Stange. “Vocational and Career Tech Education in American High
Schools: The Value of Depth Over Breadth.” NBER Working Paper No. 23851, 2017.
  Kuczera, Malgorzata, Giorgio Brunello, Simon Field and Nancy Hoffman. “Learning for Jobs:
OECD Reviews of Vocational Education and Training: Norway.” OECD, 2008.
   LaForest, Michael. “The Effects of High School Career and Technical Education for Non-College
Bound Students.” Working Paper, 2017.
   Malamud, Ofer, and Christian Pop-Eleches. “School Tracking and Access to Higher Education
among Disadvantaged Groups.” Journal of Public Economics 95 (2011): 1538-1549.
   Mane, Ferran. “Trends in the Payoff to Academic and Occupation-Specific Skills: the Short
and Medium Run Returns to Academic and Vocational High School Courses for Non-College-Bound
Students.” Economics of Education Review 18 (1999): 417-437.
   Meer, Jonathan. “Evidence on the Returns to Secondary Vocational Education.” Economics of
Education Review 26 (2007): 559-573.
   Neumark, David (ed.). Improving School-to-Work Transitions. New York: Russell Sage Founda-
tion, 2007.
   Neumark, David, and Donna Rothstein. “School-to-Career Programs and Transitions to Employ-
ment and Higher Education.” Economics of Education Review 25 (2006): 374-393.
   Oakes, Jeannie. Keeping Track: How Schools Structure Inequality. Yale University Press, 1985.



                                                  43
   Oosterbeek, Hessel, and Dinand Webbink. “Wage Effects of an Extra Year of Basic Vocational
Education.” Economics of Education Review 26 (2007): 408-419.
   Ryan, Paul. “The School-to-Work Transition: A Cross-National Perspective.” Journal of Economic
Literature 39 (2001): 34-92.
   Symonds, William C., Robert Schwartz, and Ronald F. Ferguson. “Pathways to prosperity: Meet-
ing the challenge of preparing young Americans for the 21st century.” Cambridge, MA: Pathways to
Prosperity Project, Harvard University Graduate School of Education, 2011.
   US Department of Education. “National Assessment of Career and Technical Education.” Report
to Congress, 2014. https://www2.ed.gov/rschstat/eval/sectech/nacte/career-technical-education/final-
report.pdf.
   Zilic, Ivan. “General versus Vocational Education: Lessons from a Quasi-Experiment in Croatia.”
Economics of Education Review 62 (2018): 1-11.




                                                 44
Appendix




           45
                                                 Table A.1: Variable details

Variable                              Description
Education                             Source: National Education Database
10th grade GPA                        Grade point average in the final year of compulsory schooling (10th grade, age 15).
                                      Only available for 1985 birth cohort (and younger); predicted in earlier cohorts.
Enroll in vocational/academic track   Indicator for enrolling in a vocational/academic high school track at a given age.
Complete vocational/academic degree   Indicator for completing a vocational/academic high school degree before age 30.
Vocational field of study             For each vocational enrollment/degree, an indicator for one of eight field of study categories:
                                      Trades: industrial, electrical, construction, agriculture/fishing/forestry.
                                      Services: sales/service/communication, hotel/food, arts/crafts/design, health/social care.
Complete apprenticeship               Indicator for completing an apprenticeship as part of a vocational high school track.
Enroll in college                     Indicator for enrolling in college anytime before age 30.
Complete college degree               Indicator for completing a college degree anytime before age 30.


Labor market outcomes                 Source: Tax Records and Employer-Employee Matched Panel
Earnings                              Annual pre-tax labor earnings, deflated to 2015 USD using Statistics Norway annual CPI
                                      and 2015 NOK-USD exchange rate of 8.0739. When taking within-person averages,
                                      we ignore outlier observations above the 99.9th percentile and below the 0.1th percentile.
                                      The lower cutoff only eliminates negative outliers (not zeros), often self-employment losses.
                                      Earnings estimates are very similar if we winsorize these outliers instead of dropping them.
Hours worked per week                 Total hours worked each calendar year divided by 52. Available from 2003, when oldest
                                      analysis cohort (1975) is age 28, to 2014, when youngest cohort (1981) is age 33.
Hourly wage                           Total real earnings in employer-employee data divided by total hours worked that calendar year.
                                      Outliers above 99th and below 1st percentile are dropped. Same age restrictions as hours worked.


Social outcomes                       Source: Administrative Police Records, Central Population Register
Any criminal charges                  Indicator for formal accusation of criminal activity committed in a given calendar year associated
                                      with a given age. Only available for younger analysis cohorts due to data beginning in 1992.
Teenage parenthood                    Indicator for a new child appearing in the Central Population Register between the ages of 15-19.
Married by age 34                     Indicator for any marriage appearing in the Central Population Register by age 34.
Age at first marriage                 Conditional on being married by age 34, age at which first marriage appears.
Spouse has college degree             Conditional on being married by age 34, indicator for spouse having a college degree.

Demographics & family background      Source: Central Population Register, National Education Database, Tax Records
Birth date                            Exact date of birth in the population register.
Birth year                            Calendar year of birth date.
RD window year                        Year of birth if born in first half of the year; year of birth plus one if born in the second half.
Age                                   For educational and criminal charge outcomes, age is year of measurement minus year of birth.
                                      For labor market outcomes in difference-in-discontinuity specifications, the year of outcome
                                      measurement is held fixed within each RD window (birth dates within ±6 months of January 1st)
                                      to eliminate a discrete change in year of measurement when moving across the cutoff.
Gender                                Female or male, as measured at age 16 in Central Population Register.
Parental education                    Categories for the highest education level of each parent: compulsory only, vocational high
                                      school dropout, academic high school dropout, vocational high school degree, academic high
                                      school degree, folk high school degree, post-secondary vocational degree, bachelor’s degree,
                                      master’s degree, doctoral degree. Measured when student is age 16.
Parental earnings                     Long-run average of mother and father real earnings over the 20 years prior to child’s 16th birthday.
Immigrant                             Indicator for individual having a country of birth other than Norway.
Immigrant parent                      Indicator for at least one parent having a country of birth other than Norway.
Number of siblings                    Count of other individuals in the Central Population Register who have the same mother identifier.



                                                                46
                           Table A.2: Reform effects on predetermined covariates

                                                                                         Disadvantaged
                                                      Pooled      Men       Women        Men     Women

           At least one college-educated parent        0.015      0.004     0.027*      -0.002     0.004
                           (SE)                       (0.010)    (0.013)    (0.014)    (0.005)    (0.007)
                      Outcome mean                     0.328      0.329      0.326      0.012      0.021

                      Parental income                   458        129         798        -553       704
                                                       (422)      (596)       (597)      (678)      (699)
                                                      55,281     55,231      55,333     41,454     41,807

              At least one immigrant parent            0.000      -0.003     0.002      -0.005     0.011
                                                      (0.003)    (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.009)    (0.011)
                                                       0.029      0.027      0.031      0.033      0.043

                   Child is an immigrant               0.004      -0.001     0.009      -0.007     0.022
                                                      (0.005)    (0.007)    (0.008)    (0.013)    (0.014)
                                                       0.076      0.075      0.077       0.069     0.084

                    Number of siblings                 0.01        0.04       -0.02      0.09       -0.03
                                                      (0.02)      (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.06)     (0.06)
                                                       1.65        1.65       1.65       1.81        1.77

                             N                       339,793     173,741    166,052     57,911     55,347

Notes: Estimates come from separate difference-in-discontinuity regressions as described in Section 4. Family
background variables are measured at age 16 just prior to high school entry. Parental income is a long-run average of
combined mother and father earnings over the twenty years prior to the child turning 16. Disadvantaged is an
indicator for being in the bottom third of the distribution of predicted GPA within each gender.




                                                         47
                  Table A.3: Reform effects on apprenticeship completion within fields

                                                                                All Women       Disadvantaged Women

                                               Complete apprenticeship           0.042***              0.055***
                                                        (SE)                      (0.009)               (0.018)
     Complete services field and:                 Outcome mean                     0.094                 0.135

                                          Do not complete apprenticeship           -0.008                0.006
                                                                                  (0.009)               (0.018)
                                                                                    0.116                0.154



                                                                                  All Men        Disadvantaged Men

                                               Complete apprenticeship           0.035***               0.054**
                                                                                  (0.012)               (0.022)
 Complete skilled trades field and:
                                                                                   0.226                 0.287

                                          Do not complete apprenticeship           0.008                0.022*
                                                                                  (0.007)               (0.013)
                                                                                   0.052                 0.065



Notes: Estimates come from separate difference-in-discontinuity regressions as described in Section 4. Second column
outcomes are mutually exclusive and exhaustive conditional on the first column, providing a decomposition of the reform
effect on the first column outcome. Outcomes are measured as of age 30. Services and skilled trades fields are defined
in Figure 4. Disadvantaged is an indicator for being in the bottom third of the distribution of predicted GPA within
each gender.




                        Table A.4: Reform effects on earnings for expanded groups

                           Disadvantaged         Not disadvantaged        Disadvantaged     Not disadvantaged
                           Men     Women          Men      Women          (both genders)     (both genders)

     Earnings 25-34       2,329**      754         689           -305        1,712**                273
         (SE)             (1,132)     (871)       (865)         (654)         (771)                (572)
     Outcome mean          47,108     31,685      52,578        39,037        39,571               45,961

            N             57,911      55,347     115,830        110,705      113,258               226,535

Notes: Estimates come from separate difference-in-discontinuity regressions as described in Section 4. All monetary
amounts are measured in real 2015 US dollars. Disadvantaged sample is comprised of the bottom third of the distribution
of predicted GPA within each gender; not disadvantaged sample is the complement.




                                                           48
                                            Table A.5: Reform effects across different specifications: disadvantaged men

                                                Baseline     Add control       Add cohort          Older control     Younger control      150-day RD       120-day RD
                                                              variables      trend in starting     cohorts only       cohorts only         bandwidth        bandwidth
                                                                                 age effect         1975-1977          1979-1981
                                                   (1)            (2)               (3)                 (4)               (5)                   (6)             (7)

             Enroll in vocational at 16         0.118***       0.113***           0.119***            0.134***           0.103***           0.115***         0.127***
                        (SE)                     (0.024)        (0.024)            (0.024)             (0.026)            (0.026)            (0.027)          (0.030)

         Complete vocational HS degree          0.070***       0.063***           0.070***            0.078***            0.061**           0.081***          0.064**
                                                 (0.024)        (0.024)            (0.024)             (0.026)            (0.026)            (0.027)          (0.030)

          Complete academic HS degree          -0.061***      -0.059***          -0.061***           -0.076***            -0.046*           -0.064***        -0.079***
                                                (0.022)        (0.022)            (0.022)             (0.023)             (0.024)            (0.024)          (0.027)




49
                     No degrees                   -0.013         -0.009            -0.013               -0.007             -0.019             -0.017           0.017
                                                 (0.023)        (0.023)           (0.023)              (0.025)            (0.025)            (0.026)          (0.029)

                   Earnings 25-34               2,329**        2,223**            2,368**             2,754**              1,975              2,014            1,661
                                                (1,132)        (1,105)            (1,132)             (1,181)             (1,240)            (1,257)          (1,402)

            Any criminal charges 16-30          -0.052**       -0.048**           -0.052*               N/A               -0.052**           -0.064**        -0.075***
                                                 (0.023)        (0.023)           (0.027)               N/A                (0.023)            (0.025)         (0.028)

                        N                        57,911         57,911             57,911              33,603              32,346             47,430          37,771
           N for criminal charges 16-30          32,346         32,346             32,346               N/A                32,346             26,519          21,011

     Notes: Estimates come from separate difference-in-discontinuity regressions as described in Section 4. Estimates are N/A for criminal charges in specification (4) using
     older control cohorts only since we do not observe criminal charges at younger ages for these older control cohorts; our main specification for criminal charges in Table
     12 uses only the younger control cohorts, which is why the criminal charge estimate and sample size in specification (5) are identical to the baseline (1). Disadvantaged
     sample includes the bottom third of the distribution of predicted GPA within each gender.
                                          Table A.6: Reform effects across different specifications: disadvantaged women

                                                Baseline     Add control       Add cohort          Older control     Younger control      150-day RD       120-day RD
                                                              variables      trend in starting     cohorts only       cohorts only         bandwidth        bandwidth
                                                                                 age effect         1975-1977          1979-1981
                                                   (1)            (2)               (3)                 (4)               (5)                   (6)             (7)

             Enroll in vocational at 16         0.127***       0.133***           0.130***            0.119***           0.140***           0.114***         0.126***
                        (SE)                     (0.025)        (0.024)            (0.025)             (0.026)            (0.026)            (0.027)          (0.031)

         Complete vocational HS degree          0.058**        0.061***           0.059**              0.046*            0.073***            0.051*           0.066**
                                                (0.024)         (0.024)           (0.024)              (0.025)            (0.025)            (0.026)          (0.029)

          Complete academic HS degree           0.061**        0.054**            0.061**             0.062**             0.061**            0.057**          0.054*
                                                (0.025)        (0.025)            (0.025)             (0.027)             (0.027)            (0.028)          (0.031)




50
                     No degrees                -0.061***       -0.057**          -0.062***            -0.058**           -0.067***           -0.048*          -0.053*
                                                (0.023)         (0.022)           (0.023)              (0.024)            (0.024)            (0.025)          (0.028)

                   Earnings 25-34                  754            466               817                  748                865                625              541
                                                  (871)          (853)             (870)                (910)              (942)              (968)           (1,087)

            Any criminal charges 16-30            -0.001         -0.001            0.007                N/A                -0.001             -0.007           -0.014
                                                 (0.014)        (0.014)           (0.016)               N/A               (0.014)            (0.015)          (0.017)

                        N                        55,347         55,347             55,347              32,160              30,757             45,223          36,059
           N for criminal charges 16-30          30,757         30,757             30,757               N/A                30,757             25,060          20,044

     Notes: Estimates come from separate difference-in-discontinuity regressions as described in Section 4. Estimates are N/A for criminal charges in specification (4) using
     older control cohorts only since we do not observe criminal charges at younger ages for these older control cohorts; our main specification for criminal charges in Table
     12 uses only the younger control cohorts, which is why the criminal charge estimate and sample size in specification (5) are identical to the baseline (1). Disadvantaged
     sample includes the bottom third of the distribution of predicted GPA within each gender.
                                    Figure A.1: Reform effect estimates across RD bandwidths: disadvantaged men

                                       Enroll in vocational track at 16                                           Complete vocational HS degree




                                                                                                .2
                .2
    Diff−in−disc estimate




                                                                                     Diff−in−disc estimate
                                                                                                       .15
                     .15




                                                                                                .1
              .1




                                                                                        .05
    .05




                                                                                                0
                0




                               60          90          120          150   180                                60       90          120          150   180
                                                RD bandwidth (days)                                                        RD bandwidth (days)


                                       Complete academic HS degree                              .1                           No degrees
                0




                                                                                                       .05
    Diff−in−disc estimate




                                                                                     Diff−in−disc estimate
                 −.05




                                                                                       −.05      0
       −.1




                                                                                                −.1
                −.15




                               60          90          120          150   180                                60       90          120          150   180
                                                RD bandwidth (days)                                                        RD bandwidth (days)


                                                Earnings 25−34                                                     Any criminal charges 16−30
         2000 4000 6000 8000




                                                                                                .05
    Diff−in−disc estimate




                                                                                     Diff−in−disc estimate
                                                                                     −.1     −.05      0
    0           −2000




                                                                                                −.15




                               60          90          120          150   180                                60       90          120          150   180
                                                RD bandwidth (days)                                                        RD bandwidth (days)



Notes: This figure plots disadvantaged male reform effect estimates and 95% robust confidence intervals across different
regression discontinuity bandwidths, defined as the number of birth days included on each side of the January 1st cutoff
in each cohort window. Disadvantaged sample includes the bottom third of the distribution of predicted GPA within
each gender.




                                                                                51
                                         Figure A.2: Reform effect estimates across RD bandwidths: disadvantaged women

                                             Enroll in vocational track at 16                                               Complete vocational HS degree
                     .2




                                                                                                        .15
    Diff−in−disc estimate




                                                                                           Diff−in−disc estimate
                      .15




                                                                                                         .1
              .1




                                                                                               .05
    .05




                                                                                                        0
                     0




                                        60       90          120          150   180                                    60       90          120          150   180
                                                      RD bandwidth (days)                                                            RD bandwidth (days)


                                             Complete academic HS degree                                                               No degrees
                     .15




                                                                                                                 .05
    Diff−in−disc estimate




                                                                                           Diff−in−disc estimate
                       .1




                                                                                                            0
               .05




                                                                                                  −.05
        0




                                                                                           −.1
                     −.05




                                                                                                        −.15




                                        60       90          120          150   180                                    60       90          120          150   180
                                                      RD bandwidth (days)                                                            RD bandwidth (days)


                                                      Earnings 25−34                                                         Any criminal charges 16−30
                                                                                                        .05
                                 2000
           Diff−in−disc estimate




                                                                                           Diff−in−disc estimate
                            0




                                                                                                           0
    −6000 −4000 −2000




                                                                                              −.05      −.1




                                        60       90          120          150   180                                    60       90          120          150   180
                                                      RD bandwidth (days)                                                            RD bandwidth (days)



Notes: This figure plots disadvantaged female reform effect estimates and 95% robust confidence intervals across different
regression discontinuity bandwidths, defined as the number of birth days included on each side of the January 1st cutoff
in each cohort window. Disadvantaged sample includes the bottom third of the distribution of predicted GPA within
each gender.




                                                                                      52
           Figure A.3: Actual reform effect estimates versus placebo estimates: disadvantaged men

                        Enroll in vocational track at 16                                                          Complete vocational HS degree
         .1




                                                                                                  .1
         .08




                                                                                                  .08
           .06




                                                                                            .04 .06
     Fraction




                                                                                             Fraction
                                                                      Estimate                                                                      Estimate
    .04  .02




                                                                                                  .02
         0




                                                                                                  0
                 −.15    −.1          −.05       0       .05          .1         .15                       −.1         −.05           0           .05          .1
                                         Placebo estimates                                                                    Placebo estimates


                        Complete academic HS degree                                                                           No degrees
         .1




                                                                                                  .08
         .08




                                                                                                     .06
           .06




                                                                                                                              Estimate
     Fraction




                                                                                            Fraction
                                                                                              .04




                        Estimate
    .04




                                                                                                  .02
         .02
         0




                                                                                                  0




                 −.1           −.05             0              .05               .1                        −.08        −.04           0           .04          .08
                                        Placebo estimates                                                                     Placebo estimates


                                      Earnings 25−34                                                                 Any criminal charges 16−30
         .05




                                                                                                  .05
         .04




                                                                                                  .04
           .03
     Fraction




                                                                                              Fraction
                                                                                            .02 .03




                                                                                                                  Estimate
                                                                     Estimate
    .02  .01




                                                                                                  .01
         0




                                                                                                  0




             −3000         −1500               0          1500              3000                           −.08        −.04           0           .04          .08
                                        Placebo estimates                                                                     Placebo estimates



Notes: This figure plots the actual reform effect estimate for disadvantaged male outcomes versus placebo estimates.
Each placebo estimate comes from a difference-in-discontinuity regression with a placebo date cutoff instead of the
actual January 1st cutoff, looping over the different birth years to assign placebo “reform” cohorts. The placebo cutoff
dates range from 120 to 240 days after January 1st within each calendar birth year to allow for enough data on each
side of each cutoff within each birth year window (at least 120 days) and to avoid including the actual January 1st
cutoff. Disadvantaged sample includes the bottom third of the distribution of predicted GPA within each gender.




                                                                                       53
       Figure A.4: Actual reform effect estimates versus placebo estimates: disadvantaged women

                            Enroll in vocational track at 16                                                    Complete vocational HS degree




                                                                                              .1
           .1




                                                                                              .08
                                                                                          .04 .06
    Fraction




                                                                                           Fraction
                                                                                                                                                   Estimate
     .05




                                                                         Estimate




                                                                                              .02
           0




                                                                                              0
                     −.15   −.1          −.05       0       .05         .1     .15                    −.1               −.05           0           .05        .1
                                            Placebo estimates                                                                  Placebo estimates


                            Complete academic HS degree                                                                        No degrees
           .15




                                                                                              .1
                .1
       Fraction




                                                                                          Fraction
                                                                                           .05




                                                                                                             Estimate
    .05




                                                                  Estimate
           0




                                                                                              0




                     −.1          −.05             0              .05           .1                    −.08              −.04           0           .04        .08
                                           Placebo estimates                                                                   Placebo estimates


                                         Earnings 25−34                                                            Any criminal charges 16−30
                                                                                              .08
           .05
           .04




                                                                                              .06
    .02 .03
     Fraction




                                                                                          Fraction
                                                                                            .04




                                                      Estimate
                                                                                                                                   Estimate
                                                                                              .02
           .01
           0




                                                                                              0




                 −3000        −1500               0          1500             3000                    −.08              −.04           0           .04        .08
                                           Placebo estimates                                                                   Placebo estimates



Notes: This figure plots the actual reform effect estimate for disadvantaged female outcomes versus placebo estimates.
Each placebo estimate comes from a difference-in-discontinuity regression with a placebo date cutoff instead of the
actual January 1st cutoff, looping over the different birth years to assign placebo “reform” cohorts. The placebo cutoff
dates range from 120 to 240 days after January 1st within each calendar birth year to allow for enough data on each
side of each cutoff within each birth year window (at least 120 days) and to avoid including the actual January 1st
cutoff. Disadvantaged sample includes the bottom third of the distribution of predicted GPA within each gender.




                                                                                     54
