                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        TOWARD AN UNDERSTANDING OF THE ECONOMICS OF APOLOGIES:
         EVIDENCE FROM A LARGE-SCALE NATURAL FIELD EXPERIMENT

                                         Basil Halperin
                                         Benjamin Ho
                                          John A. List
                                            Ian Muir

                                      Working Paper 25676
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25676


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2019




This manuscript was not subject to prior review by any party, as per the research contract signed
at the outset of this project. The views expressed here are solely those of the authors. List was
Chief Economist at Uber when the research was completed, and Halperin and Muir were
economists on the Ubernomics team. List and Muir are currently economists at Lyft. Thanks to
Liran Einav and three anonymous reviewers for their insights, seminar participants at AFE
2017, AEA 2018, and Williams College, and AEA 2019; discussant Chiara Farronato; and to
Courtney Rosen; for helpful comments and assistance. AEA Registry number:
AEARCTR-0002342. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Basil Halperin, Benjamin Ho, John A. List, and Ian Muir. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Toward an Understanding of the Economics of Apologies: Evidence from a Large-Scale Natural
Field Experiment
Basil Halperin, Benjamin Ho, John A. List, and Ian Muir
NBER Working Paper No. 25676
March 2019
JEL No. C9,C93,D80,D91,Z13

                                          ABSTRACT

We use a theory of apologies to design a nationwide field experiment involving 1.5 million Uber
ridesharing consumers who experienced late rides. Several insights emerge from our field
experiment. First, apologies are not a panacea: the efficacy of an apology and whether it may
backfire depend on how the apology is made. Second, across treatments, money speaks louder
than words – the best form of apology is to include a coupon for a future trip. Third, in some
cases sending an apology is worse than sending nothing at all, particularly for repeated apologies.
For firms, caveat venditor should be the rule when considering apologies.


Basil Halperin                                   John A. List
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology            University of Chicago
Cambridge, MA 02141                              1126 East 59th
basilh@mit.edu                                   Chicago, IL 60637
                                                 and NBER
Benjamin Ho                                      jlist@uchicago.edu
Department of Economics
Vassar College                                   Ian Muir
124 Raymond Ave                                  Lyft
Poughkeepsie, NY 12604                           muir.ian.m@gmail.com
benjaminho@gmail.com
   “Virtually every commercial transaction has within itself an element of
trust... It can be plausibly argued that much of the economic backwardness in
the world can be explained by the lack of mutual confidence.” Arrow (1972)


1    Introduction
    Economists have come to recognize the importance of trust, reciprocity,
and other social preferences for explaining human behavior: people are self-
interested, but also are often concerned about the payoffs of others (e.g., Rabin
(1993), Charness and Rabin (2002), Fehr and List (2004)). Additionally, as
Arrow (1972) and Sen (1977) have argued, networks of trust and reciprocity
are essential for undergirding all economic exchange. However, relatively less
is known about the consequences of violations of trust or reciprocity. What
actions can be taken to avoid the deterioration of mutual confidence when
trust has been compromised?
    One common action to avoid the collapse of a relationship after a viola-
tion of trust or an unfortunate incident is to deliver an apology. The act
of apology is an important thread running through households, friendships,
and employer-employee relationships. Recent research has lent important in-
sights into apologies in lab contexts and small-scale field experiments (see,
e.g., Gilbert et al. (2017), Ho (2012)), but much remains ill-understood. For
instance, why do firms apologize? Do customers actually value apologies?
    With these questions as motivating examples, we begin by outlining a
principal-agent model of trust violation and apologies. In the model, a cus-
tomer (the agent) purchases output that provides a noisy signal of the under-
lying trustworthiness of a firm (the principal). Depending on the stochastic
quality of the output, the firm may choose to apologize by sending a (poten-
tially costly) signal to the consumer in an attempt to signal trustworthiness
and restore the relationship. Several insights emerge from the model: among
them, (1) in order for the apology to be an effective signal, it must be accom-
panied by a real cost; (2) the apology may backfire, i.e. in some circumstances,
apologizing may be worse than not apologizing; (3) the efficacy of an apology

                                       2
depends on the familiarity of the consumer with the service; and (4) an apol-
ogy has a greater effect on firm services that are dissimilar to services that the
consumer normally consumes (Ho, 2012).
    We leverage our theory to design a field experiment on the Uber ridesharing
platform, which is a natural setting to lend insights into the underpinnings of
the model. Uber is concerned that inaccurate estimates of trip duration may
lead to decreased trust in the platform and decreased spending in the Uber
marketplace. Because Uber services 15 million rides each day (Bhuiyan, 2018),
even an extremely small fraction of rides being late could have large repercus-
sions. Indeed, our analysis suggests that, absent any apology, a rider who
experienced a late trip spends 5-10% less on the platform relative to a coun-
terfactual rider, suggesting that there are material consequences to precisely
the breach of trust described above.
    With this substantial loss in revenues as a backdrop, we conduct the first
large-scale, natural field experiment to measure the importance of apologies
as a method for restoring trust in a relationship. In doing so, we design the
experiment to have a tight link with the theoretical model. Our experiment
is conducted across the United States over several months, sending real-time
apology emails following a late trip, as defined by the actual trip time compared
to the initial time estimate shown to the rider. We combine our experimental
variation with rich customer data from Uber, the customer-firm relationship
history, and situational context to test the specific predictions of the model.
    A key goal is to measure the role of apologies in maintaining relationships
with customers who have received a bad trip experience, measured by the
level of future spending with the firm, and then to unpack the mechanisms
through which apologies operate. The main set of treatments varies whether a
customer receives an apology, the type of apology, and the size of the promo-
tional coupon the customer receives as part of that apology ($5 or zero). We
complement these treatments with a secondary set of treatments that send up
to two additional apologies following a second and third delayed trip.
    We report several interesting insights. First, a costly apology after a bad
ride – in the form of a $5 coupon for a future trip – is an effective signal that


                                        3
increases future demand for future trips. Alternatively, we find that a signal
in the form of an apology without a promotion (i.e. words alone) had little
effect or was even sometimes counterproductive. As a placebo check, we find
that the $5 coupon administered directly after a bad ride is more effective
than a $5 coupon administered at a random time and unrelated to a rider’s
experience. We also find that the benefit of a costly apology can be detected
even three months after the initial bad experience, whereas any benefit from
a non-pecuniary apology quickly fades. This is especially notable because we
measure the benefit as net of the coupon cost.
    Second, we consider two other mechanisms suggested by theory that poten-
tially create non-pecuniary costs of apologies, i.e. costs incurred by the firm
besides a direct payment or coupon. We find that one additional cost is the
potential for apologies to backfire, in particular when the apology included
a promise to do better in the future. Our data suggest that in these cases
repeated apologies after several bad experiences make things worse relative to
fewer apologies. Apologies can restore trust but consumers who receive an
apology hold firms to a higher standard in the future. If that future expecta-
tion is violated, apologies backfire.
    The other possible non-pecuniary cost of an apology suggested by theory
is the possibility that an apology could reduce demand for some kinds of rides
while increasing demand for others. For example, consider a consumer who
cares about two dimensions of quality: first, the ability to get quickly to the
airport, and second the firm’s overall customer service. An apology after a ride
to the airport could serve as an admission of incompetence in providing airport
rides, but cause the consumer to have more favorable beliefs about the firm’s
customer service. Thus, we would expect the apology to cause the consumer
to increase the number of non-airport rides that they take. Unfortunately, the
data lacked the power to make a conclusive statement about this channel.
    Finally, we find that characteristics of trips and individuals affect the im-
pact of apologies. The efficacy of an apology depends on the severity of the
unsatisfactory service – in this case measured by how late the ride was, in
minutes. In particular, we find a U-shaped relationship between severity of


                                       4
the unsatisfactory experience and apology effectiveness: for slightly bad qual-
ity and severely poor experiences, apologies are effective. Yet, for moderately
poor experiences, apologies are not as effective. Moreover, the efficacy of an
apology critically depends on a user’s familiarity with the service. Apologies
are less effective for users who are quite familiar with the product, yet are
much more effective when the user has less experience with the Uber product.
Both of these results are in concert with our model.
    Our study fits in nicely with several strands of related work. First, it
extends the social preference literature into an area that considers how trust
can be restored after it is compromised. As Levitt and List (2007) summarize,
lab and field experiments with the canonical trust game, dictator game, and
other games have shown that the concepts of trust and reciprocity are essential
for explaining human behavior. Rabin (1993), Charness and Rabin (2002), and
Dufwenberg and Kirchsteiger (2004) formally model these concepts. Second,
the extant literature on the economics of apologies has primarily been limited
to small scale field and lab experiments (e.g. Aaker et al. (2004), Abeler et al.
(2010), Fischbacher and Utikal (2010), Gilbert et al. (2017), Chaudhry and
Loewenstein (2017)), or difference-in-difference analysis of policy interventions
(e.g. Ho and Liu (2011)). We extend this literature by testing the model in the
field, with detailed customer and situational data, and we follow the subjects
for three months after the apology to measure how effects persist over time.
Our data show that methodologically the lab studies have given us a key first
look at the efficacy of apologies.
    The remainder of our paper proceeds as follows. We first introduce the
principal-agent model that guided the experimental design. Then we pro-
vide details of the experimental design, briefly describe the Uber ridesharing
platform, and discuss the empirical results. We conclude with a discussion
exploring how firms and individuals can use our results to further their under-
standing of apologies.




                                       5
2       Theoretical Motivation
    Our theoretical framework is based on the Ho (2012) principal-agent model
of a customer-firm relationship that formalizes many of the findings about
apologies in the psychology literature.1 The model is a two-player game be-
tween a firm (the agent) and a consumer (the principal). Firms can be a
good “high” type (e.g. high trustworthiness) or bad “low” type (e.g. low
trustworthiness), θ ∈ {θH , θL }. The firm produces output y for the consumer,
generating utility for the consumer. The quality of the output – how long
the ride takes to arrive to the destination relative to expectations in our case
– depends on firm type θ as well as external circumstance, ω ∈ Ω, that is
uncorrelated with firm type (e.g. unexpected weather). Bad outcomes (i.e.
low-quality output) can result from a firm with bad intentions, θ = θL , or
alternatively from a bad draw from the state of nature ω. The consumer is
only aware of the overall quality of output y = y(θ, ω). We can think of the
firm’s intent as the expected output over all possible external circumstances,
ω which the firm does not know in advance, holding the firm’s actual type,
θ, fixed: Eω̂∈Ω y(θ, ω̂). The type, θ, is known to the firm but unknown to the
consumer. Type is defined so that higher types have “better” intentions. We
call θ intentions because it represents expectations; even high-type firms may
have a poor realization in any particular interaction.
    There may be many dimensions of quality over which a firm may wish to
signal their competence. For example, depending on the context and the par-
ticular consumer, higher quality could mean better on-time performance, or
more responsive customer service, or something else entirely. What all these
dimensions have in common is that higher quality represents higher expected
future utility for that particular customer. We let θ represent any dimension
of quality that yields higher expected payoffs for a consumer relative to their
outside option. Formally, θ is defined as a match quality parameter that is pos-

    1
      For example in lab experiments, Ohtsubo et al. (2012) and de Cremer et al. (2011) find
that costly apologies can work better than cheap apologies; Skarlicki et al. (2004) and Kim
et al. (2004) find that apologies can backfire; and many find that the efficacy of an apology
depends on the type of offense (e.g. Maddux et al. (2011)).

                                             6
itively correlated with consumer’s expected utility due to a supermodularity
condition. Ho (2012) has examples of how this supermodularity assumption
can accommodate specific functional form assumptions about what quality
could represent, such as lower cost of effort or greater concern for the princi-
pal’s welfare (i.e. altruism).
    Within the context of the rideshare industry, the timeline of the baseline
game proceeds as follows (Figure 1). The consumer begins with a prior p on
the probability that the firm is high type. She then experiences a good or
bad outcome for a ride, y(θ, ω) ∈ R. Next, the firm chooses to apologize or
not a ∈ {0, 1}. Finally, given the quality of the ride y and apology or non-
apology a, the consumer updates her beliefs about the firm’s type, learns that
an outside option is of high type with probability pout , and then chooses to
stay with the firm or to go with the outside option.

     t=1                                                                                           t=2
Agent produces Apology/no apology Principal updates      Outside option   Principal chooses    Old/new agent
  y = y(θ, ω)      a ∈ {0, 1}      posterior b(a, y)     revealed, pout      stay / leave     produces output
                at cost c(a, θ, ω)

                    Figure 1: Timeline of the Apology Game

    The consumer cares only about maximizing her consumption of rides, where
ride quality y(θ, ω) is a function of the firm’s type θ and external circumstances
ω such as traffic or weather. The consumer’s choice, x, is simply whether to
purchase from the same rideshare firm in period two or to take an outside
option (e.g. switch to a competitor or take public transit).

                                            X
                          Uconsumer (x) =           y(θt (x), ωt )
                                            t=0,1

   To keep things simple for this application, the firm’s problem is simply to
decide whether or not to apologize. As in Ho (2012), we abstract away from
the firm’s choice of effort in the determination of output quality. Under fairly
general assumptions, specifically that choice of effort is supermodular with
respect to firm’s type θ, a model that includes costly effort is equivalent to


                                            7
a reduced form model where cost of effort is subsumed into an apology cost
function that depends only on type, θ. The firm receives a profit per customer
of π and pays the apology cost (potentially zero) given by c(a|θ, ω1 ), which
can depend on its type and the state of nature.

                         Uf irm (a) = π · x − c(a|θ, ω1 )

For the moment, assume the cost of apologies is constant: c(1|θ, ω1 ) = κ.
We will discuss other cost functions and cheap apologies (i.e. c(1|θ, ω1 ) = 0)
below.
    Given this simple framework, the consumer observes signals about the
firm’s type, H , which in this case includes the firm output y and the firm
apology a. The consumer chooses to stay with the firm provided their poste-
rior belief, given by b(H) ≡ P r[θ = θH |H], is greater than the quality of the
outside option: b(H) > pout . The quality of the outside option is drawn from
some known distribution F (·). The firm chooses to apologize if and only if:

                        π · [F (b(y, 1)) − F (b(y, 0))] > κ

    The efficacy of an apology, ∆b ≡ b(a = 1) − b(a = 0), is the impact
the apology has on the customer’s beliefs (i.e. the firm’s reputation) and
thus the likelihood that the customer will stay with the firm. The model
provides several useful predictions about apology efficacy, ∆b, that inform our
experiment. Below, we discuss how apology efficacy is affected by uncertainty,
the costliness of the apology, and the severity of the bad outcome. We also
discuss predictions regarding repeat apologies.


2.1    Role of Uncertainty and the Role of Costs
     A separating equilibrium where apologies signal higher type exists given
the usual single crossing conditions: From Proposition 2 in Ho (2012), there
are three existence conditions that allow a separating equilibrium to exist: 1)
it is cheaper for high types to apologize, 2) continuing the relationship is more
beneficial for high types, or 3) high types fail in different situations than low

                                        8
types. In the case of a repeated customer relationship, the second condition is
most likely to hold as repeat customers will ultimately learn the firm’s type just
from repeat experience with the product. Therefore, the continuation value
is lower for low quality firms since customers will eventually discover they are
inferior and switch to the outside option. Accordingly, high types are more
likely to maintain a lasting relationship. We examine the data for evidence for
the other two existence conditions by exploring the value of implicit promises
and the role of situation on the efficacy of the apology. We return to these
questions in the Discussion.
    In a separating equilibrium, three properties about the efficacy of an apol-
ogy follow straightforwardly from Bayes Rule (see Ho (2012) for details):

  1. Apologies are more effective when there is greater uncertainty in the
     relationship (when the prior p is bounded away from 0 or 1)

  2. Apologies are more effective early in relationships

  3. Apologies are more effective the greater the apology cost. Further, apolo-
     gies are only effective when there is a cost (c(a = 1) > 0)

    Property 1 comes from the fact that when the prior belief, p, about the
firm’s type is close to 0 or close to 1, then the posterior belief is unlikely to
change much given a single additional signal (the apology) and therefore the
apology is likely to be ineffective. Apologies move beliefs the most when the
customer is most uncertain. Property 2 follows from Property 1. A customer
receives more and more signals about a firm’s type over time. As the history
of signals, H, lengthens, beliefs converge to either 0 or 1. Therefore, apology
efficacy is greater early in a relationship.
    Finally, Property 3 is based on the cost of apologies. If apologies increase
reputation then all firms will want to apologize. If costs are too low, then all
types of firms will apologize. If all firms apologize with the same frequency
then the efficacy of apologies tends toward zero. Apologies need to be costly
in order to ensure good firms and bad firms apologize at different rates, which
creates the separation in beliefs necessary for apologies to function.


                                        9
2.2     Severity of Outcomes
    We can apply the above results to also make predictions about how the
efficacy ∆b of an apology varies according to the outcome y. Apologies are
more effective when there is greater uncertainty about the firm’s type. This is
why we don’t see apologies after good outcomes. Presumably people choose
firms they have a good impression of. It is only when a bad outcome causes the
customer to question that impression, that an apology would be justified to
mend that impression. By a similar logic, we expect apologies to less effective
for moderate lateness, than for extreme lateness.
    Consider the distribution of possible outcomes (as measured by minutes
late) for a firm with good intentions θH versus a firm with bad intentions θL .
Here we suppose that the lateness of a trip is given by a normal distribution,
with a lower mean for high-type firms than for low-type firms, and common
variance (Figure 2).




           Figure 2: Distribution of Lateness of Outcomes (minutes)
Assume lateness of outcome is normally distributed, with high-type firms having a lower
mean then low-type firms, and common variance (e.g. weather or traffic).

    In this example, certainty that the firm’s intentions are bad is maximized at
the mean of the θL distribution. There is more uncertainty when the ride is less
late since the firm is more likely to have had good intentions. Similarly when
the ride is more late, the lateness is more likely to be due to the common shock
(e.g. weather or traffic). As a result we would predict apologies to be least

                                          10
effective for intermediate values of lateness and more effective when barely late
or extremely late.


2.3    Repeated Apologies
    It is also useful to apply the above theory to make predictions regarding
the efficacy of repeated apologies. Repeat apologies should be less and less
effective as the customer gains experience with the firm. The customer is
acquiring more and more information, and therefore is becoming more certain
about the firm’s type. Therefore the efficacy of an apology should diminish
with increased interaction with the firm. In fact, Ho (2012) predicts that an
apology could even begin to backfire if we assume apologies imply a promise
for better behavior.
    A cheap talk model of repeat apologies can lead to a backfire effect if we
believe that an apology implies an implicit promise to do better in the future
and repeated failure breaks that promise (as seen in the trust game experiment
by Schweitzer et al. (2006)). A promise kept signals higher firm quality while
a promise broken is worse than no apology at all. This can be seen in a simple
screening contract extension to the baseline model.
    Imagine the principal (consumer) offers the agent (firm) a menu that says
the following: If the firm apologizes, then the relationship will be continued;
however, if the firm is late again, the relationship will be immediately termi-
nated in favor of the outside option. A separating equilibrium exists where
good-intention firms apologize and accept the threat of immediate termination
while bad-intention firms do not apologize and are judged in the future solely
based on their performance (See Ho (2012) Online Appendix for details). In
the context of Charness and Dufwenberg (2006) a broken promise signals lack
of guilt aversion which serves as a second negative signal about the firm’s type.


2.4    Heterogeneous Ride Types
   Finally, consider the possibility that the firm offers different types of prod-
ucts (e.g. airport rides, weekend rides, rush hour rides). After a bad experi-

                                       11
ence, consumers are uncertain whether the bad experience was due to the firm
being bad overall or simply bad for that particular product. If an apology is
seen as an admission that the firm is bad at that kind of ride, it could increase
the consumer’s impression of the firm overall. We would predict that a con-
sumer who received an apology would be less likely to take rides similar to the
bad one but more likely to take dissimilar rides from the same firm (See Ho
and Huffman (2006) Online Appendix for details).


2.5    Hypotheses
    In sum, the hypotheses from the model that are applicable to our setting
include:


Hypothesis 1 The efficacy of an apology is higher when apologies are more
costly.


Hypothesis 2 The efficacy of an apology is lowest for intermediate severities
of adverse outcomes when the variance of outcomes within types exceeds the
variance of outcomes between types.


Hypothesis 3 The efficacy of an apology is higher early in a customer-firm
relationship, when there is greater uncertainty about the firm’s type.


Hypothesis 4 The efficacy of an apology decreases with repeated use and can
backfire if overused.


Hypothesis 5 An apology decreases future demand for similar trips but in-
creases future demand for dissimilar trips.

    The model defines apology efficacy as the change in beliefs, ∆b that arise in
response to an apology. While we do not observe the beliefs of our experimental
subjects, we do observe their future decision of whether to stay with the firm,
or to choose an outside option: P r [b(H) > pout ]. It is this outcome variable
that we will use to test our main hypotheses.

                                       12
3       Experimental Design
    To test the hypotheses from this model, we conducted a natural field exper-
iment (see Harrison and List (2004)) on the Uber ridesharing platform. The
Uber platform connects riders with drivers willing to provide trips at posted
rates. A rider provides her desired pickup and dropoff location through a
phone app, and is offered a price, an estimated time to pickup, and an esti-
mated time to destination (ETD). She then may choose to request an Uber
ride and will be picked up and transported to the destination. At the end of
the trip, the rider has the option to tip the driver (see also Chandar et al.
(2018), Chandar et al. (2019)). This describes the standard “UberX” product
offering which is the focus of our experiment, but Uber offers products that
slightly vary this experience. For example, UberPOOL offers a discounted
price but may involve trip detours to pick up multiple riders traveling along a
similar route.2
    One measure of platform quality is the accuracy of the ETD provided to
riders. Rideshare firms such as Uber are justifiably concerned that inaccu-
rate such estimates may lead to decreased trust and consequently decreased
spending with Uber. As mentioned above, we completed an analysis using a
matching methodology to identify the causal effect on future spending of a
rider who experienced a late trip – a “bad ride” – relative to a statistically
identical customer who took an identical ride but which arrived on time. This
analysis, which helped to motivate the present study, found that riders in the
right tail of the lateness distribution spend 5-10% less on the platform relative
to the counterfactual. These results are available upon request.
    To attenuate the costs of bad trips and to test the power of apologies, we
designed a natural field experiment. Our field experiment was conducted over
the course of several months in 2017. We selected six of Uber’s largest markets
to ensure a mix of cities with differing levels of competition between Uber
and competing ridesharing platforms, and separately to ensure large enough
    2
      Cohen et al. (2016) also use Uber data to study the demand side of the ridesharing
market. A number of other papers use Uber data to examine the supply side, see e.g. Cook
et al. (2018), Hall et al. (2017).

                                          13
ridesharing markets to generate a sufficient sample size. 1.5 million subjects
passed through the experiment across the eight treatment groups described
below.
    Riders entered the treatment upon experiencing a bad ride, defined as an
UberX trip which arrived at the destination n minutes later than the ETD
initially displayed to riders when choosing whether to request a trip. The
threshold n varied by city based on the city’s historical distribution of lateness.
The threshold was set so that in expectation only the 5% latest trips would be
classified as late in each city, which generally implied a 10-15 minute threshold.
    An hour after the end of a bad ride, a customer in a treatment group would
receive an email, the content of which varied depending on the treatment
group. We then follow all of the customer’s future interactions with Uber for
84 days.
    Following our theory, subjects were divided among eight treatment groups
(Figure 3). Half received a $5 promo code while the other half received no
promo code. The promo code conditions were crossed with four different apol-
ogy types:

  1. No apology.
  2. Basic apology: e.g., “Oh no! Your trip took longer than we estimated.”
  3. Status apology: e.g., “We know our estimate was off.”
  4. Commitment apology: e.g., “We’re working hard to give you arrival
     times that you can count on.”

The wording of each email was in the spirit of our model and followed Ho
(2012). The different kinds of apologies were designed to emphasize different
apology mechanisms. In particular, the “Status” apology was designed to
amplify the effect of apologies on dissimilar rides, and the “Commitment”
apology to emphasize the effect on repeated failures. The messages were sent
as emails, with subject lines that suggested the nature of the apology and
highlighted the $5 promotion if attached. Full message details along with the
theoretical motivations for each apology type are found in Appendix A and B.
   Treatment groups were balanced on eight dimensions:

                                        14
                              Figure 3: Treatments
The experiment was a 4x2 design with 4 apology message types crossed with either a no
promo code condition or a $5 coupon condition.


   1. Average fare previously faced by a rider (in all of 2017 prior to the
      experiment launch)
   2. Days since signing up with Uber
   3. Lifetime dollars spent on Uber (up until experiment launch)
   4. Lifetime trip count (up until experiment launch)
   5. (Number of UberPOOL trips taken in life)/(Number of UberX + Uber-
      POOL trips taken in life)
   6. Number of UberPOOL trips taken (in the month before experiment
      launch)
   7. Number of UberX trips taken (in the month before experiment launch)
   8. Number of support tickets filed (in all of 2017 prior to the experiment
      launch)

    Technological limitations meant balancing could only be done for subjects
who had signed up for the Uber platform before the start of the experiment.
Subjects who joined after the start date were randomly assigned to one of
the treatment groups. As a result, because of the large number of subjects,
means were significantly different in t-tests between groups, but the differences
were economically small, as reported in Table 1. Appendix B contains further
details on experimental design, including the language and imagery contained
in the apology email.

                                         15
        Table 1: Balance Check – Mean Rider Characteristics by Treatment
                                      avg fare    days since signup       lifetime billings    lifetime pool share      lifetime trips    n recent pool trips      n recent x trips      n tix
Control                                -14.339          762.622               1990.844                 0.124                131.44                1.277                   5.363          0.896
Basic apology                          -14.318          757.443               1973.183                 0.124               130.023                1.249                  5.254*          0.877
Basic apology + promo                  -14.366          761.054               1984.287                 0.123               131.039                 1.27                   5.317          0.883
Commitment apology                     -14.276          759.031               1963.447                 0.124               129.578                1.317                   5.289           0.87
Commitment apology + promo             -14.383          757.146               1979.742                 0.123               129.618                1.242                   5.279          0.863
Status apology                         -14.309          757.866               1974.789                 0.122                 129.4                1.234                 5.222***          0.87
Status apology + promo                 -14.356          761.665               1995.218                 0.124               131.619                 1.28                   5.377          0.893
Just promo                             -14.368          762.392               1994.212                 0.124               131.528                1.281                   5.351          0.886
 * indicates significance of pairwise t-test versus the control group at the 5% level, with the Bonferroni correction applied. ** indicates the same at the 1% level and *** at the 0.1% level.




   In general we report results for future spending net of any promotions
applied (“net spending”), including but not limited to our $5 promo. For
example, if a rider took a single $8 trip in the seven days following treatment,
but used a $5 promotion on that trip, her level of spending would be reported as
$3. The analysis using gross spending yields similar results. We also consider
future trip count, future tipping, and the extensive margin of whether the rider
took any future trips as outcome variables.


4          Results
    We begin by presenting the unadjusted means of our main outcome vari-
able, net spending, across the seven treatment groups versus the control group.
Figure 4a presents average spending by riders over the seven days following
the bad ride. The figure can be read as follows: we have 186,584 customers in
the control group who had a bad trip. On average, these customers spent (net
of promotions) $45.42 in the seven days after the bad trip. Comparing this to
the basic apology group, which had 191,825 subjects, we find that those who
received our basic apology spent $45.86 in the seven days subsequent to a bad
trip. This result is significant at the p < 0.05 level using a standard t-test of
means.
    Another finding in the raw data is that we find no statistically significant
differences between the different message types in the raw means. F-tests
show that mean spending within the set of three “Just apology” treatments
were statistically indistinguishable (ANOVA p = 0.27), as was mean spending
within the set of three “Promo + apology” treatments (ANOVA p = 0.63).


                                                                                            16
Total spending (net of promos).png Total spending (net of promos).png




                   (a)                                            (b)

                   Figure 4: Mean spending by treatment group
Panel (a) presents raw mean spending (net of any promotions) by treatment arm. Panel (b)
aggregates the results across message types into four treatment categories (since the content
of the messages themselves was found to be insignificant), with shaded 95% confidence
intervals.


Accordingly, for ease of comparison, we aggregate the treatments into four
categories, shown in Figure 4b. The categories are: the control group, the
treatment group that received just the $5 promo code (“Just promo”), the
three treatment groups that received just an apology email (“Just apology”),
and the three treatment groups that received both a $5 promo and an apology
(“Promo + apology”). The figure shows similar insights as observed in the
disaggregated data: coupons are an important promotional tool, and apologies
alone work marginally.
    To complement this visualization of the raw data, we provide Table 2,
which reports summary statistics for the full set of outcome variables, again
at the seven-day horizon. Note that the effect of treatments on trip count and
whether a rider takes a future trip are consistent with the effect on spending.
Additionally, the effects of different treatments on future tipping behavior are
indistinguishable from zero.

                                             17
                   Table 2: Means (Std Errs) by Treatment Category (7d)
                      Total spending (net of promos)         Trip count        Total spending (incl. promos)      Total tips    Took another trip
Control                             45.424                       2.848                     46.6                      0.977              0.674
                                    (0.152)                     (0.009)                   (0.154)                   (0.008)            (0.001)
Just promo                          45.741                       2.877                    47.219                     0.994              0.680
                                    (0.154)                     (0.009)                   (0.156)                   (0.009)            (0.001)
Just apology                        45.748                       2.851                    46.924                     0.991              0.672
                                    (0.100)                     (0.006)                   (0.101)                   (0.006)            (0.001)
Promo + apology                     45.649                       2.879                    47.166                     0.994              0.679
                                    (0.101)                     (0.006)                   (0.102)                   (0.006)            (0.001)
  Note: Outcome variables at a seven-day horizon are presented here, but data were collected at horizons up to and beyond 84 days after the initial bad
  ride.




    To supplement the raw data observations, we conduct a series of regres-
sions. Our main empirical specification regresses the outcome variables of
interest for each subject i on the set of eight treatment dummies indexed by j,
controlling for the variables X~ on which we balanced in addition to city, date,
and hour-of-week fixed effects:


                                  X
 ln(Outcomei ) =                          αj · T reatmentj + β~ · X
                                                                  ~ i + γcity + δdate + ηhour + εi (1)
                                     j


    Regression results for the effect of apologies on net spending, estimated
using this specification, are presented in Table 3. Each column estimates the
treatment effect on net spending over progressively longer horizons (7, 14, 28,
56, 84 days). A main feature to note is that the apology by itself (without a
promotion) has no statistically significant effect at conventional levels. In fact,
while the effect of an apology is largely not significant, if anything the presence
of the apology in and of itself has a negative effect over longer time horizons
(56 to 84 days). Table 4 presents the same specification but with number of
future rides as an outcome variable. It shows the same basic pattern, therefore
we will focus our attention on net spending as the outcome variable.
    Figure 5 plots the estimated coefficients on the treatment dummies from
our main empirical specification estimated over the same horizons described
above. We find persistent effects of treatments that include a promotion as
far out as three months after the apology was sent.
    One possible explanation for the persistence of the effect is intertemporal


                                                                          18
Table 3: Log of future net spend by treatment group over the N days after
the bad ride

                                          7d          14d         28d         56d         84d
Basic apology                           0.007         0.001     -0.005       -0.008      -0.009
                                       (0.006)      (0.006)    (0.006)      (0.005)     (0.005)
Basic apology + promo                  0.015**      0.012*     0.015**      0.011*        0.009
                                       (0.006)      (0.006)    (0.006)      (0.005)     (0.005)
Commitment apology                      -0.002       -0.004     -0.013      -0.016*      -0.014
                                       (0.008)      (0.008)    (0.008)      (0.008)     (0.007)
Commitment apology + promo              0.008        -0.001     0.001        -0.005      -0.006
                                       (0.008)      (0.008)    (0.008)      (0.008)     (0.007)
Status apology                          0.006         0.002     -0.003       -0.006      -0.006
                                       (0.006)      (0.006)    (0.006)      (0.005)     (0.005)
Status apology + promo                 0.013*         0.008     0.011       0.011*      0.011*
                                       (0.006)      (0.006)    (0.006)      (0.005)     (0.005)
Just promo                             0.015**        0.007     0.005         0.005       0.008
                                       (0.006)      (0.006)    (0.006)      (0.005)     (0.005)
Controls                                  X            X           X           X           X
City                                      X            X           X           X           X
Date                                      X            X           X           X           X
Hour                                      X            X           X           X           X

No. observations                       1257738      1257737    1257735     1257735      1257740
  OLS regressions of log future net spending in the N days after experiencing a bad ride with city,
  date, and hour-of-week fixed effects. Controls include: average fare; days since signup; lifetime
  billings; lifetime POOL share; lifetime trips; number of recent POOL trips; number of recent
  UberX trips; and number of support tickets filed.
  *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                               19
Table 4: Log of future number of rides by treatment group over the N days
after the bad ride

                                          7d          14d         28d         56d         84d
Basic apology                0.004                    0.001      -0.003      -0.005      -0.006
                            (0.002)                 (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)
Basic apology + promo      0.011***                 0.01***     0.01***     0.008*      0.007*
                            (0.002)                 (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)
Commitment apology           -0.001                  -0.002     -0.008*     -0.011*     -0.011*
                            (0.003)                 (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.005)     (0.005)
Commitment apology + promo 0.008*                    0.003        0.002      -0.001      -0.002
                            (0.003)                 (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.005)     (0.005)
Status apology               0.003                  2.68e-04     -0.003      -0.006     -0.007*
                            (0.002)                 (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)
Status apology + promo      0.01***                 0.008**     0.01***     0.01**      0.01**
                            (0.002)                 (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)
Just promo                  0.01***                  0.007*      0.007*     0.007*      0.008*
                            (0.002)                 (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)
Controls                                  X            X           X           X           X
City                                      X            X           X           X           X
Date                                      X            X           X           X           X
Hour                                      X            X           X           X           X

No. observations                       1257788      1257788    1257788      1257788     1257788
  OLS regressions of log future trips taken in the N days after experiencing a bad ride with city,
  date, and hour-of-week fixed effects. Controls include: average fare; days since signup; lifetime
  billings; lifetime POOL share; lifetime trips; number of recent POOL trips; number of recent
  UberX trips; and number of support tickets filed.
  *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                               20
                                           (a)




                                           (b)

                 Figure 5: Percent change in spending over time
We plot the α coefficient on each treatment dummy from model (1), with total spending as
the outcome, between the date of the bad ride and some future date 7, 14, 28, 56, and 84
days in the future. Panel (a) presents results for each treatment, and panel (b) aggregates
   the results across message types into four treatment categories for increased power.


complementarities in consumption. In other words, if taking an additional
ride today increases a rider’s chance of taking a ride tomorrow, then simply
inducing a customer to take an additional ride in the first week could have
persistent effects. While this result is intuitively appealing, it should be tem-
pered in that if complementarities were the only force driving the persistence,


                                            21
one would expect the effect size to get smaller over time. In fact, if anything
the effect (of a promotional coupon alone) stays steady or increases (albeit not
significantly) by day 84.
    What is especially notable in the results is that the effect of an apology by
itself becomes more negative over time. An apology alone (with no coupon)
becomes significantly negative by day 84, in contrast to the effect of an apology
with a promo. In particular, the difference in effects of an apology without
a coupon by day seven is statistically distinguishable from the effect by day
84 (p < 0.001), whereas the difference for the effect of an apology including a
coupon is not (p = 0.18). These points confirm Hypothesis 1 that apologies
are more effective when the cost associated with the apology is higher.
    Breaking the results down by treatment, we can see in Figure 5a that the
downward time trend is seen primarily in the treatments with no coupon,
along with both coupon and no-coupon treatments when a commitment was
made. (The one treatment in this set that did not see a statistically significant
decline was the commitment apology without a promo. However, the estimated
coefficients for this treatment had a decline similar to the others, around 1.2%,
with a p-value of 0.098. The lower significance for commitment apologies
could be explained by the lower power in that treatment as we sub-divided
the commitment treatment into 8 groups to measure repeat apologies, so the
sample we are testing is only 1/8th as large as the other treatments.) There
were declines in some of the other treatments but they were smaller and not
statistically significant.


4.1    Heterogeneity by Severity of Lateness
    Recall Hypothesis 2 that an apology would be least effective for mod-
erate levels of lateness, since this is when the poor experience is most likely
attributable to the firm itself. On the other hand, apologies would be more
effective for low levels of lateness (when the firm is more likely to be of the
high type) and high levels of lateness (where the most severe delays can be
attributed to external factors like weather).


                                       22
    This prediction is consistent with the pattern observed in the data. Fig-
ure 6 provides the estimated coefficient for the aggregated treatment variable
interacted with indicators for the degree of lateness as measured by decile.
Since there is significant variation in the distribution of lateness for each city,
we measure lateness relative to other rides from the same city, although other
specifications produce the same pattern. As predicted, apologies are least
effective (or most damaging) for intermediate degrees of lateness.




             Figure 6: Efficacy of Apology by Severity of Outcomes
The coefficient on the treatment variable interacted with the decile of how late the ride was
as measured by number of minutes relative to the other rides in the sample from the same
city.


    We test this relationship formally by estimating our main specification
(1) with the addition of interaction terms between the treatment dummies
and the percentile of lateness and the percentile squared. We find that the
quadratic interaction term is statistically significant for the “promo + apology”
treatment at the p < 0.05 level and for the “Just promo” treatment at the
p < 0.10 level.


4.2     Heterogeneity by Rider History
    We now turn to Hypothesis 3 that apologies should be most effective
when there is the greatest degree of uncertainty and therefore we would expect
greater efficacy for new users of the ridesharing platform. Here we present the
effect of apologies within subsamples of riders based on quartiles of riders’
number of rides before having the bad experience.


                                             23
                           Figure 7: Rider heterogeneity
Treatment effect on net spending within subsamples defined by the quartile of the number
of past rides in the customer’s history.


    As shown in Figure 7, our results are mixed. For the joint promo and
apology treatment, the point estimates indicate that the treatment effect is
highest for the newest quartile of users (those with 0 to 10 lifetime trips) and
lowest for the most experienced users (those with greater than 157 trips), with
the effectiveness decreasing across quartiles. However, for those who received
just an apology, the point estimates are mixed, and in fact the treatment effect
estimate is smallest for the newest users and somewhat higher for the most
experienced users. In both cases, the confidence intervals are wide.
    Looking instead at a different measure of unfamiliarity and uncertainty, the
frequency of UberPOOL usage relative to UberX, we find results more consis-
tent with the hypothesis (Figure 8). The two most popular services provided
by Uber are UberPOOL and UberX. Since our experiment was conducted ex-
clusively on UberX riders, we expect riders who have mostly used UberPOOL
in the past to be more uncertain about the quality of UberX. Indeed, our point
estimates indicate that riders who mostly used UberPOOL in the past were
much more likely to be positively influenced by an apology than riders who
mostly used UberX, although the confidence intervals are again large.



                                          24
                  Figure 8: UberPOOL Riders vs UberX Riders
Treatment effect on net spending within subsamples defined by whether a rider is a “consis-
tent UberX user” (≥ 75% of trips in the preceding three months on UberX), a “consistent
UberPOOL user” (≥ 75% of trips in the preceding three months on UberPOOL), or the
intermediate case with no consistent product.


4.3     Impact of Repeat Apologies
    Next, consider Hypothesis 4: that repeat apologies would be less and less
effective over time and may even be counterproductive. For a subsample of
riders we conduct the following secondary experiment. We split the sample and
offer a second apology for half of the subjects who in following weeks receive a
second late trip, leaving the other half as a control (having only received one
apology). For the subsample who received two apologies we split the sample
again for those who took a third late trip, offering half a third apology and
leaving the other half as one final control (who only received two apologies).
    As before, a cheap-talk apology alone without the $5 promotion remains
largely ineffective. However, whereas the short term effect of the first apology
with a $5 promotion yielded a 2% increase in net spending, the net effect
on spending of the second apology is not significantly different compared to
someone who had a second bad ride but received no new apology message.
For the third bad ride, the apology on its own is insignificant again, while the
third apology with a promotion has a significantly negative effect on future net


                                            25
                   (a)                                               (b)

                 Figure 9: Treatment Effect of Repeat Apologies
Panel (a) reports the marginal treatment effect over the first apology of a second apology
treatment for a second bad experience with Uber, compared to the relevant control group.
Panel (b) reports the marginal effect of a third apology relative to the second. Effects are
at a seven-day horizon.


spending relative to someone who received three bad rides but only received
two apologies with a promotion. In fact, this negative effect shows up not just
in terms of future net spending but also in terms of the number of future rides
taken and in terms of future gross spending.
    This backfire effect we observe is consistent with an apology acting as a
promise. An apology can temporarily restore a customer’s loyalty after an
adverse outcome. However, an apology acts as a promise that the adverse out-
come was due to unexpected external factors, and that the customer should
therefore expect better outcomes in the future. When those higher expecta-
tions go unmet, the firm reputation suffers more than if no apology had been
tendered at all. Apologies should therefore be used sparingly and ideally only
after unexpectedly bad outcomes that are unlikely to repeat again in the near
future.




                                            26
4.4    Heterogeneity by Ride Type
    Finally, consider Hypothesis 5: that an apology after a trip of a given type
decreases demand for that category of ride but increases demand for dissimilar
trips. Given the rich data associated with each trip on the Uber platform, we
are able to classify trips into several natural categories based on popular Uber
use cases. We consider the following categories of trips: rides to and from
an airport; rides during morning commute hours; and rides during weekend
hours. We also link trip timing and location to local weather conditions using
the Dark Sky weather API and consider trips during times of precipitation
(i.e. rain, snow, or sleet) versus those not during times of precipitation.
    To test the model’s hypothesis about heterogeneous effects due to the cir-
cumstance of the bad ride, we compared the treatment effect of apologies on
riders who had (for example) a bad airport trip on future airport trips versus
the treatment effect on future non-airport trips, However, we are unable to
reject the null that apologizing has no differential effect between trip types for
the categories tested (airport vs. non airport, rush hour vs. non rush hour,
weekend v.s weekday, and rainy vs. non-rainy).


5     Discussion
    Since our principal finding is that it is primarily a promotional coupon
that can be used for a future trip that restores the firm’s reputation and not
the apology itself, one can ask: is this an “apology effect” or just a “promo
effect”? One approach to answer this query is to compare our estimated effect
sizes with the effect of a generic $5 promotion sent out randomly by Uber,
which will have no apology connotation.
    Running concurrently in the cities where our experiment was conducted
(between the months of June and October of 2017), another experiment tested
the effects of randomly sending a $5 promo against a control group that re-
ceived no promotion. While this serves as an important comparison experi-
ment, we should note that this natural field experiment is not a perfect ana-


                                       27
logue to our main apology experiment for two reasons. First, this experiment
proactively targeted the entire Uber rider population whereas our own exper-
iment targeted only those who had received a late ride. Having a late ride is
more likely to happen to more frequent riders simply by chance: more trips
implies a higher chance of at least one bad draw. To make treatment effects
comparable, we restrict consideration to just those riders who experienced at
least one bad ride during 2017. It is important to note that while these riders
experienced a bad ride, the random $5 promos were not sent because of this
ride and could have been sent months before (or after) the experience.
    A second limitation of our comparison experiment is that this generic
promo was usable multiple times and limited to a single week, whereas our
promotion was one-time use in the next three months. Therefore, we might ex-
pect this generic promotion to be much more effective at the seven-day horizon
than our apology promotion.
    In fact, while the sample size is small (n = 27, 203), we find that our “just
promotion” treatment in the aftermath of a bad experience is statistically sig-
nificantly more effective than the randomly-timed generic promotion. Stacking
the generic promotion data with our “just promotion” and control data, we
estimate:

ln(Outcomei ) = α1 ·is generic+α2 ·is treated+α3 ·is generic·is treated+β·   ~X ~ i +γcity +δdate +εi ,
                                                                                (2)
where the coefficient on the interaction term α3 is the treatment effect of receiv-
ing a generic (randomly-timed) promotion, compared to receiving a promotion
in the aftermath of a late trip.
    Estimating (2) with net spend as the outcome variable at the seven-day
horizon, and using the same set of controls as in the previous analyses, we
find that the randomly-timed promotion has a significantly negative effect of
-8.3% (p-value < 0.001) on future net spending, which is in contrast to the
positive effects of the $5 “just promotion” without an apology. Importantly,
this suggests that it matters that the act of remediation occurred after an
adverse event, a breach of trust. This is, at least, consonant with the idea


                                         28
that our $5 “just promotion” treatment had an extra impact after a bad trip
compared to the effect observed after a generic $5 promotion is received.
    This finding also lines up with the findings of an experiment that was
run independently, and concurrently, by the ridesharing company Via (Cohen
et al., 2018). This study also found that while a $5 promo after a bad ride
was effective at increasing net spending, a $5 promo randomly given had an
insignificant effect on gross and net spending. Cohen et al. (2018) also find
that a cheap apology (without a promotional coupon) had no significant effect.
This replication with a different company is encouraging in that it suggests our
results generalize to rideshare firms beyond Uber, which had perhaps a unique
reputation at the time our experiment was conducted. There are a couple
differences observed between the Cohen et al. (2018) paper and our own that
are worth noting. They find that apologies mostly matter for late pickups,
whereas our experiment focused on late arrivals. Indeed they find null results
for late arrivals. They also find that their apologies are most effective for their
most frequent customers whereas we found indistinguishable treatment effects
on users by frequency. These differences are likely due to Via’s model which
emphasizes shared rides. When a user hails a ride with Via, she knows that the
driver will pick up other riders along the way. Thus, she does not necessarily
have the same expectation for an on-time arrival.
    The Via study, occurring in a different geography and different setting, is
also informative because apologies are undoubtedly context-dependent. Abeler
et al. (2010), who study apologies on an auction website, is similarly comple-
mentary. Interestingly, they find that cheap apologies were more effective than
monetary compensation. We have two possible explanations for the incogru-
ence between our results and Abeler et al.’s insights. First, their outcome
variable was the customer’s rating of the seller on the auction website. This is
relatively costless for the customer to change. The second is that their offer of
monetary compensation was offered as a quid pro quo payment to the customer
to change the rating (which may have been construed as a bribe) whereas in
our case, the monetary compensation was offered as a gift. Of course, our
thoughts are merely speculative, and further experiments are needed to pre-


                                        29
cisely identify the role of norms and context.
    Future research can also better identify the mechanisms that determine
how apologies work. Apologies can contain monetary restitution, admission of
guilt, promises about the future, expression of empathy, or even excuses (See
Appendix for more details). The experiment was designed to test different
apology mechanisms by varying the message that accompanied the apology
and by estimating the effect of apologies in different traffic and weather situa-
tions. While some of the effects of different apology messages were directionally
consistent with predictions from theory, the significance of their effect was not
consistently robust, perhaps because the email text associated with promotions
was not carefully read by customers (email open rates averaged approximately
30%). Similarly, the efficacy of apologies did vary by weather and traffic, but
not in any systematic way discernible through the lens of theory.


6    Conclusion
    We present results from a large-scale natural field experiment on the effects
of apologies to restore trust within a principal-agent relationship. We offer not
just evidence that apologies matter for customers, but also insights into how
apologies matter. Our results have implications both for firms deciding how,
and when, to apologize and for understanding how trust can be repaired in
economic relationships more generally.
    We find that the most effective apology was the provision of a $5 coupon,
with or without any accompanying apology text. Giving such a coupon after a
bad ride was more cost-effective than $5 coupons given at random. Yet, we find
that the benefits of apologizing with a coupon disappear after 3 months when a
promise to do better in the future is made. We further examine dimensions of
customer characteristics and characteristics of the adverse outcome that could
help provide guidance for more effective apologies going forward, such as the
customer’s familiarity with the product. Furthermore, apologizing repeatedly
to the same person who had multiple bad experiences in a three-month period
actually reduced future spending, relative to someone who also had repeated

                                       30
bad rides but did not receive repeated apologies.
    Overall, our experiment provides real world empirical support for the gen-
eral apology model. While previous lab studies have served to provide impor-
tant insights, our data demonstrate the value of the signaling view of apologies
by showing that its predictions hold in the field. Our analysis also provides
useful advice for firms on the ifs, whens, wheres, and hows to apologize op-
timally. We find that while apologies can be an effective way to restore and
prolong the customer relationship, the reason why apologies are not more fre-
quent is because they are costly and potentially backfire. Firms often do not
apologize because apologizing is difficult. Our data highlight that the safest
way to remediate a bad experience is a simple promotion applied to future pur-
chases. We find that money spent in this way, after an adverse event, yields a
positive return for the firm even when promotions sent at other times do not.
    There are several opportunities to expand on our experiment. Future work
should explore the impact of apologies in other industries and include greater
variation in the cost dimension. In particular, we remain interested in ex-
ploring the role of different kinds of apologies where the implicit promises
associated with an apology are made even more explicit.


References
Aaker, J., Fournier, S., and Brasel, S. A. (2004). When Good Brands Do Bad.
  Journal of Consumer Research, 31(1):1–16.
Abeler, J., Calaki, J., Andree, K., and Basek, C. (2010). The power of apology.
  Economics Letters, 107(2):233–235.
Arrow, K. J. (1972). Gifts and Exchanges. Philosophy & Public Affairs,
  1(4):343–362.
Battaglini, B. Y. M. (2002). Multiple Referrals and Multidimensional Cheap
  Talk. 70(4):1379–1401.
Bhuiyan, J. (2018). Uber powered four billion rides in 2017. It wants to do
  more – and cheaper – in 2018.



                                      31
Chandar, B., Muir, I., List, J. A., and Gneezy, U. (2018). The Determinants
  of Tipping: Evidence from Rideshare. Working paper.
Chandar, B., Muir, I., List, J. A., Woolridge, J. M., and Hortaçsu, A. (2019).
  Design and analysis of cluster-randomized field experiments in panel data
  settings. Working paper.
Charness, G. and Dufwenberg, M. (2006). Promises and Partnership. Econo-
  metrica, 74(6):1579–1601.
Charness, G. and Rabin, M. (2002). Understanding Social Preferences with
  Simple Tests. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(3):817–869.
Chaudhry, S. and Loewenstein, G. (2017). Thanking, Apologizing, Bragging,
  and Blaming: The Currency of Communication.
Cohen, M. C., Fiszer, M. D., and Kim, B. J. (2018). Frustration-based Pro-
  motions: Field Experiments in Ride-Sharing. pages 1–42.
Cohen, P., Hahn, R., Hall, J., Levitt, S., and Metcalfe, R. (2016). Using Big
  Data to Estimate Consumer Surplus: The Case of Uber.
Cook, C., Diamond, R., Hall, J., List, J. A., and Oyer, P. (2018). The Gender
  Earnings Gap in the Gig Economy: Evidence from over a Million Rideshare
  Drivers.
de Cremer, D., Pillutla, M. M., and Folmer, C. R. (2011). How important is
  an apology to you? Forecasting errors in evaluating the value of apologies.
  Psychological Science, 22(1):45–48.
Dufwenberg, M. and Kirchsteiger, G. (2004). A theory of sequential reciprocity.
  Games and Economic Behavior, 47(2):268–298.
Fehr, E. and List, J. A. (2004). The Hidden Costs and Returns of Incen-
  tivesTrust and Trustworthiness among Ceos. Journal of the European Eco-
  nomic Association, 2(5):743–771.
Fischbacher, U. and Utikal, V. (2010). Learning and Peer Effects On the
  Acceptance of Apologies. (53).
Gilbert, B., James, A., and Shogren, J. (2017). Corporate Apology for Envi-
  ronmental Damage.
Hall, J. V., Horton, J. J., and Knoepfle, D. T. (2017). Labor Market Equili-
  bration: Evidence from Uber. Working Paper, pages 1–42.


                                      32
Harrison, G. W. and List, J. A. (2004). Field Experiments. Journal of Eco-
  nomic Literature.
Ho, B. (2012). Apologies as Signals: With Evidence from a Trust Game.
  Management Science, 58(1):141–158.
Ho, B. and Huffman, D. (2006). Trust and the Law. 12604(1977):1–29.
Ho, B. and Liu, E. (2011). Does sorry work? The impact of apology laws on
  medical malpractice. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 43(2):141–167.
Kim, P. H., Ferrin, D. L., Cooper, C. D., and Dirks, K. T. (2004). Removing
  the Shadow of Suspicion: The Effects of Apology Versus Denial for Repairing
  Competence- versus Integrity-Based Trust Violations. Journal of Applied
  Psychology, 89(1):104–118.
Levitt, S. D. and List, J. A. (2007). What Do Laboratory Experiments Measur-
  ing Social Preferences Reveal About the Real World? Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 21(2):153–174.
Maddux, W. W., Kim, P. H., Okumura, T., and Brett, J. M. (2011). Cul-
  tural differences in the function and meaning of apologies. International
  Negotiation, 16(3):405–425.
Ohtsubo, Y., Watanabe, E., Kim, J., Kulas, J. T., Muluk, H., Nazar, G.,
  Wang, F., and Zhang, J. (2012). Are costly apologies universally perceived
  as being sincere? Journal of Evolutionary Psychology, 10(4):187–204.
Rabin, M. (1993). Incorporating Fairness into Game Theory and Economic.
  The American Economic Review.
Schweitzer, M. E., Hershey, J. C., and Bradlow, E. T. (2006). Promises and
  lies: Restoring violated trust. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
  Processes, 101(1):1–19.
Sen, A. (1977). Rational Fools : A Critique of the Behavioral Foundations of
  Economic Theory. Philosophy & Public Affairs, 6(4):317–344.
Skarlicki, D. P., Folger, R., and Gee, J. (2004). When Social Accounts Backfire:
  The Exacerbating Effects of a Polite Message or an Apology on Reactions
  to an Unfair Outcome. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 34(2):322–341.




                                      33
A     Appendix A: Different Kinds of Apologies
   A key part of the original design of the experiment was to test different
kinds of apologies by modifying the text of the apology message. The intent
was to identify evidence for the different mechanisms identified by Ho (2012),
which classified apologies into one of five categories:

  1. Costly apology: “I’m sorry, here’s $5.” An apology that involves a
     tangible cost.

  2. Commitment apology: “I’m sorry, I won’t do it again.” An apology that
     promises to do better in the future. Based on a screening contract.

  3. Status apology: “I’m sorry, I’m an idiot.” An apology that admits
     incompetence. Based on two-dimensional type.

  4. Empathy apology: “I’m sorry, I see that you are hurt.” An apology that
     recognizes the other’s pain. Based on information partitions.

  5. Excuses: “I’m sorry, it wasn’t my fault.” An apology that blames exter-
     nal factors. Based on verifiable cheap talk.

    Our study was designed to focus on the first three. Empathy was thought
to be too difficult for a corporation to communicate over an email while excuses
would have been technically more difficult and potentially had greater negative
consequences.
    The idea of the three types of apologies were conveyed to Uber’s marketing
department who designed messages consistent with the intent of the theory but
also consistent with Uber’s marketing practices.


A.1     Commitment Apologies
    The theoretical basis of the commitment apology is a screening contract.
As noted in the main text, the principal (consumer) offers the agent (firm) a
menu that says the following: If the firm apologizes for the breach of trust,
then the relationship will be continued; however, if the firm is late again, the
relationship will be immediately terminated in favor of the outside option.


                                      34
   In each round the principal has the option of staying with the current
agent or choosing an outside option. In a commitment apology, the princi-
pal commits to a menu of rewarding the agent using its future decisions to
stay with the current firm based on whether they apologized or not and their
trustworthiness in future periods.


           Table 5: Continuation values for commitment apologies.

                       Agent Behavior                  Cont. Value
                  Apologize, then good ride                v1g
                   Apologize, then bad ride                v1b
                  No apology, then good ride               v0g
                  No apology, then bad ride                v0b




   If good-intention firms are more likely to have good rides in the future, a
separating equilibrium exists where good-intention firms apologize and accept
the threat of immediate termination while bad-intention firms do not apologize
and are judged in the future based on their performance (See Ho (2012) Online
Appendix for details). The principal must commit to future behavior such that

                               v1g > v0g > v0b > v0b

. Note this is not renegotiation-proof since once a firm apologizes it reveals
itself to be of good intentions. This suggests a role for emotional motivations
that maintain the equilibrium behavior.


A.2     Status Apologies
    An alternate contract theory-inspired model for how apologies restore trust
in a relationship is based on the idea that intrinsic type, θ, is two-dimensional.
A firm can have good intentions but they may be unreliable for some types
of tasks (Chaudhry and Loewenstein (2017) provide recent evidence on how
apologies rely on the trade-off in the the agent’s perception of the principal’s

                                        35
competence versus the principal’s warmth). Suppose the distribution of ex-
ternal shocks, ω is correlated with the agent’s type. The principal can choose
which tasks to assign to the agent depending on her beliefs about the agent’s
type.
    For example, suppose some firms are better suited for rides to the airport,
while other firms are better suited for rides downtown. Here, the principal can
offer a screening contract after a bad airport ride, where if the agent apologizes,
they implicitly acknowledge their own inadequacy at airport rides, and if the
agent doesn’t apologize, they implicitly admit to having poor intentions. A
separating equilibrium can be enforced if the agent can assign similar tasks in
the future to agents who do not apologize but different tasks to agents who
do apologize.
    An agent with good intentions but who admits to being bad at providing
airport rides will get more city rides in the future. An agent with bad intentions
will not apologize because they find the airport rides to be more lucrative. The
agent with good intentions would not choose to not apologize because they
know they are bad at them. As in Battaglini (2002), the presence of multiple
dimensions of type allows the principal to get fully revealing information from
a cheap signal.
    In our experiment we expected to find evidence for status-based apologies
if a rider responded to an apology by decreasing future spending for similar
rides but increasing it for dissimilar rides. However, testing for such effects for
airport versus non-airport rides, weekday versus weekend rides, and rush hour
versus non rush-hour rides, returned statistically indistinguishable treatment
effects.


B     Appendix B: Experiment Details
   As discussed in Appendix A, riders who were sent an apology email received
one of three types – a “basic apology”, a “status apology”, or a “commitment
apology” – that either included a $5 promotion or did not. A screenshot of the
basic apology email, with a promotion, is shown in Figure 10a. Additionally,

                                        36
(a) Example screenshot of one of        (b) Screenshot of the “just promo” email
the apology emails sent to riders:      sent to riders, i.e. not including an explicit
the “basic” apology with a $5 pro-      apology.
motion.

                                     Figure 10


one treatment group received an email with the $5 promotion, but no explicit
statement of apology, shown in Figure 10b. The apology emails differed in
their subject lines and body paragraphs in the following way: Basic apology:

   • Subject line: “Oh no! Your trip took longer than we estimated”

   • Body: “Your trip took longer than we estimated, and we know that’s
     not ok. We want you to have the best experience possible, and we hate
     that your latest trip fell short.”

Commitment apology:

   • Subject line: “We can do better.”

   • Body: “Your trip took longer than expected, and you deserve better.


                                        37
     This time we missed the mark, but we’re working hard to give you arrival
     times that you can count on.”

Status apology:

   • Subject line: “We know our estimate was off.”

   • Body: “We underestimated how long your trip would take – and that’s
     our fault. Every trip should be the best experience possible, and we
     recognize that your latest trip fell short.”

    As reported in the body of the paper, technological limitations meant that
stratification could only be done for subjects who had signed up for the Uber
platform before the start of the experiment. Subjects who joined after the
start date were randomly assigned to one of the treatment groups. The same
technological constraints meant that each treatment arm could only be allo-
cated an integer percentage of the population. Since we have eight treatment
arms, this meant that some treatment groups received 13% of newly registered
users, while others received 12%. Because the newly registered users system-
atically differ from previously registered users, this resulted in the nonzero
differences between our raw-means estimates and our regression-adjusted esti-
mates. However, the differences do not impact our analysis and moreover, the
results are similar if we drop all users who were not pre-randomized.




                                     38
