                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



          UNITY IN DIVERSITY? HOW INTERGROUP CONTACT CAN FOSTER
                               NATION BUILDING

                                        Samuel Bazzi
                                         Arya Gaduh
                                   Alexander D. Rothenberg
                                        Maisy Wong

                                      Working Paper 25683
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25683


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2019


We thank the following for helpful feedback: Alberto Alesina, Oriana Bandiera, Toman Barsbai,
Giorgio Chiovelli, Raquel Fernandez, Paola Giuliano, Dilip Mookherjee, Nathan Nunn, Daniele
Paserman, Ben Olken, Imran Rasul, Duncan Thomas, and audiences at Boston University, Duke,
Georgetown, Harvard, the Kiel Institute, McGill, MIT, Notre Dame, Syracuse, University of
Arkansas, University of Colorado Denver, UNC-Chapel Hill, University of Southern California,
University of Toronto, Wellesley College, the Barcelona Graduate School Summer Forum, the
2017 DIAL Development Conference, the 2017 Midwest International Development Conference,
the NBER Political Economy meeting, the Ninth International Migration and Development
Conference, the 2016 Annual European Conference of ASREC, the Yale Interdisciplinary
Migration Conference, and the Northeast Universities Development Consortium 2016
Conference. Bazzi is grateful for financial support from the Global Development Policy Center at
Boston University. Wong is grateful for financial support from the Research Sponsors Program of
the Zell/Lurie Real Estate Center and the Wharton Social Impact program. A previous version of
this paper circulated under the title “Unity in Diversity? Ethnicity, Migration, and Nation
Building in Indonesia.” Richard Jin, Gedeon Lim, JoonYup Park, Ying Pei, Xuequan Peng, and
Hanna Schwank provided excellent research assistance. All errors remain ours. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Samuel Bazzi, Arya Gaduh, Alexander D. Rothenberg, and Maisy Wong. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Unity in Diversity? How Intergroup Contact Can Foster Nation Building
Samuel Bazzi, Arya Gaduh, Alexander D. Rothenberg, and Maisy Wong
NBER Working Paper No. 25683
March 2019
JEL No. D02,D71,J15,O15,R23

                                           ABSTRACT

We use a population resettlement program in Indonesia to identify long-run effects of intergroup
contact on national integration. In the 1980s, the government relocated two million ethnically
diverse migrants into hundreds of new communities. We find greater integration in fractionalized
communities with many small groups, as measured by national language use at home,
intermarriage, and children's name choices. However, in polarized communities with a few large
groups, ethnic attachment increases and integration declines. Residential segregation dampens
these effects. Social capital, public goods, and ethnic conflict follow similar patterns. Overall, our
findings highlight the importance of localized contact in shaping identity.


Samuel Bazzi                                      Alexander D. Rothenberg
Department of Economics                           Syracuse University
Boston University                                 426 Eggers Hall
270 Bay State Road                                Syracuse, NY 13244-102
Boston, MA 02215                                  adrothen@maxwell.syr.edu
and CEPR
and also NBER                                     Maisy Wong
sbazzi@bu.edu                                     Real Estate Department The
                                                  Wharton School University
Arya Gaduh                                        of Pennsylvania 1464
University of Arkansas                            Steinberg-Dietrich Hall 3620
402 Business Building                             Locust Walk Philadelphia PA
Fayatteville, AR 72701                            19104-6302
AGaduh@walton.uark.edu                            maisy@wharton.upenn.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25683
       [The] central challenge of modern, diversifying societies is to create a new, broader sense of ‘we’.
       —Robert Putnam, The 2006 Johan Skytte Prize Lecture


1    Introduction
Uniting people from diverse cultures is a founding principle of many nation states.1 Throughout history,
leaders have introduced policies to foster a national identity that would sustain an “imagined political
community” in which citizens remain connected by shared history and values, despite never meeting
one another (Anderson, 1983). However, rising geographic mobility has stoked concerns that growing
local diversity may undermine this nation-building objective.2
    This paper asks how intergroup contact affects the intergenerational process of nation building. Com-
peting views abound in the social sciences. Some argue that exposure to new cultures provokes back-
lash and conflict (Blumer, 1958; Huntington, 2004). Others posit that, under certain conditions, negative
sentiments may dissipate as intergroup relationships develop over time with greater contact (Allport,
1954). Alternatively, diversity may engender social anomie or isolation, which limits integration (Put-
nam, 2007). Whether intergroup contact is conducive to integration or to conflict may also depend on the
relative size of different groups (Esteban and Ray, 2008, 2011). Empirically, it is difficult to distinguish a
causal effect of diversity from the influence of endogenous sorting and location-specific amenities.
    We address these challenges using a large-scale policy experiment that created hundreds of diverse
communities across Indonesia. One of history’s largest resettlement efforts, the Transmigration program
provides a unique opportunity to understand how intergroup contact affects nation building. After
independence, the government urgently needed to forge an Indonesian identity that would forestall
secessionist tendencies. Policymakers viewed resettlement as an important part of efforts to unite more
than 700 ethnolinguistic groups across the archipelago. From 1979 to 1988, the government relocated two
million voluntary migrants (hereafter, transmigrants) from the Inner Islands of Java and Bali to newly
created agricultural villages in the Outer Islands.3
    The Transmigration program offers plausibly exogenous variation in ethnic diversity and segrega-
tion. Given the rapid scale-up and haphazard implementation, planners had little ability to systemati-
cally assign transmigrants. Nor could transmigrants choose their destinations. They queued for a short
time at Inner-Island transit camps waiting for settlements to open in the Outer Islands. The coincidental
timing determined the ethnic mix of Inner Islanders in the new villages. The government further man-
dated quotas for Outer-Island natives that varied over time and across regions. Reassuringly, we find
that initially assigned diversity does not systematically differ in more hospitable locations. Moreover,
upon arrival, all settlers received houses and farms by lottery. Full ownership rights were transferred
after 5–10 years, and imperfect land markets effectively tied migrants to their initial plot.
1
  For example, “United in Diversity” is the motto in the European Union, E pluribus unum in the United States, and “Unity in
  Diversity” in South Africa. History abounds with efforts “to make” national citizens (see, e.g., Duggan, 2007, on Italy).
2
  See Putnam (2007). Alesina et al. (2017) and Miller (2012) discuss challenges of forging a shared identity within the European
  Union. More generally, migration pressures are growing among minorities within rich countries (see Frey, 2014, on the United
  States) and in newer migration corridors from poor to rich countries (Hanson and McIntosh, 2016).
3
  The program had three goals: population redistribution, agricultural development, and nation building. Bazzi et al. (2016)
  investigate the agricultural productivity effects. While unique in some respects, Transmigration has parallels with resettlement
  schemes in other developing countries and also with state-sponsored efforts to settle frontier areas in developed countries.
  Appendix C elaborates on these as well as possible implications for modern refugee resettlement (see Bansak et al., 2018).


                                                                1
   We use the complete-count 2010 Census Population data to study diversity and the nation-building
process. The data comprise more than two million individuals in 817 Transmigration villages. We ob-
serve self-reported ethnicity and three revealed-preference measures of identity and integration: lan-
guage use at home, intermarriage, and children’s name choices. The data also provide granular details
on residential location, allowing us to examine hyper-local intergroup contact. We combine the Census
with survey and administrative data sources capturing other integration outcomes.
   Strikingly, even after three decades, Transmigration villages exhibit significantly greater ethnic diver-
sity and less within-village segregation than other organically settled villages in the Outer Islands. The
persistence of mixed communities suggests that tipping (à la Schelling, 1971) did not neutralize the initial
policy assignment. Long-run diversity in these villages is unrelated to predetermined amenities associ-
ated with national integration (e.g., proximity to roads). Comparing across Transmigration villages, we
can thus identify the effects of intergroup contact that are not due to endogenous sorting.
   We develop a model of identity choice to understand how local diversity influences the nation build-
ing process. Individuals choose whether to retain their ethnic identity or to adopt a national identity
(as revealed by language choice). Interactions in a diverse community benefit from a common culture.
With many small groups, a neutral national identity can help solve coordination problems and maximize
the gains from market and non-market interactions (Lazear, 1999). However, with a few large groups,
intergroup antagonism grows in importance (Esteban and Ray, 1994). Diversity may accelerate or slow
down the diffusion of the national identity. We embed these insights in a framework that generalizes the
Darity Jr. et al. (2006) model on the evolution of identity.
   The model predicts how a community’s initial ethnic composition determines the long-run preva-
lence of the national identity. Under certain assumptions, we derive a closed-form expression that in-
cludes two widely-used measures of diversity: fractionalization (F ) and polarization (P ). In high-F
villages (with many small groups), the national identity is more pervasive given the benefits of coor-
dination. In high-P villages (with a few large groups), ethnic attachment is more likely as it provides
protection from intergroup antagonism. Both of these forces are more muted in segregated communities
where, holding F and P fixed, intergroup contact is more limited.
   We test these novel implications using several proxies for national integration. Our primary measure
is the choice of language used at home in 2010. Globally, language is seen as one of the most critical
components of national identity (Pew Research Center, 2017). Policymakers view the national language,
Bahasa Indonesia or Indonesian, as synonymous with the Indonesian identity, widely promoting its use
across economic and social domains. Indonesian is rooted in a minority ethnic language (Malay) spoken
by only 5 percent of the country when it was chosen as the national language in 1928. Today, nearly
everyone can speak Indonesian. Yet, less than 20 percent choose it as the main language at home; most
prefer their native ethnic language. In survey data, those speaking Indonesian at home (homeIndo) re-
port significantly stronger national than ethnic identity. This suggests that homeIndo may contribute to
Indonesian identity formation and advance nation building. Using auxiliary panel data, we describe this
intergenerational process, linking homeIndo as a child to weaker ethnic attachment later in life as adults.
   Our main results support the opposing effects of fractionalization and polarization suggested by
the model. A one standard deviation (s.d.) increase in fractionalization leads to 12.9 percentage points
(p.p.) greater homeIndo, consistent with the benefits of intergroup contact in settings with many small


                                                      2
groups. A one s.d. increase of P leads to 8 p.p. lower homeIndo, consistent with the costs of intergroup
antagonism in settings with a few large groups. These are large effects relative to the village-level mean
of 14.4 percent for homeIndo.
   Several additional findings point to an identity-based interpretation. If individuals speak Indonesian
at home solely to improve language skills, we would see different effects across education levels or
employment sectors, but we do not. It is particularly telling to find sizable effects of F and P on ethnic
Malays whose native language forms the base of Indonesian. For Malays to choose homeIndo rather
than their mother tongue, they must feel relatively more invested in the national identity. In fact, we
find stable effects of F and P across major ethnic groups. Together, these results suggest that homeIndo
likely captures something deeper than latent fluency or effort to improve skills thereof. Moreover, these
findings are not likely due to endogenous sorting. We address compositional differences through an
array of fixed effects (e.g., ethnicity, birthplace, age) and show that the small subset of residents that may
have sorted endogenously cannot overturn our findings.
   Importantly, we identify similar effects of diversity on two additional proxies for ethnic attachment.
First, interethnic marriage rates, a leading indicator of integration (Gordon, 1964), are positively related
to F and negatively related to P . Second, we study the identity content of names given to children born
after resettlement. Name choices are the first act of intergenerational cultural transmission, conveying
information about parental preferences and expectations about the value of different identities. Using
several indices akin to the “black name index” of Fryer and Levitt (2004), we find that parents give their
children less ethnically distinctive names in villages with greater F and lower P .
   Furthermore, polarization exhibits adverse effects on social capital. At the individual level, we
use survey data to measure intergroup tolerance and trust, community engagement, and preferences
for redistribution. These subjective responses line up with village-level outcomes: P reduces growth-
enhancing public goods provision by local governments, increases the likelihood of ethnic conflict, and
ultimately hinders economics development. Meanwhile, F works in the opposite direction, indicating
possible downstream benefits of integration. Together, these other outcomes bolster our revealed pref-
erence interpretation of homeIndo as reflecting broader investments in the national identity, weakening
ethnic attachments, and integration with other groups.
   To better understand why ethnic divisions matter, we identify three potentially important mecha-
nisms, focusing on our core outcome of homeIndo. First and foremost, residential segregation determines
the scope for intergroup contact to change behavior in diverse communities. Exploiting the lottery as-
signment of housing units, we identify granular effects of diversity, both at the level of neighborhoods
within villages and among immediate next-door neighbors, reminiscent of the neighborhood effects in
Bayer et al. (2008) and Chetty and Hendren (2018). Moreover, segregation dampens the effects of both
F and P by limiting day-to-day contact with other groups. Second, as in Lowe (2018), the type of con-
tact matters: F has weaker positive effects in settings with greater interethnic inequality in economic
resources, proxied by location-specific human capital endowments. Third, deep-rooted linguistic differ-
ences between ethnic groups amplify both the benefits of F and the costs of P . In a final exercise, we
show how coordination on homeIndo can reduce the effective degree of polarization by bringing other-
wise culturally distant groups closer together.
   This paper sheds light on how intergroup contact influences nation building. Many studies docu-


                                                      3
ment adverse consequences of diversity (see Alesina and LaFerrara, 2005 and Esteban and Ray, 2017
for reviews). Relatively few examine how to mitigate ethnic divisions through nation building (Alesina
and Reich, 2015; Miguel, 2004).4 A survey by Paluck et al. (2018) notes that prior work on intergroup
contact has tended to focus on short-run lab or field experiments and self-reported preferences. Within
economics, a few studies find that contact fosters short-run increases in tolerance and out-group friend-
ships (Boisjoly et al., 2006; Lowe, 2018; Rao, forthcoming).
    We make three contributions to these literatures. First, we use a large-scale policy to examine long-
run effects of intergroup contact on both self-reported preferences and behavioral measures of integra-
tion. Nation building is a slow process, and endogenous sorting makes it difficult to identify these effects
in most settings. Second, our model complements the Esteban and Ray (2011) theory relating F and P to
conflict. We show that F hastens and P hinders the diffusion of the national identity. There are positive
externalities to adopting a common national identity, and as intergroup contact speeds up this process
(through F ), there may be increasingly less scope for intergroup antagonism to fuel conflict (through P ).
Third, our findings on segregation contribute to a small but growing literature highlighting the impor-
tant role of physical proximity in mediating the aggregate effects of diversity.5 Algan et al. (2016) also
explore sharply local effects of diversity in public apartment blocks in France, arguing that diverse build-
ings tend to foster social anomie. We differ by focusing on identity and integration, by disentangling F
and P , and by clarifying the distinct effect of segregation.
    Our study offers insight on how diversity affects the formation of a new shared identity. This pro-
cess differs from minority immigrant assimilation to the native majority explored in prior work (e.g.,
Abramitzky et al., 2018; Advani and Reich, 2015; Bleakley and Chin, 2010). Our findings suggest an
important role for the national language. This novel focus matters for understanding nation-building
processes in historical Europe as well as post-colonial developing countries.6 It also provides a window
into contemporary debates about national identity in rapidly diversifying developed countries. Conver-
gence towards a “broader sense of ‘we”’ may be easier in some settings (high F ) than others (high P ).
We are among the first to bring these two dimensions of diversity into a single framework for studying
integration, which may be useful in other settings.
    The paper proceeds in seven sections. Section 2 provides background on nation building in Indonesia
and the Transmigration program. Section 3 develops a model for understanding how intergroup contact
affects national integration. Section 4 describes our main data sources. Section 5 develops our empirical
strategy, including details on the transmigrant allocation process. Section 6 presents our core empirical
results. Section 7 explores mechanisms and other outcomes. Finally, Section 8 revisits the controversial
legacy of the Transmigration program and offers concluding thoughts.
4
  Other recent work on nation building examines how public media (Blouin and Mukand, 2016), bureaucrat assignments
  (Okunogbe, 2015), schooling (Bandiera et al., forthcoming), shared religious experience (Clingingsmith et al., 2009), and exter-
  nal enemies (Dell and Querubin, forthcoming) influence intergroup tolerance and national identity.
5
  This interplay between local and aggregate diversity features in cross-country studies by Alesina and Zhuravskaya (2011) and
  Desmet et al. (2016) and is an emerging theme in the political science literature covered by Enos (2017).
6
  There is comparatively little empirical work on either setting. There are interesting case studies on France (Weber, 1976) and
  several African countries (Laitin, 2007), and various national language policies are discussed in books referenced in footnote 8.
  There are a few empirical studies looking at the effects of banning ethnic languages (Clots-Figueras and Masella, 2013; Fouka,
  2016) and the determinants of national language choice by the government (Laitin and Ramachandran, 2015; Liu, 2015). Yet, a
  recent survey of the economics literature on language reveals no work on the national language and its implications for nation
  building in diverse countries (Ginsburgh and Weber, 2018). This is precisely where our study innovates, and our context
  should be of broad interest given Indonesia’s remarkable diversity and relative success in promoting a national identity.


                                                                4
2     Background: Diversity, Language, and Nation Building in Indonesia
Indonesia is one of the world’s largest and most diverse countries, with more than 1,200 self-identified
ethnic groups living on roughly 6,000 islands. According to 2010 Population Census data, Indone-
sia has an ethnic fractionalization index F —the probability that any two residents belong to different
ethnicities—of around 0.81. Despite its national diversity, most Indonesians live in segregated commu-
nities: of more than 60,000 urban and rural villages, the median village has an F of 0.04.7
      For most of its history, several independent kingdoms governed the peoples of the Indonesian
archipelago. Absent a common ruler, many different cultures and languages persisted throughout the
region. The Dutch colonists pursued a divide-and-conquer strategy that pitted kingdoms against each
other, ensuring that by the end of the nineteenth century “. . . a common Indonesian identity or [set] of
common goals simply did not yet exist” (Ricklefs, 2008, p.189). After independence in 1945, many in the
Outer Islands saw the consolidation of power as favoring the Javanese, Indonesia’s largest ethnic group
with 40 percent of the population (Bertrand, 2004). This fueled anti-Javanese sentiments and recurring
secessionist threats from the Outer Islands (Thornton, 1972).
      Not surprisingly, given Indonesia’s vast diversity and disparate groups with little shared history, its
founding leaders prioritized national unity. Anderson (1983, pp. 6–7) defines a nation as “an imagined
political community” whose members are often strangers but think of each other as part of a “commu-
nion.” To build a nation is to promote a shared national identity, with shared values and preferences that
are strong enough to glue its citizens together (Alesina and Reich, 2015). In Indonesia, “national unity”
became one of the state ideology’s Five Key Principles (Pancasila), and “Bhinneka Tunggal Ika” (Unity in
Diversity) is the state motto. The national language and the Transmigration program were two central
policies, among many, designed to advance this objective.


2.1     National Language

Policymakers viewed the national language as a key vehicle to socialize Indonesia’s national identity.8
In 1928, nationalists at the Second All-Indonesian Youth Congress drafted a statement of unity opposing
the Dutch. They pledged allegiance to Indonesia as “satu nusa, satu bangsa, satu bahasa” (one fatherland,
one nation, one language). They aimed to create a nation “unified by ties of common language, common
outlook, and common political participation, a people enthusiastically severing its outworn ties to local
traditions and loyalties” and instead rooted in an “all-Indonesian culture” (Feith, 1962, pp. 34-35).
      The national language, Bahasa Indonesia (or Indonesian), is a modified version of Malay, a trading
language used in the region for centuries. Before its recognition as the national language in 1928, Malay
was the mother tongue of 5 percent of Indonesia’s colonial population. Choosing a lingua franca instead
of Javanese, the language of the largest ethnic group, was critical. According to Liu (2015, pp. 4-5), this
choice played “a decisive role in counteracting the potentially negative economic effects of the country’s
heterogeneity”, minimizing intergroup tensions and cultivating the image of a pan-ethnic state.


7
  Villages (desa or kelurahan) comprise the lowest level of governance in Indonesia with an average population of over 2,000
  (7,000) in rural (urban) areas in the early 2000s. They are the main administrative unit of analysis in our study.
8
  This view is pervasive globally. The role of language policy in shaping national identity is a key theme of several books
  covering countries across Europe (Barbour and Carmichael, 2000), Asia (Simpson, 2007), and Africa (Simpson, 2008).


                                                             5
      Subsequent policies, including requiring its use in schools and official communications, promoted
Indonesian as “a symbol of national unity and identification” (Sneddon, 2003). Policymakers leading
this effort, like Alisjahbana (1962), believed that as people “. . . learned to express themselves in Indone-
sian, the more conscious they became of the ties which linked them.” Many outsiders view Indonesia’s
language policy as exemplary.9 According to the 2010 Census, nearly all Indonesians are able to speak
the national language. Yet, less than 20 percent use it as their main language at home.


2.2     Transmigration

Some policymakers also saw the nation-building potential of resettlement. The Transmigration program
aimed to relieve population pressures in Java/Bali and stimulate development in the Outer Islands. Poli-
cymakers believed that the program could also foster national integration by expanding the possibilities
for intergroup contact. For instance, in 1985, the Minister of Transmigration stated “By way of trans-
migration, we will try to . . . integrate all the ethnic groups into one nation, the Indonesian nation. The
different ethnic groups will in the long run disappear because of integration and there will be one kind
of man, Indonesian” (Hoey, 2003).
      Transmigrants volunteered for the program. Only nuclear families were eligible, and couples had to
be legally married, with the household head between 20 and 40 years old. In practice, most participants
were poor, landless agricultural laborers, with few assets, and limited schooling (see Kebschull, 1986,
for a pre-departure survey of transmigrants). Their education levels are more comparable to rural non-
migrants than to voluntary migrants from their home districts.10
      The Transmigration program provided free transport to the newly created settlements, housing, two-
hectare farm plots, and supplies for the first few growing seasons. According to the 1978 Transmigration
Manual, planners were keen to ensure that each settlement could produce enough food to overcome sub-
sistence. Officials worked with agricultural experts to map arable land availability, elevation, vegetation,
soil types, hydrology, climate, and market access (see Bazzi et al., 2016). They used these measures to
determine the maximum potential population of each settlement.
      The National Ministry of Transmigration (MOT) created and oversaw the new villages, endowing
each with the same initial institutions. The MOT provided public goods, including health clinics and
schools, where children were taught in Indonesian and would mix with students from different back-
grounds. Moreover, upon arrival, farm plots and housing were assigned by lottery to newly-arriving
settlers. This served, ex ante, to limit residential segregation and inequality in land (quality) across eth-
nic groups. After 5–10 years, households received ownership of housing and land, formerly under MOT
authority, though this was not perfectly enforced in practice. As formerly landless, the delayed prospect
of ownership may have tied them to their new land in the critical first few years after resettlement.
      The program fostered ethnic diversity in the new villages in two ways. First, given the rushed imple-
mentation to meet lofty resettlement targets,11 the assignment of transmigrants was neither rigorous nor

9
 According to Paauw (2009), “[No] other post-colonial nation has been able to develop and implement a national language
 with the speed and degree of acceptance which Indonesia has. No other national language . . . is used in as wide a range of
 domains as Indonesian, a feat made more impressive by the size and ethnic, linguistic and cultural diversity of Indonesia”.
10
   In the 2000 Population Census, transmigrants had around 0.7 fewer years of schooling than non-migrants from their origin
   district in Java/Bali and 3.5 fewer years of schooling than those who migrated independently to other Outer-Island districts.
11
   A total of 1.2 million people were resettled from 1979–1983, and an additional 3.75 million people were planned to be resettled


                                                                6
systematic. Instead, the allocation across villages was determined by the coincidental timing of trans-
migrants’ arrival to transit camps in Java/Bali and the opening of settlements in the Outer Islands. If
the transmigrants queuing in camp C happened to be diverse at the time village V was cleared, then V
received a diverse mix of Inner-Island settlers. Second, to encourage contact between Inner and Outer Is-
landers, planners allocated quotas for native Outer Islanders in each settlement. These quotas, known as
Alokasi Pemukiman bagi Penduduk Daerah Transmigrasi (APPDT), varied across time and space. Together,
the haphazard assignment of transmigrants and the APPDT quotas induced variation both in the ethnic
mix among Inner Islanders and the relative shares of Inner and Outer Islanders. We elaborate on both
sources of variation when developing our empirical strategy in Section 5.1.


3     Model: Intergroup Contact and Identity Choice
This section presents a framework for understanding how intergroup contact influences the nation-
building process. Building on Darity Jr. et al. (2006), we model the choice between maintaining one’s
own ethnic identity or adopting the common national identity. There are tradeoffs between the benefits
of productive intergroup relationships (Lazear, 1999) and the costs of intergroup antagonism (Esteban
and Ray, 1994). Coordinating on a national identity increases the returns to social interactions across
groups, and when someone adopts this common identity, it spurs others to do the same. However, in-
tergroup antagonism can hinder this process, particularly when large groups assert cultural dominance.
      Our model uses an evolutionary game theory framework to study how contact between members of
different ethnic groups slowly transforms identity choices for the community as a whole. We show how,
under certain conditions, ethnic fractionalization (many small groups) hastens nation building while
polarization (a few large groups) hinders it. The model is stylized in order to develop intuition for our
empirical results. We address extensions in Appendix B.


3.1     Setup

Consider a community with multiple ethnic groups, indexed by j = 1, ..., J. Each individual is endowed
with a fixed ethnicity, exogenously given at birth. For simplicity, we assume that individuals live forever,
and, over the course of their lives, they decide whether to retain their own ethnic identity or to adopt the
national identity. We assume infinite lives for simplicity; similar results would hold with finitely-lived
individuals who transmit their identity to the next generation (see Montgomery, 2010). As a baseline, we
model contact as a random matching process: the probability an individual is matched to someone from
ethnic group j is equal to that ethnic group’s population share, pj . In Appendix B, we allow matching to
be influenced by segregation between ethnic groups within the village. By limiting intergroup contact,
segregation dampens the effects of diversity that we derive below.
      Identity choices are persistent. Individuals match each period but are only able to revise their choices
infrequently. More precisely, each individual must maintain their identity choice for T periods, where T
is an independent draw from an exponential distribution with rate R. When revision opportunities arise,
an individual is myopic and compares her current payoff with that from a random sample of strategies
 from 1984–1988. A large and unexpected drop in oil revenue in the mid-1980s led to a significant shortfall in meeting the
 planned targets during this latter period (see Bazzi et al., 2016).


                                                            7
played by those around her.12 She adopts the strategy with the higher payoff. The probability that
she switches her identity is proportional to the difference in payoffs. This infrequent process of identity
switching leads to inertia and makes convergence to an evolutionarily stable equilibrium relatively slow.

Payoff Structure.           Table 1 shows how the payoff to group j from each match depends on identity
choices (described in the last two columns) and the types of interactions (rows). There are three key
parameters governing payoffs from interactions: (i) ✓, which captures the market and non-market ben-
efits from productive interactions; (ii) , which captures the costs of investing in an ethnic identity (                         E)

or a national identity (        N   >   E ),   including the costs of learning a language or the costs of maintaining
cultural traditions; (iii) and D, which captures disutility from intergroup antagonism.

                                 Table 1: Payoffs of Identity Choices for Group j
                                                                          I DENTITY C HOICES
                                                    M ATCHED WITH       N ATIONAL     E THNIC
                                                    N ATIONAL j           ✓    N
                                                                                       ✓    E
                               O WN - GROUP
                                                    E THNIC j             ✓    N
                                                                                       ✓    E

                                                    N ATIONAL k           ✓    N           E
                               I NTERGROUP
                                                    E THNIC k            DkN     N
                                                                                       DkE    E




       An individual adopting the national identity (an N -chooser) obtains a payoff of ✓                        N   from own-
group interactions (the top two rows). For intergroup contact with a fellow N -chooser, the payoff is also
✓        N   since they share a common national identity. However, intergroup contact with E-choosers gives
rise to antagonism and a lower payoff of                DkN       N.

       For own-group interactions, the payoff from choosing the ethnic identity (E-chooser) is ✓                         E.   How-
ever, for intergroup contact with an N -chooser, the payoff is only                     E:   there is no benefit unless they
share a common national identity. The payoff from intergroup contact with an E-chooser is                            DkE         E.

       Individuals can only choose one identity, and relative group sizes (p’s) affect the likelihood of own-
group and intergroup interactions. Individuals enjoy benefits (✓) from sharing a common national iden-
tity. By contrast, remaining an E-chooser confers benefits from own-group interactions and protec-
tion from intergroup antagonism. We assume intergroup antagonism is costlier for N -choosers than
E-choosers who enjoy protection from their own ethnic network (DkE < DkN ). This is akin to a club-good
benefit for ethnic loyalists that is excludable from others, including N -choosers from the ethnic group
(see Cornes and Sandler, 1996; Iannaccone, 1992).

Expected Payoffs.           Let wjs denote the expected payoff for group j from choosing the National (s = N )
or the Ethnic (s = E) identity. Given the matching process, average payoffs can be written as a function
of individual match payoffs, exogenous ethnic shares (pj ), and the endogenous share of N -choosers (⇡j ):
                                                                         X        
    Nationalist: wjN = pj ⇡j (✓            N ) + (1     ⇡j ) (✓    N) +          pk ⇡k (✓     N)   + (1   ⇡k )       N     DkN
                                                                          k6=j

12
     This revision protocol is based on a textbook formulation widely used in evolutionary game theory models (Sandholm, 2010).
     Formally, T s exp (R), so that P(T  t) = 1 e Rt . This means that the number of identity revisions that can occur during
     the time interval [0, t] follows a Poisson distribution, with mean Rt. Sandholm (2015) details the interaction and updating
     process, which is akin to the imitation mechanism put forward in Young (2015). See Appendix B.2 for further details.


                                                                  8
                              ✓         X              ◆                 X
                        = ✓ pj +               pk ⇡k            N               (1     ⇡k )pk DkN               (1)
                                        k6=j                             k6=j
                          |             {z             }     |{z}        |           {z             }
                                        (i)                   (ii)                   (iii)
                                               X
Ethnic loyal: wjE = ✓pj                E              (1     ⇡k )pk DkE .                                       (2)
                                               k6=j


For example, for strategy N , the first term in brackets corresponds to payoffs for own-group interac-
tions, and the second term corresponds to payoffs from intergroup interactions. The latter imply social
externalities to identity choices (i.e., ⇡k influences choices of group j).
      The payoffs in equation (1) depend on three factors: (i) the gains from productive interactions, (ii) the
cost of adopting the identity, and (iii) the cost of intergroup antagonism. Intuitively, small ethnic groups
enjoy greater benefits from coordinating on a common national identity. Larger ethnic groups may not
benefit as much. Instead, they may prefer to remain ethnic loyalists given the greater costs of adopting
a national identity (      N      >     E)    and the club-good benefit of protection against intergroup antagonism
(DkE   <   DkN ).   In Appendix Figure A.1, we use data from Transmigration villages (described below) to
relate ethnic shares (pj ) to language choices. Indeed, small groups who benefit from coordination are
more likely to speak the national language (left panel), and large groups are more likely to speak their
own native ethnic language (right panel).


3.2     Diversity and Growth of the National Identity

The model reveals how intergroup contact can influence the evolution of nation building, captured by
the growth rate of adoption of the national identity. We characterize this growth process here.

Nation-Building Process. We define the aggregate growth rate in the adoption of the national identity,
ĠN , as the community’s population average of ethnic-group-specific growth:

                                                                    X                 X           d⇡j
                                                           ĠN =         pj ġjN =           pj       .         (3)
                                                                                                   dt
                                                                     j                  j


In Appendix B.2, we describe how the revision protocol and the matching process lead to a so-called
replicator dynamic, which characterizes group-level identity growth. Intuitively, the strategy with the
higher expected payoff propagates faster, and the dominated strategy is progressively eliminated. The
growth of ⇡j is given by
                                                                     d⇡j
                                                           ġjN =        = ⇡j wjN             wj ,              (4)
                                                                      dt
where wj = ⇡j wjN + (1                ⇡j ) wjE measures group j’s average payoff across both choices. Note that wjN
and wj depend on ⇡k . As more people from group k choose N , ⇡k increases, raising wjN above wj ,
encouraging further adoption of N next period. These social externalities accelerate the diffusion of the
national identity. Equation (3) aggregates this growth equation to the community level to understand
how initial ethnic diversity affects the rate of diffusion. We focus on two widely-used measures of
diversity to summarize ethnic-group size distributions: fractionalization (F ) and polarization (P ).

Measuring Diversity: Fractionalization and Polarization. Fractionalization in a village corresponds to

                                                                                9
              PJ
                 j=1 pj .   This measures the probability that two individuals, randomly selected from the village
F =1                  2

population, belong to different groups. With many small groups, F increases. Following Montalvo and
                                                     P
Reynal-Querol (2005), we define polarization as P = 4 Jj=1 p2j (1 pj ). P is maximized when a village’s
ethnic group shares approach a symmetric bimodal distribution (i.e., two groups equal in size).14

Aggregate Growth of the National Identity.                                    Our model reveals how F and P shape identity choices.
To begin, we show in Appendix B.3 that the growth in the national identity can be rewritten as follows:
                                            X                      ⇣              X               ⌘       XX
                                ĠN =               pj ġjN =     ✓ 1                         2
                                                                                           j pj                        pj pk Tjk    Ā ,                  (5)
                                               j                                  j                        j    k6=j

                                         P                        P
where Aj = ⇡j (1 ⇡j ), Ā =                  j     p j Aj , ⇡ =       k   pk ⇡k is the (ethnic-share-)weighted average of ⇡j ’s,                          ⇡,
                                                                                                                                                      = Ā¯
     j   = (Aj ⇡j )/ , and Tjk = Aj (1                    ⇡k )Dk . The first term in parentheses captures the notion that high-
F communities with many small groups encourage the adoption of the national identity. The overall
benefit (✓) from coordinating on a common national identity is larger with many small groups since
    P
       j j pj ) decreases with pj . Meanwhile, the second term captures effective interethnic antagonism
(1           2

at the community level. If Tjk is a function of pk (through the antagonism cost Dk ), this term is akin
to the total polarization formula first introduced in Esteban and Ray (1994, equation 1). The effects of
relative group sizes (p’s) in equation (5) are consistent with the patterns in Appendix Figure A.1.
         With two simplifying assumptions, we can derive a closed-form relationship showing that F (P )
increases (decreases) the rate of national identity adoption. First, we assume that intergroup antagonism,
Dk , is a linear function of group shares: Dk = 4 pk for all k = 1, ..., J. This is consistent with larger
groups asserting cultural dominance. Additionally, if ⇡j = ⇡ for all j = 1, ..., J,15 we show in Appendix
B.3 that equation (5) simplifies to:
                                                    8      0                      1                            2                      3     9
                                                    <               J
                                                                    X                                              J
                                                                                                                   X                        =
                        ĠN = ⇡ (1           ⇡)         ✓⇡ @1                 p2j A           (1          ⇡) 44          p2j (1    pj ) 5
                                                    :                                                                                       ;
                                                                    j=1                                            j=1

                               =    0   +   1F            2P                                                                                              (6)

where        0   =   ⇡ (1      ⇡)       < 0,        1   = ✓⇡ 2 (1         ⇡) > 0, and                 2   =     ⇡ (1       ⇡)2 > 0. In the case of matching
under segregation, the expression becomes                                 0   +   1 (1            )F           2 (1       )P . In other words, an increase in
segregation, , dampens the positive effects of F and negative effects of P .
         To summarize, in a fractionalized community, there are multiple options for a common culture, and
agreeing upon one may be difficult. If nation-builders promote the adoption of a neutral national iden-
tity, they can help groups coordinate on a single culture to maximize the gains from intergroup contact.
However, coordination may be more elusive in a polarized community. With a few large groups, each is
more likely to assert its own culture. This can sharpen ethnic cleavages and deepen intergroup antago-
nism. Ethnic loyalty shields members from such antagonism, further entrenching ethnic tribalism. The
relative strengths of these competing forces determine the speed of diffusion.
         Finally, note that our theoretical results describe the instantaneous growth rate of national identity.
14
   This P is a special case in the more general class of polarization indices introduced in Esteban and Ray (1994). Empirically,
   we follow Esteban et al. (2012) and consider generalizations that account for variable intergroup distances (see Section 7.1).
15
   This approximates the initial conditions in Transmigration settlements where the ⇡-shares were likely small for all groups.


                                                                                      10
Empirically, we are able to estimate the level effects of initial diversity three decades after resettlement.
These relationships are informative about the long-run process of identity change. In general, the model
displays multiple evolutionary stable equilibria; some villages will converge to the national identity
while others will feature persistent ethnic entrenchment. Appendix B.4 explores these equilibria and
how they depend on initial conditions. Using an approximation argument and simulations, we show
that as F increases, this widens the basin of attraction to N , and as P increases, the basin of attraction to
N becomes smaller.


4     Data
This section describes several data sources that we use to measure diversity and proxies for nation build-
ing in Transmigration villages. Appendix D provides further details on the data.


4.1    Transmigration Census

To identify Transmigration villages, we digitized the 1998 Transmigration Census, produced by the Min-
istry of Transmigration. This provides the number of transmigrants assigned, the settlement year, and
the location of each unique settlement village based on 2000 boundaries. Our main sample comprises 817
Transmigration villages (outside of Papua) settled from 1979 to 1988. These villages are dispersed across
the Outer Islands (see Figure 1) and initially received 1,872 transmigrants from Java/Bali on average
(with a range of 350 to 8,500). Many villages are located in contiguous settlement clusters, and village
boundaries have changed over time. We account for both features of the data in robustness checks.16


4.2    Ethnic Diversity and Segregation

We use individual-level data from the 2010 Population Census to measure ethnic diversity and segre-
gation in Transmigration villages. This complete-count census includes a single, self-reported ethnic
identity for over 234 million individuals across Indonesia and over 2 million in Transmigration villages.
There are more than 1,330 different ethnicities. We exploit this full granularity in our main analysis but
also consider aggregations based on linguistic similarities between groups (Fearon, 2003) and classifica-
tions by Indonesian demographers (Ananta et al., 2013).17 In Transmigration villages, the baseline frac-
tionalization index (F ), as defined in Section 3.2, ranges from 0 to 0.88 with a median of 0.40. Polarization
(P ) ranges from 0 to 0.99 with a median of 0.62. We also measure within-village ethnic segregation using
enumeration details to pinpoint household residential locations (see Section 7.1).



16
   The 2000 village boundaries are our main spatial units of analysis as the policy varied at this level. While 254 Transmigration
   villages are isolated villages, the remainder are part of clusters containing 2–18 villages with half of those containing 2–4.
   Some of these clusters contain villages settled in the same year while others contain villages settled over multiple years from
   1979 to 1988. What’s more, by 2010, 141 of the 817 villages had split into two or more additional villages by 2010, for a total
   sample of 987 villages if defined using 2010 boundaries. In Table 6, we consider the effects of diversity at different levels of
   spatial aggregation, which ensures that our findings are not driven by the baseline village boundaries in 2000.
17
   In Transmigration villages, we see 16 Inner-Island and 700 Outer-Island ethnic groups. Inner-Island groups include all eth-
   nicities native to Java/Bali with the top four—Javanese, Sundanese, Madurese, and Balinese—comprising over 99 percent of
   Inner Islanders. Meanwhile, the top 50 Outer Island ethnicities comprise over 84 percent of Outer Islanders.


                                                                11
4.3     Nation Building Outcomes

We consider several outcomes aimed at capturing the long-run, nation-building process. Like other
recent literature, we view language, marriage, and name choices as leading indicators of culture and
identity (Abramitzky et al., 2018; Giuliano and Nunn, 2018). We also explore broader measures of social
capital and public goods using survey and administrative data.

Language Use at Home. Our main nation-building outcome is an indicator for whether or not individ-
uals primarily speak Indonesian at home. In the 2010 Census, all individuals age 5 and above answer
two questions: (i) Are you able to speak Indonesian? (ii) What is your primary language used at home?18
That there are two questions about language in a short-form Census questionnaire is indicative of how
important it is to the government. In Transmigration villages, 97.2 percent are able to speak Indonesian,
but only 15.4 percent use it as their primary language at home. The majority instead speak their native
ethnic language at home (76.4 percent).
      Indonesian use at home can be seen as a choice by parents to socialize a common national identity.
Because nearly everyone is able to speak Indonesian, its use at home likely reflects deeper beliefs and
preferences rather than simply a desire to improve fluency—a claim on which we provide empirical evi-
dence below. As further evidence of revealed preference, nationally-representative survey data (Susenas
2015) identifies an important distinction between Indonesian use outside versus inside the home. While
35 percent of Indonesians speak the national language outside the home on a daily basis (e.g., at work,
school, etc.), one-third of those switch to their native ethnic language as the primary one inside the home.

Indonesian Language and Identity.               Is language important for social identity?19 We marshal evidence
from two independent surveys to show that Indonesian use at home is associated with weaker ethnic at-
tachment and stronger national integration. First, using the 2009 Asian Barometer survey, a cross-sectional
analysis shows that home use of Indonesian is associated with a relatively stronger sense of national
identity. Conditional on age, gender, education, and region fixed effects, individuals who primarily or
exclusively speak Indonesian at home are 10 p.p. more likely to choose the national identity over their
ethnic or other identity, relative to a mean of 63 percent.20
      Second, panel evidence from the Indonesia Family Life Survey (IFLS) shows how Indonesian use at
home may contribute to an intergenerational process of nation building. We examine how people using
Indonesian at home as children (observed in 1997) made different language and identity choices after
forming new households as adults more than a decade later (in 2014). The regressions in Table 2 con-
trol for age, gender, education, and village fixed effects, thus comparing observably similar individuals
except for differences in parental Indonesian use as a child.

18
   Enumerators record a native ethnic language if individuals respond to (ii) with both Indonesian and an ethnic language.
   According to the IFLS (see Table 2), which records multiple languages at home, 56.9 percent of those speaking Indonesian at
   home also speak an ethnic language at home. Hence, those speaking exclusively Indonesian at home are a distinct group.
19
   As Kramsch and Widdowson (1998) argue, “There is a natural connection between language and identity insofar as language
   often defines membership to a specific group to the exclusion of nonmembers. Through language the group manifests ‘per-
   sonal strength and pride’ and a ‘sense of social importance and historical continuity’ and most of all belonging to an ‘imagined
   community’ that shares a common worldview and that commands allegiance to it. . . .” Simpson (2007) notes that “Indonesian
   has also become positively valued as the primary shared component of the country’s emerging national identity.”
20
   The question reads: “Let us suppose you had to choose between being an Indonesian and being [own ethnic group], which of
   these do you feel most strongly attached to?” Responses include “Indonesian”, “Own Ethnic group”, and “Another Identity”.


                                                                12
      Panel A shows that adults who grew up speaking Indonesian at home are: (i) nearly 50 percent
more likely to speak Indonesian at home in their new households (column 1); (ii) more likely to report a
different ethnicity in 2014 than in 1997, reflecting a more fluid self-concept of ethnic identity (column 2);
(iii) around 55 percent more likely to marry a non-co-ethnic (column 3); and (iv) significantly less likely
to trust co-ethnics more than others (column 4). Panel B shows that these patterns are not driven solely
by individuals that grew up with multiethnic parents, which is similarly and independently correlated
with these four outcomes. Together, these patterns suggest that using Indonesian at home may weaken
ethnic attachments and help to socialize a shared national identity across generations.

Other Nation Building Outcomes.          In addition to language use at home, we examine several dif-
ferent measures of integration, social capital, conflict, and development. We use the 2010 Census to
construct two proxies for ethnic attachment: interethnic marriage and the ethnic content of children’s
name choices. We use a 2012 household survey (Susenas) to examine subjective intergroup preferences,
including trust, tolerance and willingness to contribute to local public goods, among others. Finally, we
explore village-level public good provision, ethnic conflict, electoral outcomes, and development using
several sources. We describe these outcomes at length when presenting results in Section 7.2.


5     Empirical Strategy
We develop our empirical strategy in four steps. First, we explain how the resettlement process gener-
ated plausibly exogenous variation in initial diversity. Second, we show that this policy-induced varia-
tion persisted over the long run. Third, we describe the variation in fractionalization (F ) and polarization
(P ) and provide motivating evidence on how they relate to Indonesian use at home. Finally, we present
a formal identification strategy to estimate causal, long-run effects of diversity.


5.1     Transmigrant Assignment and Ethnic Diversity in the New Settlements

The Transmigration program’s rapid expansion beginning in 1979 contributed to an as-if-random initial
assignment of transmigrants. As planners rushed to meet lofty annual targets set by the central gov-
ernment, institutional frictions and bottlenecks were rife, with many reports describing the haphazard
implementation as a “plan-as-you-proceed” approach (Hardjono, 1988; World Bank, 1988). Coordina-
tion problems between government agencies made it infeasible to systematically match transmigrants to
settlements. One agency was responsible for recruiting transmigrants in the Inner Islands, while another
was tasked with clearing sites in the Outer Islands.
      In practice, the arbitrary timing of transmigrants’ arrival to transit camps in Java/Bali played an
important role in shaping diversity in the new settlements. There were four main transit camps where
transmigrants would gather for brief pre-departure orientations. Participants could not choose their
destinations and, even upon departure, were often ill-informed about the conditions they would face
(see Kebschull, 1986, for survey evidence). Importantly, because the camps were large, each would
collect transmigrants from many different areas of Java/Bali. This resulted in ethnic mixing within the
camps that would carry over to the new settlements. Suppose a new village just opened up with slots for
400 households. Given the haste in implementation, the given set of households in the camp departure


                                                     13
queue would be sent to that settlement. At some times, that queue was ethnically homogenous, while
at others it was more mixed. This arbitrariness explains why in some villages, all transmigrants are
Javanese while in others one finds a mix of Inner-Island ethnic groups (see Section 5.3).
      A second source of variation in diversity comes from the APPDT quotas for native Outer Islanders
from nearby areas. These quotas were designed to encourage Inner–Outer ethnic mixing, to avoid Inner-
Island ethnic enclaves, and to forestall local grievances in resettlement areas. Officially, these slots were
reserved for residents of other villages within the same province. In 1979, de jure guidelines required
each village’s APPDT share to be 10 percent, and this increased to 25 percent in 1982. However, de facto,
APPDT shares varied across locations and were often set by provincial officials, including the governor
and local MOT leadership (Rigg, 2013; Tirtosudarmo, 1990). Some villages had APPDT shares of 50–80
percent (Tanasaldy, 2012, p. 191). In sum, APPDT shares varied due to policy rules changing over time
and to discretion by provincial officials, two sources of variation borne out in 2010 Census data.21
      Finally, planners had little scope to match Inner-Island ethnic groups to culturally similar destina-
tions. If, for example, many Javanese arrived in a transit camp just before a new settlement opened in
an ethnically Kutai region of Kalimantan, then such groups would have been forced to mix in the new
settlement even if the Sundanese, who arrived later to the transit camp, would have been less culturally
distant (Clauss et al., 1988). What’s more, the de facto APPDT share for that settlement was set before
local officials knew which ethnic groups would be departing from the transit camp in Java/Bali.


5.2     Persistent, Policy-Induced Diversity

The resettlement process described above resulted in persistent variation in diversity. Using 2010 Census
data, Figure 2 plots the distribution of village-level F and P across Transmigration program (solid line)
and non-program (dashed line) villages in the Outer Islands.22 For Transmigration villages, we see a
continuum of diversity and significant mass at relatively higher F and P . Migration frictions and land-
market imperfections likely contributed to the persistence of the initial program-induced diversity.23 In
typical settings with free labor mobility, segregation and tipping forces will render such high F and
P unstable. The solid density in Figure 2 shows that non-program villages—settled organically over
time—are generally less diverse as people tend to self-segregate across villages along ethnic lines.
      The long-run diversity in Transmigration villages is rooted in the initial policy variation. A Shapley
decomposition suggests that 46 (52) percent of variation in F (P ) is explained by diversity among Inner-
Island ethnicities (Finner and Pinner ). This is consistent with the mixing and queuing process in the transit
camps of Java/Bali naturally shuffling the ethnic mix of Inner Islanders. Another 50 (48) percent of
variation in F (P ) is explained by the Inner-Island ethnic share, which varies with the APPDT allocations.
Most Outer Islanders in Transmigration villages either belong to one large group or many very small
groups local to the settlement area, which partly explains why diversity among Outer-Island ethnicities
(Fouter and Pouter ) does not constitute a large share of overall variation.


21
   The data show (i) a significant increase in the mean Inner-Island ethnic share for villages settled after 1982, (ii) sizable variation
   around that mean across provinces, and (iii) less variation within than between provinces.
22
   See Appendix Figure A.2 for the joint distribution of F and P and Appendix Table A.1 for analogous evidence showing that
   the housing lottery induced lower long-run segregation within Transmigration villages (conditional on F and P ).
23
   Weak property rights and missing land markets are often a barrier to migration in rural areas (see, e.g., De Janvry et al., 2012).


                                                                   14
5.3       Motivating Evidence on Fractionalization and Polarization

The fact that F and P are highly correlated at low levels makes it difficult to separately identify their
causal impacts. Figure 3 plots F against P for all Transmigration villages, reproducing a familiar shape
from the cross-country figures in Montalvo and Reynal-Querol (2005). At low levels of diversity—where
F < 0.2 and P < 0.4—F and P are nearly collinear. Beyond this region, the two measures are positively
correlated when P is high but negatively correlated when F is high, making it difficult to determine the
sign of the omitted variable bias if one of the two diversity measures is excluded.
       To illustrate how independent variation in F and P affects our main outcome, we present three
examples of Transmigration villages. These villages are depicted in Figure 3, where the different shapes
and colors across villages correspond to different quintiles of Indonesian use at home. Some villages, like
Tanjung Gading (TG), were settled with many small groups. TG is home to 43 ethnic groups, including
three large Inner-Island groups (42% Javanese, 21% Banten, 9% Sundanese), one large local Outer-Island
group (11% Lampung), and many other small groups. Consequently, TG has a very high F of 0.76.
       By contrast, Bukit Kemuning (BK) was settled by only 14 ethnic groups. TG and BK have similar
polarization levels (0.63 in TG and 0.59 in BK), but BK has a much lower F of 0.41. The model in Section
3 suggests TG will have more Indonesian use at home because, in communities with many small groups,
the gains from coordinating are high while the benefits from self-segregating are low. Indeed, 95% of the
population chose Indonesian as the primary language at home in TG compared to 22% in BK.
       Now, consider the village of Tri Dharma Wirajaya (TDJ) and compare it to the prior village, BK.
Both villages have the same fractionalization (0.41), a similar number of groups (17 and 14), and a large
majority (around 75% Javanese). The key difference is that TDJ also has a large minority group (21%
Sundanese) whereas BK has many small minorities (each with less than 10%). Accordingly, polarization
is substantially higher in TDJ (0.71) relative to BK (0.59). The model suggests that intergroup antagonism
is more intense in polarized villages with a few large groups, reducing the incentive to integrate. Only
7% of TDJ speaks Indonesian at home, compared to 22% in BK.


5.4       Identifying the Effects of Diversity

Our main specification regresses nation building outcome y on diversity in Transmigration village v:

                                              yv = ↵ +     f Fv   +    p Pv   + x0v + "v .                                         (7)

All regressions include controls in xv for 21 predetermined measures of geography and agroclimatic con-
ditions used by planners to select sites and determine the population size of the new settlements. These
include, among others, several natural advantages typically associated with diversity and openness.24
We also include island fixed effects to account for broad regional differences. In robustness checks, we
further control for island-, province-, or even district-by-year-of-settlement fixed effects to rule out vari-
ation in program implementation across space and time that may be confounded with latent integration.
We cluster standard errors by district, of which there are 84.25 The model implies                       f   > 0 and    p   < 0.

24
     See the notes to Table 3 for a complete elaboration of the components of x.
25
     Appendix Table A.3 shows that inference is robust to four alternative procedures: (i) spatial HAC (Conley, 1999), (ii) wild
     cluster bootstrap (Cameron et al., 2008), (iii) effective degrees-of-freedom adjustment (Young, 2016), and (iv) multi-way clus-


                                                                  15
    For our core outcome (homeIndo) and a few others, we estimate individual-level analogues to equa-
tion (7) with up to 1.8 million people. We include an array of fixed effects to address confounders. For
example, ethnicity FE address the possibility that some groups may be more open to integration and
more likely to live in diverse communities. These specifications help but do not fully resolve endogene-
ity in today’s F and P . We take three additional steps to address remaining sources of bias.
    First, Appendix Table A.2 offers prima facie evidence against ex post sorting. Panel A shows that F
and P in Transmigration villages today are uncorrelated with location fundamentals associated with
nation building. These include (i) natural advantages (e.g., distance to district capitals and roads) and
(ii) proxies for the national integration, including homeIndo, of populations living in nearby areas before
the program. By contrast, (i) and (ii) are highly correlated with F and P in other Outer-Island, non-
Transmigration villages (see Panel B), which is what we expect with endogenous sorting. The weaker
and null correlations in Panel A suggest limited sorting after the initial policy assignment in the 1980s.
    Second, we provide direct evidence on the plausibly exogenous assignment of initial diversity. Re-
call that the policy-induced variation in F and P comes from (i) the Inner-Island ethnic share and (ii)
ethnic diversity among Inner Islanders. On (i), Appendix Figure A.4 shows that planners did not sys-
tematically assign more transmigrants to locations that were more nationally integrated in the 1970s or
inherently attractive to (linguistically similar) migrants thereafter. Appendix XII discusses similar null
results for other confounders. There, we also provide analogous evidence on the unconfoundedness of
(ii) as proxied by Finner and Pinner in 2000 for those born in Java/Bali before resettlement.
    Third, we develop an instrumental variables (IV) strategy that isolates variation in initial diversity.
We pin down the Inner-Island ethnic share using a flexible function of the number of transmigrants in
the initial year. The x vector in equation (7) proxies for the policy rule determining the carrying capacity
and potential population in each village. Therefore, conditional on x, a larger initial stock of transmi-
grants implies a higher Inner-Island ethnic share. We pin down the ethnic mix among transmigrants
using ethnic group shares for Inner Islanders born in Java/Bali (based on the 2000 Census).26 Appendix
XII shows that the two sets of instruments are strong predictors of F and P in 2010. The exclusion restric-
tion requires that planners did not create more diverse settlements in locations that were unobservably
more prone to integration. The abovementioned tests provide supportive evidence, suggesting that the
instruments are uncorrelated with a large number of historical correlates of nation building.


6    Results: Diversity and National Language Use at Home
In this section, we estimate the effects of diversity on national integration, as proxied by Indonesian use
at home. First, we present baseline results and evidence consistent with a social identity interpretation.
Second, we address threats to causal identification.


   tering on birthplace and ethnicity (Cameron et al., 2011). Given this robustness, we opt for the baseline clustering by district
   in all other tables throughout the paper and appendix.
26
   These data provide the best available proxy for the initial ethnic composition of transmigrants from Java/Bali. They are
   of course limited by the possibility that death and re-migration rates may differ across ethnic groups between the year of
   settlement and 2000. However, we do not think this is a major source of bias. If it were, diversity among those born before the
   year of settlement would differ substantially from diversity among those born after. Instead, F and P for the older generation
   nearly perfectly predict F and P for the younger generation with a coefficient that is indistinguishable from one.


                                                                16
6.1       Main Results

Table 3 presents our core results for homeIndo. We focus on OLS specifications and leave IV results to
robustness checks below. We begin with village-level regressions where the dependent variable is the
share of individuals in the village who mainly speak Indonesian at home.
       Columns 1 to 3 demonstrate the importance of estimating conditional effects of F and P . Recall from
Figure 3 that F and P are positively correlated as diversity increases from very low levels but negatively
correlated in other regions. In columns 1 and 2, we estimate significant positive unconditional effects of
F and P , but these effects may be coming primarily from the first region with low levels of diversity. In
column 3, where we include both measures, the sign reverses for P and the coefficient on F increases
substantially. Hence, important independent variation in F and P was not captured in the unconditional
estimates. But this is precisely the variation needed to identify the two distinct forces in the model of
Section 3. Including one measure of diversity but not the other confounds this distinction.27
       The estimates in column 3 of Table 3 imply significant effects of ethnic diversity on Indonesian use
at home. A one standard deviation (s.d.) increase in F (holding P constant) leads to 12.9 p.p. greater
homeIndo. By contrast, a one s.d. increase in P (holding F constant) leads to 8.1 p.p. lower homeIndo.
These results are consistent with the predictions of our model, which suggest that F (P ) captures benefits
(costs) of intergroup contact. These are also large effects relative to the mean village where 14.4 percent
of individuals speak Indonesian at home. For reference, a one s.d. increase in F equals 0.21 relative to a
mean of 0.41, and a one s.d. increase in P equals 0.23 relative to a mean of 0.57.
       Together, the opposing effects of F and P in Table 3 suggest that national integration is stronger in
villages with many small groups relative to villages with a few large groups. Taking the relationship
between Indonesian use at home and national identity from the Asian Barometer (see Section 4.3), the
standardized effects of F and P in column 3 imply, respectively, a 14.1 (8.9) percent increase (decrease)
in national relative to ethnic identity.
       We validate these opposing forces of diversity in Figure 4 by estimating a flexible specification with
quintiles of F and P and an exhaustive set of interactions thereof:

                                  5 X
                                  X 5             ⇢
                       yv = ↵ +              ✓ij 1 Fv 2 [i   1 , i )   and Pv 2 [⇢j   1 , ⇢j )   + x0v + "v .              (8)
                                   i=1 j=1


where 0 = ⇢0 = 0 ,and i and ⇢j for i, j = 1, ..., 5 respectively index the upper bounds of quintiles
of F and P across Transmigration villages. This specification provides a richer approximation of the
underlying variation and a stricter comparison across villages with similar F but different P (and vice
versa), along the lines of the motivating village examples in Section 5.3. Figure 4 plots results for each
ij cell, adding the estimated ✓bij to the mean Indonesian use at home of 0.036 for the bottom reference
quintiles of F and P (i = j = 1). The estimates follow a similar pattern as that seen in the raw data
plotted in Figure 3. There is a roughly monotonic increase in Indonesian use at home moving towards
more fractionalized villages at a given level of polarization and vice versa moving towards more polar-

27
     Furthermore, we show in Appendix Table A.4 that the effects of F and P are robust to controlling for the size of one’s
     own ethnic group in the village. Of course, for homogenous villages or those with just two groups, the own-group share
     is sufficient to identify the relationship of interest. However, the considerable variation in the number and size of groups
     suggests that both F and P are necessary to capture the effects of ethnic composition on individual behavior.


                                                                  17
ized villages at a given level of fractionalization. The point estimates and standard errors can be seen in
Appendix Table A.5, which shows that all but a few lower quintile interactions are significantly different
at the 1% level from the reference villages with very little to no diversity (i = j = 1).
     Returning to the linear specification in Table 3, we estimate individual-level regressions using the
full Census microdata. Column 4 shows that the analogous baseline estimate is indistinguishable from
the village-level estimate in column 3. Column 5 includes exhaustive fixed effects (FE) for the 95 ages, 2
genders, and 716 ethnicities in Transmigration villages. Thus, we compare, for example, Javanese living
in villages with different F and P . Column 6 additionally controls for 496 birth district and 84 current
district FEs. This compares, for example, individuals born in the same district of Java/Bali or residing in
the same Outer-Island district today but living in villages with different F and P . The full set of FEs in
column 6 cuts the baseline effects in half, but the effects remain sizable despite the more limited identi-
fying variation.28 Overall, these demanding FEs ensure that the effects are not driven by compositional
differences associated with a proclivity for Indonesian use (e.g., younger people, ethnicities with native
languages closer to Indonesian, or immigrants from or living in tolerant regions).
     Together, the results in Table 3 provide strong evidence that national language use at home is in-
creasing in ethnic fractionalization and decreasing in ethnic polarization. Appendix Table A.6 shows
that these effects are driven by individuals switching out of their own native ethnic language (rather
than choosing another ethnic group’s language). We interpret these results as evidence of fractionaliza-
tion (polarization) weakening (deepening) attachment to one’s native ethnic identity.

National Language Use as National Identity? While individuals may face immediate economic incen-
tives to speak Indonesian at home, this choice may also reflect deeper, long-run investments in identity.
We present evidence here consistent with that interpretation. If, for example, individuals were speaking
Indonesian at home only to increase their fluency or improve their skills in the local labor market, we
would observe sharp differences in the effects of F and P across individuals with different education
levels or who sorted into occupations on the basis of comparative advantage in Indonesian.
     Instead, we find stable effects of F and P across different education levels and employment sectors.
Appendix Table A.7 splits the sample in column 6 of Table 3 across six education levels, ranging from no
schooling in column 2 to some post-secondary schooling in column 7. Compared to the baseline estimate
reproduced in column 1, we see similar standardized effects of F and P across education levels. This
suggests that different degrees of fluency and exposure to Indonesian in schools cannot fully explain the
effects. Appendix Table A.8 presents related insights based on sample splitting by sector of employment
for all working-age individuals (column 1). We restrict to those not working in column 2 and then to
those working in six broad sectors: (3) agriculture and mining, (4) manufacturing, (5) other manual (e.g.,
construction), (6) trade and services, (7) white collar (e.g., banking), and (8) other. Sectors differ along
many dimensions, but two important ones are skill requirements and the likelihood of mixing with other
groups in the workplace, both of which are plausibly lowest for agriculture and highest for white collar,
trade, and services. Yet, individuals exhibit similar responses to F and P across sectors.29
28
   In Appendix Table A.9, we find very similar results when including (i) FE for each birth district–current district pair (16,109
   in total), or (ii) FE for each ethnicity–current district pair (4,575 in total). These similar results suggest that sorting along
   particular origin–destination corridors or particular ethnicity–destination matches cannot explain our findings. We opt for
   the more parsimonious, additive FEs in column 6 of Table 3 as the main individual-level specification moving forward.
29
   Although some of the sample splits in Tables A.7 and A.8 may be endogenous outcomes of F and P , we view the stable


                                                                18
      Interpreted through the model in Section 3, the results thus far suggest that exposure to diversity may
change one’s incentives to invest in forms of identity conducive to integration. For some, the incentives
to embrace Indonesian may be strongly economic; for others, less so. However, from the nation building
perspective, what matters first and foremost is that local diversity affects ethnic attachment. Whether
that occurs as a result of initial economic or non-economic incentives is less first order, and, in fact, both
forces are at play in our model.
      We close this section with two results that further point to a social identity motive for homeIndo
that goes beyond economic incentives to improve fluency. Both use the individual-level specification in
column 6 of Table 3. First, regressing an indicator for one’s ability to speak Indonesian on diversity yields
small standardized effects of 0.007(0.001) and -0.003(0.002) for F and P , respectively. While Indonesian
ability is responsive to diversity, the effects are orders of magnitude smaller than those for its use at
home. This is not surprising since nearly everyone can speak Indonesian.
      Second, in an even stronger test, we find large effects of diversity on homeIndo for the ethnic Malay
population.30 This group has little economic incentive to speak Indonesian at home given that they
have native fluency already (as Indonesian is based on the Malay language). Yet, F and P have large
standardized effects in a regression restricted to ethnic Malay in Transmigration villages: 0.104(0.021)
for F and -0.050(0.022) for P relative to a mean of 21.3%. This suggests that homeIndo must be capturing
something deeper than latent fluency or a desire to improve one’s skills thereof. For Malays to report
Indonesian rather than their mutually intelligible mother tongue, they plausibly feel more invested in
the national identity. What’s more, as seen in Figure 5, the effects of F and P are similar for several other
large ethnic groups in Transmigration villages, including the most numerous Javanese and Sundanese.


6.2     Addressing Threats to Identification

This section presents addresses key concerns about endogenous sorting and other confounders.

Instrumental Variables Estimates.              Table 4 shows that the IV procedure detailed in Section 5.4 deliv-
ers similar estimates as the baseline OLS results. We re-estimate columns 3–6 of Table 3 using instru-
ments that isolate the policy-induced variation in initial diversity across Transmigration settlements.31
These IV-GMM estimates are generally larger than the corresponding OLS in Table 3. In the village-level
specification in column 1, the coefficient on F increases from 0.637 to 1.017 and on P from -0.362 to -
0.793. However, we cannot reject that the IV estimates are different from the OLS estimates (based on a
Hausman-type GMM test). Similar patterns hold for individual-level regressions in columns 2–4.
      The similarity between OLS and IV estimates points to the persistent impact of the initial settlers
on diversity 2–3 decades later. Coupled with earlier evidence against endogenous initial assignments,
this reinforces the notion that the program generated plausibly exogenous variation in diversity. While

   effects across different sub-populations as informative nonetheless.
30
   Malay comprise 5% of the total population and 16.7% of the native Outer-Island ethnic population in Transmigration villages.
31
   Given the many instruments, we estimate the 2SLS equations using Generalized Method of Moments (GMM) for greater
   efficiency. At the bottom of the table, the Sanderson and Windmeijer (2016) Wald statistics reject the null of weak instruments
   on the two endogenous variables. Based on the Hansen (1982) test, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the instruments
   are uncorrelated with the error term and are correctly excluded from the second stage. Coupled with the rejection of the
   null under the Anderson and Rubin (1949) test (that the coefficients on the endogenous variables jointly equal zero and the
   overidentifying restrictions are valid), these diagnostics point to a well-specified IV model.


                                                               19
the IV and OLS results are statistically indistinguishable, larger IV point estimates are consistent with
a Local Average Treatment Effect (LATE) in which the instruments isolate policy-induced compliers
who are more responsive to diversity. In contrast, OLS could be capturing tolerant individuals who
endogenously sorted and hence are less affected by diversity, biasing the OLS estimates towards zero.
     To clarify the LATE-based interpretation, we shut down one source of endogenous deviation from
the policy rules by only considering Transmigration villages where the Outer-Island ethnic share today
is below the de jure APPDT quotas (see Section 5.1). For these villages, most of the overall diversity
comes from ethnic differences among the transmigrants who, unlike Outer-Island natives, could not
choose their destination village. Compared to the baseline OLS estimates from column 3 of Table 3,
the effects for F increase from 0.637(0.073) to 1.238(0.164) and for P from -0.362(0.051) to -0.676(0.108).
These magnitudes are similar to the IV estimates. To better understand why, we turn to a more thorough
investigation of sorting using the individual-level Census data.

Further Checks on Sorting.           Several results suggest that endogenous sorting is unlikely to explain the
main findings in Table 3. First, in Table 5, we separately estimate the effects of diversity for different
ethnic and immigrant sub-populations in Transmigration villages. For reference, column 1 reproduces
the estimate from column 6 of Table 3, but we standardize coefficients within-sample for ease of com-
parison across columns.32 Column 2 restricts to Inner-Island ethnics, most of whom are first- or second-
generation transmigrants from Java/Bali assigned by planners to the given village. Column 3 restricts
further to first-generation transmigrants born in Java/Bali before the given Transmigration village was
created. These two samples exhibit similar responses to F and P as the full sample in column 1. This
suggests that our main findings are driven largely by the initial transmigrants and their children.
     Columns 4 and 5 estimate analogous specifications, respectively, for Outer-Island ethnics and first-
generation residents born in the Outer Islands before their village was created. Here, the effect sizes for
both F and P are smaller. Native Outer Islanders could be less responsive to local diversity because they
have more proximate “exit” options: greater potential to interact with fellow Outer Islanders outside the
settlements and easier access to their (nearby) origin villages.
     We sharpen this sorting interpretation in the remaining columns of Table 5. We split the Outer-Island
natives in column 5 into those born in nearby districts eligible for inclusion in the APPDT quota for the
given village (column 6) and those born in faraway districts and hence ineligible for APPDT (column
7).33 The latter are likely to have migrated over long distances to reach the given Transmigration village
and hence are more likely to exhibit stronger endogenous sorting on unobservables. Therefore, it is not
surprising that these long-distance “sorters” have considerably higher Indonesian use at home today
(32% versus 16%) and are less responsive to local diversity.
     Finally, column 8 restricts to plausible children of initial transmigrant or APPDT settlers. These
individuals were born in the given district after the year of settlement, but we cannot say for certain

32
   While mean Indonesian use at home differs across columns, the baseline fixed effects in column 1 (for ethnicity, age, gender,
   current district and birth district), used in every column thereafter, make it possible to compare standardized coefficients.
33
   Tirtosudarmo (1990) discusses other non-APPDT categories of Outer-Island natives that joined Transmigration settlements
   through official means in certain regions (e.g., swakarsa, ‘resettlement’, or sisipan). These groups were less numerous than
   the APPDT and received less government assistance during the relocation process. Importantly, though, mean F and P are
   statistically indistinguishable across APPDT-eligible and -ineligible groups in columns 6 and 7, which suggests that these
   long-distance sorters are not more prevalent in villages with particular types of diversity.


                                                              20
whether they moved to the village from elsewhere in the district. The effects are similar to those in
column 2. Akin to the first-generation transmigrants from Java/Bali, these individuals were plausibly
exposed to diversity as a result of others’ choices (their parents). Together, the results in columns 2 and
8 show that the baseline effects are due to initial program assignments rather than sorting.34
       It is still possible that long-distance sorters exhibit strong spillover effects that explain our overall
findings. We address this concern in Appendix Table A.10 by controlling flexibly for the share of the vil-
lage population that we classified in column 7 of Table 5 as ineligible for the APPDT. Doing so leaves the
main results unchanged. In other words, the baseline effects of diversity for program-assigned migrants
are not confounded by the prevalence of those settling in the village through endogenous sorting.

Confounding Variation in Assignment Rules. It is also possible that planners created more or less di-
verse villages in locations deemed more suitable for nation building. We know that de jure APPDT quotas
increased over the 1980s, and sensitive regions were allowed higher APPDT quotas de facto. There may
be other confounding sources of variation in local assignment rules that remain unobservable. Appendix
Table A.11 addresses such concerns using our village-level specification (baseline in column 1).
       Columns 2–5 include separate year-of-settlement FE in different islands, provinces, and districts.
These specifications compare across villages created in the same year within the same region. Column 5
includes 303 district-by-year-of-settlement FE, effectively bringing us close to a matching-type estimator
that compares the effects of F and P across a few nearby villages. Consistent with the reduced variation
in F and P , the effects fall by 20–30% but still remain sizable.
       Column 6 includes FE for the 102 indigenous ethnolinguistic homelands that span Transmigration
villages. This addresses the possibility that planners created more diverse villages in regions where the
local ethnic group is more culturally similar to Inner-Island ethnic groups. Column 7 interacts these
FE with year-of-settlement FE. Again, the effects slightly fall but remain sizable. Together, these results
in Appendix Table A.11 mitigate the concern that planners may have learned over time or space about
which locations were more amenable to the nation-building goals of ethnic mixing.

Summary.           Overall, this section provided evidence against important identification concerns about ex
post sorting and confounding variation in initial assignments. While reassuring, these results may raise
the question of what identifying variation remains when comparing villages settled at the same time
in the same region. Our baseline controls (x) absorb much of the potentially concerning residual local
variation (e.g., proximity to roads). Moreover, results are unchanged when adding further village-level
controls capturing predetermined natural advantages associated with agricultural development (i.e., po-
tential crop yields) or the disease environment (i.e., a malaria index from 1978). These checks suggest
that the effects of diversity on homeIndo are not driven by individuals or places with unobservable pre-
disposition to national integration. Rather, the haphazard resettlement process generated significant
variation in diversity even across nearby settlements with similar natural advantages. Unanticipated
exposure to such diversity then shaped identity choice as seen through language use at home.

34
     We further validate this point by examining the 103,338 individuals that immigrated into Transmigration villages from other
     districts in the last five years. These individuals have predictably higher homeIndo on average but are also less sensitive
     to local diversity. Reproducing a version of Table 5 based on this sample yields small and insignificant effects of diversity,
     particularly for native Outer Islanders. Omitting these individuals from the baseline regressions leaves results unchanged.


                                                                 21
7        Mechanisms and Other Outcomes
This section provides deeper insight into why ethnic diversity affects nation building. We first show how
different dimensions of intergroup distance—spatial, economic, and cultural—shape the relationship
between diversity and national language use at home. We then demonstrate effects of diversity on
several other outcomes related to the nation-building process.


7.1       Mechanisms: Intergroup Distance and the Salience of Ethnic Divisions

Our baseline findings suggested that F is conducive to national integration while P deepens ethnic
attachment. We provide three sets of results that clarify how underlying ethnic divisions become salient,
driving these results. First, residential segregation determines the scope for intergroup contact to change
behavior in diverse communities. Second, interethnic inequality undermines the benefits of diversity.
Third, cultural distance between ethnic groups amplifies the effects of diversity.

Residential Segregation and Intergroup Contact.                        In Table 6, we use the full spatial detail in the 2010
Census to show that diversity at the neighbor(hood) level may be more important in shaping behavior
than diversity at more aggregate levels. We measure F and P at the sub-village administrative level and
also identify the ethnic mix of next-door neighbors by leveraging the zigzag enumeration method (see
Appendix D).35 In each case, we estimate individual-level regressions based on the FE specification in
column 6 of Table 3 and standardize the diversity measures for comparability.
       Moving from left to right in Table 6, the diversity measures become increasingly local while the ef-
fect sizes grow larger. Column 1 examines diversity at an aggregate level that includes all contiguous
Transmigration villages (see Section 4.1). Contiguous-cluster-level diversity has somewhat weaker ef-
fects than village-level diversity in our baseline estimate, reproduced in column 2. Column 3 then looks
at diversity across neighborhoods (rukun tetangga or RT) within villages.36 The resulting effects of F
and P are significantly larger than at the village level. Column 4 goes even more local by examining
ethnic differences with neighbors in the two adjacent housing units. Relative to households with both
neighbors of the same ethnicity, those with one (both) neighbor(s) from a different ethnicity are 6.6 (19.1)
p.p. more likely to speak Indonesian as the main language at home. The results in columns 3 and 4 are
robust to the use of village fixed effects (that absorb village-level diversity). Column 5, which includes
all diversity measures simultaneously, shows that neighborhood and within-neighborhood diversity are
the strongest drivers of homeIndo. Cluster- and village-level diversity have small and mostly insignificant
effects when included alongside these more localized diversity measures.
       Column 6 rounds out these findings with a village-level summary measure of ethnic segregation
due to Alesina and Zhuravskaya (2011).37 As neighborhood-level ethnic shares differ from village-level
shares, the segregation index, S, increases. With full segregation, each neighborhood contains a separate

35
   This zigzag approach is similar to Logan and Parman (2017) who study racial segregation in historical U.S. Censuses.
36
   These neighborhoods are the lowest level of governance, with leaders responsible for facilitating public good provision in
   tandem with the village government. Across Transmigration⇣villages,
                                                                   ⌘    the median has 15 RT, while the maximum has 59 RT.
37                                                P    P             (⇡ibv ⇡iv )2
   The index for village v is given by Sv = I 1 1 Ii=1 B  b=1
                                                               nbv
                                                               Nv         ⇡iv
                                                                                  , where i = 1, . . . , I denotes ethnicities, and
     (nbv /Nv ) measures the population of census block b = 1, . . . , B as a fraction of the total village population. Sv is the squared
     coefficient of variation between block-level ethnic shares, ⇡ibv and village-level ethnic shares, ⇡iv .


                                                                    22
ethnic group, and S equals one. If every block has the same ethnic mix as the overall village, S equals
zero. In Transmigration villages, S ranges from 0 to 0.27 with a mean and standard deviation of 0.03. We
find that a one s.d. increase in S reduces homeIndo to the same extent as a one s.d. increase in P .
       Although the housing lottery generated exogenous variation in initial segregation, it is possible that
newly formed households endogenously sorted within the village over subsequent years. We address
this ex post residential sorting by instrumenting for overall ethnic segregation (S) with the ethnic seg-
regation among the original parental cohort (S old ). This older cohort—born                                   15 years before the
year of settlement—is likely to be living in the same house assigned upon arrival, whereas their young
(grand)children may have established new houses elsewhere in the village. In practice, though, S old is
highly correlated with S young (⇢ = 0.86). This is consistent with inheritance norms in rural areas where
land is passed on to children who then form households near their parents. As a result, instrumenting S
with S old does not materially change the coefficient on S in column 6 of Table 6.
       In Table 7, we make the intergroup contact mechanism even more precise by showing how segrega-
tion attenuates the effects of overall diversity. Column 1 runs a village-level specification analogous to
the individual-level regression in column 6 of Table 6. Column 2 then adds interactions of S with F and
P , with each measure standardized (pre-interaction). Segregation dampens both the positive effects of
F and the negative effects of P . By limiting local contact, segregation makes fractionalized communities
seem more ethnically homogenous at the neighborhood level, thereby increasing incentives for ethnic
attachment. Analogously, in villages where different groups are isolated from each other, the negative
effects of polarization are more muted as there are fewer venues for intergroup antagonism to material-
ize. Together, these results are consistent with a model extension where segregation alters the matching
function, making it less likely for one to meet non-co-ethnics (see equation (B.4) in the Appendix).

Interethnic Inequality.             Beyond physical proximity, economic inequality is another potentially impor-
tant means by which ethnic divisions become salient. We explore this mechanism in columns 3–4 of
Table 7 using a measure of interethnic inequality. Although settlers received the same quantity and ex-
pected quality of assets upon arrival in the new settlements, there may have been initial differences in
human capital endowments across groups as a result of the arbitrary assignment process. We capture
these differences using a measure of location-specific human capital that is predetermined and exoge-
nous with respect to initial diversity: agroclimatic similarity (Aod ) between an initial settler’s origin o
and the given destination d.38 Aod measures the extent to which the agroclimatic environment in an in-
dividual’s district of birth was similar to the environment where that individual was placed. As shown
in our prior work (Bazzi et al., 2016), agroclimatic similarity is a good proxy for skill transferability and
hence an important determinant of economic well-being. Inequality between ethnic groups in this skill
might exacerbate ethnic differences to the extent that it leads, for example, to inequality in economic
opportunities or in the ability to cope with shocks.
       Interethnic inequality reduces national language use at home. The estimate in column 3 implies 3.3
p.p. lower homeIndo for a one s.d. increase in interethnic inequality. These results are conditional on F , P ,

38
     We construct an index of inequality in agroclimatic
                                                     PI similarity
                                                           PJ           between all ethnic groups i and j in village v, Between-Group
     Agroclimatic-Similarity Inequality: BGAIv = 2ā
                                                  1
                                                       i=1   j=1 n i n j |ai aj |, where ni is the relative size of ethnic group i, ai is
     the average agroclimatic similarity within each ethnic-group i and ā is the average agroclimatic similarity within each village
     v. This measure is akin to the between-group rainfall inequality index in Guariso and Rogall (2017).


                                                                    23
village-level average agroclimatic similarity, and overall inequality in agriclimatic similarity (regardless
of ethnicity); these last two measures have small and null effects (not shown). Column 4 then introduces
interaction terms showing that interethnic inequality reduces the positive effects of F on integration
but exhibits no significant heterogeneity with respect to polarization. Overall, these results suggest that
interethnic inequality changes the type of contact, making it potentially more antagonistic (Lowe, 2018).

Ethnolinguistic Distance.                      The remaining columns of Table 7 explore how native linguistic differences
may accentuate ethnic divisions. Our baseline measures of diversity treat every self-reported ethnicity
as equally distant from every other ethnicity. Thus, for example, the Batak Tapanuli are equidistant
from the Javanese and the Batak Toba even though both Batak sub-groups have mutually intelligible
languages and similar cultures. Columns 5 and 6 of Table 7 explore whether this simplification obscures
aspects of ethnic diversity that are important in shaping identity choices.
          Column 5 shows that the baseline effect sizes for F and P are unchanged when using a coarser defini-
tion of ethnic identity that consolidates the 1,330 self-reported ethnicities into 44 broad groups stipulated
by Indonesian demographers (Ananta et al., 2013). We cannot reject that the coefficients are different
from those in column 3 of Table 3 (appropriately standardized). This coarse grouping, which mostly
obscures diversity among Outer Island ethnicities, seems to capture the leading sources of variation in
diversity in Transmigration villages. This suggests that deeper ethnic divisions are driving differences in
national language use at home. In other words, it is the differences between Javanese and Batak rather
than between Batak Toba and Batak Tapanuli that matters for homeIndo.
          We validate this interpretation in column 6, which adjusts F and P for the linguistic distance between
each ethnic group based on native language classifications. This generalization of F is given by the
                              P P
Gini-Greenberg index, Fv ( ) = Ii=1 Jj=1 piv pjv ij , where ij measures the linguistic distance between
groups i and j. The generalization of P is given by the Esteban and⇣Ray (1994) formulation:  ⌘     Pv ( ) =
PI PJ                  39                                                  branchij
       j=1 piv pjv ij .   We follow the literature in defining ij = 1                           based on the
            2
  i=1                                                                 max(branchi ,branchj )
fraction of possible shared branches on linguistic classification trees from the Ethnologue database (see
Appendix D.4). We set  to 0.05 as in Esteban et al. (2012). This low  amplifies deeper ethnolinguistic
cleavages by accentuating, for example, the Javanese–Batak difference more than the Javanese–Sunda
difference because the Sunda language is more similar to Javanese than is Batak.
          These linguistic-distance-adjusted diversity measures have slightly larger effects on homeIndo, and
we can reject at the 5% level that P ( ) has the same effect as P . Increasing  brings us closer to the
results for baseline F and P as expected. For example, with  = 0.5 (as in Desmet et al., 2009), the
coefficient on fractionalization (polarization) is 0.142 (-0.088) compared to 0.144 (-0.092) for  = 0.05 in
column 6 and 0.135 (-0.084) for the baseline  = 1. By down-weighting culturally similar groups, these
     adjustments make clear that deep-rooted linguistic differences between ethnic groups are an important
factor shaping the relationship between diversity and integration.


7.2            Other Evidence on Local Diversity and Nation Building

The results thus far suggest that national language use at home reveals weaker attachment to one’s
ethnic group and perhaps a greater affinity for the national identity. This section provides corroborating
39                                                                           PI     PJ                                  PI     PJ
     If   ij   = 1 when i 6= j, and if   ii   = 0 for all i, then Fv ( ) =    i=1    i6=j   piv pjv = Fv and Pv ( ) =    i=1    i6=j   p2iv pjv = Pv .


                                                                              24
evidence using a host of other outcomes. These other proxies for nation building provide (i) further
validation of the revealed preference interpretation of national language use as an identity choice, and
(ii) evidence of broader economic and social implications of diversity.

Intermarriage. Intermarriage has long been viewed as a leading indicator of integration, and officials in
the Ministry of Transmigration monitored marriage between Inner and Outer Islanders in the new settle-
ments (Babcock, 1986). Such marriages may be important for nation building: children in intermarried
households exhibit greater tolerance and weaker ethnic attachment later in life (see Table 2).
     We use 2000 and 2010 Population Census data to measure intermarriage, focusing on young cohorts
plausibly married after resettlement.40 Despite Indonesia’s diversity, intermarriage is rare: across the
country, only 10 percent marry outside their ethnic group. For young households, Transmigration vil-
lages had an average intermarriage rate of 15.2 percent (17.8 percent in 2010). As a benchmark, the
intermarriage rate in the capital city of Jakarta for roughly the same age cohort is 34.2 percent. At the
average rate of increase in intermarriage across Transmigration villages, 2.6 p.p. per decade, it will take
58 years for the mean Transmigration village to arrive at the intermarriage rate in Jakarta.
     Table 8 shows that F hastens and P hinders the otherwise slow process of integration through mar-
riage. We estimate results using the 2000 and 2010 Censuses, defining diversity in the given year.
Columns 1 and 2 show that a one s.d. increase in F (P ) is associated with roughly 50 (15) percent
higher (lower) intermarriage rates. These patterns are consistent with weaker ethnic attachment in more
fractionalized communities and stronger ethnic attachment in more polarized communities.
     Of course, intermarriage rates reflect both demand for and supply of non-co-ethnic spouses in the
village. We use a simple reduced form approach to adjust for these supply effects at the village level.
We divide the actual intermarriage rate by the average intermarriage rate from 10,000 simulations of
random matching among the young, married population in each village.41 In 2000, for example, the
actual intermarriage rate is only 38.8 percent of the average rate from random matching.
     Columns 3 and 4 of Table 8 show that polarization still has a statistically and economically significant
negative effect, even after adjusting for the random intergroup matching rate. We find very similar re-
sults when including a quadratic or cubic polynomial in potential intermarriage rates on the right-hand
side of columns 1 and 2 (instead of adjusting the left-hand side as in columns 3 and 4). The effect of
F is no longer significant as it is highly correlated with the random matching rate (⇢ = 0.987).42 Frac-
tionalization increases the likelihood of intermarriage by increasing the potential for intergroup contact,
but polarization captures intergroup antagonism, above and beyond changes in the potential supply of
different groups in the local marriage market.
     To better understand this result, consider two Transmigration villages. Terusan Makmur is somewhat
fractionalized (F = 0.60) but very polarized (P = 0.90) with 47.3% Balinese, 41.6% Javanese, and 8.0%
local native Banjar. The high F implies a high supply of potential non-co-ethnic partners. Yet, the

40
   In practice, we restrict to households where the head is younger than the legal marriage age (15) in the year of settlement.
41
   We treat the village as the marriage market. If we used the district instead, we would have smaller supply adjustments. This
   is because supply effects due to the program are concentrated at the village level, and quite muted at the district level. Hence,
   supply adjustments at the village level are more conservative. Note also that these adjustments are based on the married
   population (of household heads and spouses) whereas the diversity regressors are based on the entire population.
42
   The probability of a mixed marriage is equal to a weighted average of pg ⇥ (1 pg ), where pg is the population share of group
   g. The weights, based on the gender-specific marriage-age population of g, explain the lack of a perfect correlation with F .


                                                                25
actual intermarriage rate of 0.07 is only a small fraction of the potential intermarriage rate of 0.59. By
comparison, the village of Rimba Beringin has similar F = 0.59 but much lower P = 0.68, and an actual
intermarriage rate of 0.19. These examples and the results in Table 8 suggest that the choice of marriage
partners varies with attachment to one’s ethnic identity, which is fueled by polarization.
       In closing the discussion, it is important to note that intermarried households do not explain the over-
all effects of diversity on Indonesian use at home. Appendix Table A.12 shows that F and P have similar
effects on children with and without intermarried parents. If anything, the effects are slightly smaller
for children in intermarried households, which is consistent with the message from Table 6 insomuch as
intrahousehold diversity has more proximate effects than village-level diversity.

Children’s Name Choices.               In addition to language and marriage choices, children’s names can be in-
formative about nation building. This is arguably the first act of intergenerational cultural transmission,
reflecting parents’ preferences and expectations about the value of different identities. Using the 2010
Census, we construct four indices measuring the extent to which a name conveys weaker ethnic attach-
ment and stronger national integration.43 Importantly, while these indices are correlated with homeIndo
and intermarriage, names are an additional margin of identity choice. Many children have names evoca-
tive of integration even though they live in an ethnically homogenous household where everyone speaks
the native ethnic language.
       Our first index associates children’s names with speaking Indonesian at home. Similar to the “black
name index” in Fryer and Levitt (2004), for each first name n, we calculate the relative likelihood, be-
tween 0 and 1, that n is associated with someone who speaks Indonesian at home:

                                                      P (name = n | homeIndo = 1)
                  I NDO SCOREn =                                                                .                            (9)
                                      P (name = n | homeIndo = 1) + P (name = n | homeIndo = 0)
For example, consider the name, Asep. The numerator measures the fraction of people named Asep
among those speaking Indonesian at home. The denominator is the sum of this term and the proba-
bility that someone has this name if they do not not speak Indonesian at home. If everyone named
Asep speaks Indonesian at home, the index equals 1. We construct this likelihood for everyone living
outside Transmigration villages (more than 200 million people), and then apply the score to children in
Transmigration villages born after resettlement. We standardize the proxy for ease of interpretation.
       In Table 9, we relate I NDO SCORE and three other indices to village-level diversity. We estimate
individual-level regressions for plausible second-generation immigrants in Transmigration villages. This
is the same sample as column 8 of Table 5 but now includes those under 5. These regressions include
ethnicity FE, which subsume unobservable, ethnicity-specific naming conventions. In column 1 of Table
9, we see that fractionalization is associated with children’s names that are more predictive of homeIndo.
Polarization acts in the opposite direction with effects of a similar magnitude. In column 2, our second
index associates names with the likelihood of living in an intermarried household. We see again that
F leads to greater integration, while P has the opposite effect. In column 3, our third index associates
names with the likelihood of living in an urban area. While nearly all Transmigration villages are in
43
     We focus on measures based on individual names but exclude those with names that are not shared by at least 100 people
     in the entire country. Fryer and Levitt (2004) implement a similar cutoff rule, and our results are robust to other cutoffs.
     Appendix Table A.13 estimates a similar set of regressions for all children’s names using a double-metaphone adjustment
     that groups similar-sounding names prior to calculating the indices and hence does not require stipulating such a cutoff.


                                                                26
rural areas, diversity may lead parents to give their children names that are more indicative of the types
of names given in cosmopolitan urban areas. The coefficients on F and P for this measure are similar.
       Our fourth index, the dependent variable in column 4, associates names with ethnic attachment by
generalizing the procedure above to allow for many identity groups. For each individual with name n
and ethnic group g, we calculate the relative likelihood that n is associated with g. For example, suppose
Asep is highly indicative of the Sundanese ethnic group but mildly indicative of the Batak ethnic group
(i.e., few Batak choose this name). Then, a Sundanese person named Asep will have a high own-ethnic-
index value (i.e., his name reveals a strong own-ethnic-attachment to Sundanese), but a Batak person
named Asep will have a low own-ethnic-index value (i.e., his name reveals a weak attachment to Batak).
Compared to the indices in prior columns, we see mirror image effects using this measure: F reduces
the precision of a child’s name in identifying his or her ethnic group while P increases it.
       Overall, the lessons from Table 9 are clear: fractionalization leads parents to choose names more
evocative of national integration while polarization fuels more insular name choices. To be sure, the
results in Table 9 are capturing much of the same variation as the baseline findings for homeIndo and
intermarriage. It is nevertheless reassuring to find similar effects of F and P on name choice. Next, we
use survey data to validate the findings from these revealed preference measures of integration.

Social Capital. Table 10 provides new evidence that polarization undermines social capital. We explore
eight questions from the sociocultural module of the 2012 National Socioeconomic Survey (Susenas): (1)
willingness to contribute to voluntary public goods; (2) participation in neighborhood social activities;
(3) tolerance of non-co-ethnics in the village; (4) trust of neighbors to watch one’s house; (5) trust of
neighbors to care for one’s children; (6) how safe one feels; (7) how easy it is to obtain help from neigh-
bors; and (8) willingness to assist unfortunate neighbors. These measures provide a window into sub-
jective intergroup preferences and interaction. Each outcome, in rows, is reported on a 1 to 4 scale with
higher numbers indicating greater support for the given statement. The columns report beta coefficients
on F and P for ease of interpretation. One limitation is that because this is a national survey, it only
covers 87 Transmigration villages with around 10 respondents (households heads) per village.
       Individuals in polarized villages are less likely to contribute to public goods (row 1) or to join commu-
nity groups (row 2), though the latter is statistically insignificant.44 Polarization also reduces tolerance
of non-co-ethnic activities in the village (row 3), trust in neighbors (rows 4 and 5), feelings of safety (row
6), helpfulness of neighbors (row 7), and support for poorer neighbors (row 8). These effects are sizable,
but some are imprecisely estimated. Combining all eight measures into a mean index suggests that a one
s.d. increase in P reduces social capital by -0.340 s.d. and is significant at the 1% level.
       While polarization has significant adverse effects, fractionalization has more muted and in some
cases positive effects. For example, individuals in high-F villages are more likely to contribute to vol-
untary public goods (row 1) and to assist poorer neighbors (row 8). The other outcomes exhibit less
clear patterns and noisier estimates. These findings are at odds with prior literature on diversity, trust,
and public goods, which shows that F is associated with adverse outcomes. Our results differ in part
44
     Our estimates are based on individual-level specifications that control for predetermined covariates analogous to those in the
     individual-level regressions using Census data (i.e., gender, age and age squared). The 2012 Susenas is the only available data
     to study reported preferences in a large enough sample of Transmigration villages to yield reliable estimates. Even so, the
     estimates are relatively noisy with only 6 out of 16 being significant at conventional levels. This is due to limited statistical
     power, and not because of limited coverage over certain parts of the joint distribution of F and P .


                                                                   27
because we are able to distinguish F from P .45 That P rather than F undermines social capital is in line
with our findings for language, marriage, and name choices.

Aggregate Outcomes.             In Table 11, we further corroborate these lessons using village-level outcomes
associated with integration. While some measures exhibit little variation, most results are in line with
earlier findings, which suggest that F is conducive to nation building while P undermines this process.
     Columns 1–3 show that F leads to more growth-enhancing public goods while P works against such
investments. Column 1 considers a summary index of five public goods provided by village govern-
ments and recorded triennially in Podes data from 2002 to 2014: safe drinking water, garbage collection,
public toilet facilities, 4-wheel road access, and streetlights.46 The positive effects of F and negative ef-
fects of P on measured public goods are consistent with the individual responses in Table 10. Column
2 considers the share of the village with any visible nighttime lights in 2010, a proxy for local develop-
ment (Henderson et al., 2012). A one s.d. increase in F (P ) increases (reduces) light coverage by nearly
one-third. Column 3 provides similar insights using a survey-based measure of mean household expen-
ditures per capita, pooling annual Susenas data from 2000 to 2014. The outcome is in logs, and a one s.d.
increase in F (P ) increases (reduces) expenditures 6.7 (3.8) percent.
     Consistent with these patterns of (under)development, columns 4 and 5 show that F reduces the
likelihood of ethnic conflict while P increases it. Column 4 uses triennial Podes data from 2002 to 2014
covering all villages. Column 5 uses event-level data from the National Violence Monitoring System
(Sistem Nasional Pemantauan Kekerasan Indonesia or SNPK), which covers incidents in high-conflict regions
from 2000 to 2014. In both sources, ethnic conflict is a rare event, and the signs on F and P are similar.
However, the estimates are larger and more precisely estimated for the media-reported events in SNPK
(column 4) compared to events reported by the village head in Podes (column 5).47
     We interpret these results through our model in Section 3 and the Esteban and Ray (2011) theory of
ethnic conflict. In the latter, F amplifies conflict over private goods, and P amplifies conflict over public
goods. Transmigration villages fostered equality in private access to land and housing. Our model
implies benefits of intergroup contact in villages with many small groups (high F ). With fewer reasons to
fight over private resources, these benefits may be more salient in shaping interethnic interactions than in
Esteban and Ray (2011). On the other hand, Transmigration villages still have a host of contestable public
resources and institutions (subject to recurring elections). These “public prizes” may fuel interethnic
antagonism, which drives the adverse effects of P in our model and in Esteban and Ray (2011).
     Finally, columns 6 and 7 of Table 11 explore civic capital and support for inclusive, nationally-
oriented political parties. Column 6 considers voter turnout in the first democratic election in 1999,
recorded in Podes in the same year. Given such high turnout (95% in the mean village), there is little
scope for diversity to matter. However, column 7 shows that P reduces support for political parties that
embrace the Indonesian state ideology of Pancasila (see Section 2.1). The outcome, from Podes 2002 data,
takes a value of one for villages where Pancasila-adhering parties finished first, second and third, and

45
   To be sure, regressions including F or P but not the other measure yield systematically negative estimates for both. For
   example, in row 3, F has a coefficient(std. error) of -0.369(0.191) on its own, and P has a coefficient of -0.501(0.184) on its own.
46
   These locally-provided public goods have more scope to vary over time and across villages than those provided by the
   Ministry of Transmigration in the 1980s (e.g., the number of schools and health clinics, see Section 2.2).
47
   The results from Podes are similar when restricted to the villages covered by SNPK: -0.010(0.010) for F and 0.005(0.009) for P .


                                                                  28
zero otherwise. The effect size is meaningful—a 10% reduction in support for a one s.d. increase in
P —though imprecise. Meanwhile, F also has negative effect, but it is smaller and even less precise.

Summary.       Combined with our earlier results for homeIndo, the findings in Tables 8–11 provide new
evidence on (i) how diversity shapes integration across ethnic groups and (ii) downstream consequences
of integration for public goods, development, and conflict. By changing incentives to maintain one’s
ethnic identity, diversity has the potential to either undermine or reinforce this nation building process.


7.3     Mitigating Ethnic Divisions: National Language Use and Shared Identity

In this final section, we illustrate how the national language can mitigate ethnic divisions over the long-
run. As more people speak Indonesian at home, the linguistic distance between ethnic groups falls,
thereby reducing the effective polarization in society. Figure 6 plots the density of polarization, P ( ),
across Transmigration villages, adjusted for exogenous native linguistic distances between groups as in
Section 7.1. The dashed line presents another polarization measure, P ( ˜), which uses the primary lan-
guage spoken at home to compute endogenous linguistic distance between groups. Intuitively, if more
people within a village speak the same language, then the effective polarization, P ( ˜), between groups
would be lower. This shift is evident in Figure 6 where the P ( ˜) density lies to the left of the P ( ) density.
A Kolmogorov-Smirnov test rejects the null that the two distributions are identical (p < 0.001). These
differences are important. If everyone spoke their native language, there would be no shift. If only a few
people from different groups spoke a common language, the shift would be much less pronounced.
      Put differently, adoption of Indonesian at home is helping to integrate ethnic groups that would oth-
erwise remain divided along deep linguistic cleavages inherited over many generations. While Figure 6
is based on a single cross-section in 2010, it hints at the possibility of national language use facilitating
cultural integration across time. Indeed, this is the message of Table 2, which showed that children who
grow up speaking Indonesian at home exhibit weaker attachment to their inherited ethnic identity and
greater openness to integrating with those from other ethnic groups. Together, these results, and the
nexus of findings in Section 6 are consistent with language being a key nation-building instrument.


8     Discussion
This paper offered new evidence on how intergroup contact shapes the nation-building process in di-
verse societies. We studied a large-scale resettlement program involving nearly two million voluntary
migrants across more than 800 diverse new communities. Our findings illustrate two important dimen-
sions of local diversity. With many small groups (high fractionalization), there are large returns to inte-
grating through a common identity. With a few large groups (high polarization), intergroup antagonism
and incentives for cultural dominance grow stronger, making coordination more difficult. These two
forces shape numerous outcomes related to the nation-building process, including national language
use at home, intermarriage, name choices for children, social capital, and public goods provision. More-
over, we find strong neighborhood effects of diversity and show that residential segregation undermines
the benefits of F while mitigating the costs of P .



                                                       29
       Beyond Indonesia, the distinct effects of F and P that we identify contribute to recent debates on
migration and demographic change in both rich and poor countries. Several studies document poten-
tial economic benefits of migration-induced diversity (e.g., Alesina et al., 2016; Ashraf and Galor, 2013),
while others emphasize the costs (e.g., Borjas, 2016). Our findings suggest a possible middle ground: F
may increase the benefits while P may increase the costs. These results could inform the design of reset-
tlement or housing policies where group composition is malleable. We further speak to the importance
of a shared identity and national language to unite diverse groups. While we focus on primary identity
choice, it would be interesting to explore the possibility of multiculturalism in future work.
       From a policy perspective, the behavioral changes that we observe have important intergenerational
implications for nation building. Although small, the mixed Transmigration communities may affect
aggregate policy outcomes insomuch as local cultural change spills over onto the broader political envi-
ronment (Giuliano and Nunn, 2013). Because Transmigration settlements arose at a critical juncture of
development in these frontier areas of the country, it is possible that their impacts on cultural formation
and evolution were quite sizable in the long-run (Bazzi et al., 2018). A growing literature on culture
and institutions suggests potential channels for such persistence (see Alesina and Giuliano, 2015). This
should be further explored in future work along with a rigorous investigation of spillovers.
       The potential spillovers beyond Transmigration settlements are also important for understanding
the legacy of this controversial resettlement program. While policymakers viewed Transmigration as
a tool for nation building, critics accused the government of Javanese imperialism in the Outer Islands
(Hoshour, 1997). Even today, popular accounts remain colored by egregious cases of failed integration.48
However, Barter and Côté (2015) provide ethnographic evidence against this popular view, arguing that
state-sponsored Transmigration communities were not associated with the ethnic violence that erupted
in the Outer Islands in the 1990s. Ultimately, our findings offer support for this more sanguine view of
the program. While some villages may have achieved limited integration over the long-run, this was but
one possible outcome. For others, we find national integration of the sort one only sees in Indonesia’s
most diverse and vibrant cities. That such outcomes can also be realized in remote and underdeveloped
rural areas is a testament to the importance of intergroup contact in the nation-building process.




48
     For example, Pisani (2014) details a visit to a particularly unsuccessful Transmigration settlement in the conflict-ridden
     province of Aceh in the 1990s: “But even where transmigrants rubbed along well enough with their neighbors, they car-
     ried on speaking their mother tongue, they cultivated crops they grew back home, they set up the gamelan gong orchestras
     that mirrored those of Java or Bali. It was more transplantation than transmigration, hardly a homogenizing force. . . . Trans-
     migration was a rare failure in Suharto’s nation building efforts.” (pp. 36-7,). Similar anecdotes abound in the literature on
     the program and are part of broader concerns about “sons of the soil” conflict in Indonesia (Fearon and Laitin, 2011).


                                                                  30
References
Abramitzky, R., L. P. Boustan, and K. Eriksson, “Cultural Assimilation during the Age of Mass Migra-
  tion,” NBER Working Paper 22381, 2018.
Advani, A. and B. Reich, “Melting pot or salad bowl: The formation of heterogeneous communities,”
  Technical Report, Institute for Fiscal Studies 2015.
Alesina, A. and B. Reich, “Nation Building,” Unpublished Manuscript, 2015.
    and E. LaFerrara, “Ethnic Diversity and Economic Performance,” Journal of Economic Literature,
  September 2005, 43 (3), 762–800.
   and E. Zhuravskaya, “Segregation and the Quality of Government in a Cross-Section of Countries,”
  American Economic Review, 2011, 101, 1872–1911.
   and P. Giuliano, “Culture and Institutions,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2015, 53 (4), 898–944.
  , G. Tabellini, and F. Trebbi, “Is Europe and Optimal Political Area?,” Brookings Papers on Economic
  Activity, 2017, BPEA Conference Drafts, March 23-24, 2017.
  , J. Harnoss, and H. Rapoport, “Birthplace Diversity and Economic Prosperity,” Journal of Economic
  Growth, 2016, 21 (2), 101–138.
Algan, Y., C. Hémet, and D. D. Laitin, “The social effects of ethnic diversity at the local level: A natural
  experiment with exogenous residential allocation,” Journal of Political Economy, 2016, 124 (3), 696–733.
Alisjahbana, S. T., Indonesian language and literature: Two essays, Yale University, Southeast Asia Studies,
  1962.
Allport, G. W., The nature of prejudice, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1954.
Ananta, A., E. N. Arifin, M. S. Hasbullah, N. B. Handayani, and A. Pramono, “Changing ethnic compo-
  sition: Indonesia, 2000-2010,” in “XXVII IUSSP International Population Conference” 2013, pp. 26–31.
Anderson, B., Imagined Communities, Verso, 1983.
Anderson, T. W. and H. Rubin, “Estimation of the parameters of a single equation in a complete system
  of stochastic equations,” The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 1949, 20 (1), 46–63.
Ashraf, Q. and O. Galor, “The “Out of Africa” Hypothesis, Human Genetic Diversity, and Comparative
  Economic Development,” The American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (1), 1–46.
Babcock, T., “Transmigration as a regional development strategy,” in C. MacAndrews, ed., Central Gov-
  ernment and Local Development in Indonesia, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986.
Bandiera, O., M. Mohnen, I. Rasul, and M. Viarengo, “Nation-Building Through Compulsory School-
  ing During the Age of Mass Migration,” Economic Journal, forthcoming.
Bansak, K., J. Ferwerda, J. Hainmueller, A. Dillon, D. Hangartner, D. Lawrence, and J. Weinstein, “Im-
  proving refugee integration through data-driven algorithmic assignment,” Science, 2018, 359 (6373),
  325–329.
Barbour, S. and C. Carmichael, Language and nationalism in Europe, OUP Oxford, 2000.
Barter, S. J. and I. Côté, “Strife of the soil? Unsettling transmigrant conflicts in Indonesia,” Journal of
  Southeast Asian Studies, 2015, 46 (1), 60–85.
Bayer, P., S. L. Ross, and G. Topa, “Place of work and place of residence: Informal hiring networks and
  labor market outcomes,” Journal of Political Economy, 2008, 116 (6), 1150–1196.
Bazzi, S., A. Gaduh, A. Rothenberg, and M. Wong, “Skill Transferability, Migration, and Development:
  Evidence from Population Resettlement in Indonesia,” American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (9), 2658–
  2698.
  , M. Fiszbein, and M. Gebresilasse, “Frontier Culture: Historical Roots and Persistence of ‘Rugged
  Individualism’ in the United States,” NBER Working Paper 23997, 2018.
Bertrand, J., Nationalism and ethnic conflict in Indonesia, Cambridge, UK; New York: Cambridge Univer-

                                                     31
  sity Press, 2004.
Bleakley, H. and A. Chin, “Age at arrival, English proficiency, and social assimilation among US immi-
  grants,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2010, 2, 165.
Blouin, A. and S. Mukand, “Erasing Ethnicity? Nation Building, (Mis)Trust and the Salience of Identity
  in Rwanda,” Unpublished Manuscript, 2016.
Blumer, H., “Race prejudice as a sense of group position,” Pacific Sociological Review, 1958, 1 (1), 3–7.
Boisjoly, J., G. J. Duncan, M. Kremer, D. M. Levy, and J. Eccles, “Empathy or antipathy? The impact of
  diversity,” American Economic Review, 2006, 96 (5), 1890–1905.
Borjas, G., We Wanted Workers: Unraveling the Immigration Narrative, W.W. Norton & Company, 2016.
Cameron, A. C., J. B. Gelbach, and D. L. Miller, “Bootstrap-based improvements for inference with
  clustered errors,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2008, 90 (3), 414–427.
  , , and , “Robust Inference with Multiway Clustering,” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics,
  2011, 29 (2).
Chetty, R. and N. Hendren, “The impacts of neighborhoods on intergenerational mobility I: Childhood
  exposure effects,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2018, 133 (3), 1107–1162.
Clauss, W., H.-D. Evers, and S. Gerke, “The Formation of A Peasant Society: Javanese Transmigrants in
  East Kalimantan,” Indonesia, 1988, (46), 79–90.
Clingingsmith, D., A. I. Khwaja, and M. Kremer, “Estimating the impact of the Hajj: religion and
  tolerance in Islam’s global gathering,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124 (3), 1133–1170.
Clots-Figueras, I. and P. Masella, “Education, Language and Identity,” The Economic Journal, 2013, 123
  (570), F332–F357.
Conley, T. G., “GMM Estimation with Cross Sectional Dependence,” Journal of Econometrics, 1999, 92,
  1–45.
Cornes, R. and T. Sandler, The theory of externalities, public goods, and club goods, 2nd ed ed., Cambridge ;
  New York: Cambridge University Press, 1996.
Darity Jr., W. A., P. L. Mason, and J. B. Stewart, “The economics of identity: The origin and persistence
  of racial identity norms,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, July 2006, 60 (3), 283–305.
Dell, M. and P. Querubin, “Nation Building Through Foreign Intervention: Evidence from Discontinu-
  ities in Military Strategies,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Desmet, K., I. Ortuño-Ortı́n, and S. Weber, “Linguistic Diversity and Redistribution,” Journal of the
  European Economic Association, 2009, 7 (6), 1291–1318.
  , J. Gomes, and I. Ortuño-Ortı́n, “The geography of linguistic diversity and the provision of public
  goods,” Unpublished Manuscript, 2016.
Duggan, C., The Force of Destiny: A History of Italy Since 1976, Penguin Books, London, 2007.
Enos, R. D., The space between us: Social geography and politics, Cambridge University Press, 2017.
Esteban, J. and D. Ray, “Polarization, fractionalization and conflict,” Journal of Peace Research, 2008, 45
  (2), 163–182.
   and , “Linking conflict to inequality and polarization,” American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (4),
  1345–1374.
   and , “Conflict and Development,” Annual Review of Economics, 2017, 9 (1).
  , L. Mayoral, and D. Ray, “Ethnicity and Conflict: An Empirical Study,” American Economic Review,
  2012, 102 (4), 1310–1342.
Esteban, J.M. and D. Ray, “On the measurement of polarization,” Econometrica, 1994, pp. 819–851.
Fearon, J. D., “Ethnic and Cultural Diversity by Country,” Journal of Economic Growth, 2003, 8 (2), 195–
  222.


                                                     32
   and D. D. Laitin, “Sons of the soil, migrants, and civil war,” World Development, 2011, 39, 199–211.
Feith, H., The decline of constitutional democracy in Indonesia, 1st equinox ed ed., Jakarta: Equinox Pub,
  1962.
Fouka, V., “Backlash: The Unintended Effects of Language Prohibition in US Schools after World War
  I,” Stanford Center for International Development Working Paper, 2016, (591).
Frey, W. H., Diversity Explosion: How New Racial Demographics are Remaking America, Brookings Institution
  Press, 2014.
Fryer, R. G. and S. D. Levitt, “The Causes and Consequences of Distinctively Black Names,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2004, 119 (3), 767–805.
Ginsburgh, V. and S. Weber, “The economics of language,” 2018.
Giuliano, P. and N. Nunn, “The transmission of democracy: from the village to the nation-state,” Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 2013, 103 (3), 86–92.
   and , “Understanding cultural persistence and change,” Harvard Universtity, mimeo, 2018.
Gordon, M. M., Assimilation in American life: The role of race, religion, and national origins, New York:
  Oxford University Press, 1964.
Guariso, A. and T. Rogall, “Rainfall inequality, political power, and ethnic conflict in Africa,” 2017.
Hansen, L. P., “Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments Estimators,” Econometrica,
  1982, 50 (4), 1029–1054.
Hanson, G. and C. McIntosh, “Is the Mediterranean the New Rio Grande? US and EU Immigration
  Pressures in the Long Run,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2016, 30 (4), 57–81.
Hardjono, J., “The Indonesian Transmigration Program in Historical Perspective,” International Migra-
  tion, 1988, 26 (4), 427–439.
Henderson, J. V., A. Storeygard, and D. N. Weil, “Measuring Economic Growth from Outer Space,”
  American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (2), 994–1028.
Hoey, B. A., “Nationalism in Indonesia: Building Imagined and Intentional Communities Through
  Transmigration,” Ethnology, 2003, 42 (2), 109–126.
Hoshour, C. A., “Resettlement and the Politicization of Ethnicity in Indonesia,” Bijdragen tot de Taal-
  Land-en Volkenkunde, 1997, (4de Afl), 557–576.
Huntington, S. P., Who are We?: America’s Great Debate, Free Press, 2004.
Iannaccone, L. R., “Sacrifice and Stigma: Reducing Free-riding in Cults, Communes, and Other Collec-
  tives,” The Journal of Political Economy, April 1992, 100 (2), 271–291.
Janvry, A. De, K. Emerick, M. Gonzalez-Navarro, and E. Sadoulet, “Delinking Land Rights from Land
  Use: Certification and Migration in Mexico,” Unpublished Manuscript, 2012.
Kebschull, D., Transmigration in Indonesia: An Empirical Analysis of Motivation, Expectations and Experi-
  ences, Hamburg, Germany: Transaction Publishers, 1986.
Kramsch, C. and H. G. Widdowson, Language and Culture, Oxford University Press, 1998.
Laitin, D. and R. Ramachandran, “Linguistic Diversity, Official Language Choice and Nation Building:
  Theory and Evidence,” Unpublished Manuscript, 2015.
Laitin, D. D., Language repertoires and state construction in Africa, Cambridge University Press, 2007.
Lazear, E., “Culture and Language,” Journal of Political Economy, 1999, 107, s95–s126.
Liu, A. H., Standardizing diversity: the political economy of language regimes, Philadelphia: University of
  Pennsylvania Press, 2015.
Logan, T. D. and J. M. Parman, “The national rise in residential segregation,” The Journal of Economic
  History, 2017, 77 (1), 127–170.
Lowe, M., “Types of Contact: A Field Experiment on Collaborative and Adversarial Caste Integration,”


                                                    33
  Unpublished Manuscript, 2018.
Miguel, E., “Tribe or Nation?: Nation Building and Public Goods in Kenya versus Tanzania,” World
  Politics, 2004, 56 (3), 327–362.
Miller, R., “The Development of European Identity/Identities: Unfinished Business,” A Policy Review,
  2012.
Montalvo, J. G. and M. Reynal-Querol, “Ethnic Polarization, Potential Conflict and Civil War,” American
  Economic Review, 2005, 95 (3), 796–816.
Montgomery, J. D., “Intergenerational cultural transmission as an evolutionary game,” American Eco-
  nomic Journal: Microeconomics, 2010, 2 (4), 115–36.
Okunogbe, O., “Does Exposure to Other Ethnic Groups Promote National Integration? Evidence from
  Nigeria,” Unpublished Manuscript, 2015.
Paauw, S., “One land, one nation, one language: An analysis of Indonesia’s national language policy,”
  University of Rochester Working Papers in the Language Sciences, 2009, 5 (1), 2–16.
Paluck, E. L., S. A. Green, and D. P. Green, “The contact hypothesis re-evaluated,” Behavioural Public
  Policy, 2018, pp. 1–30.
Pew Research Center, “What It Takes to Truly Be ‘One of Us’,” Washington: Pew Research Center, February
  2017.
Pisani, E., Indonesia, Etc.: Exploring the Improbable Nation, WW Norton & Company, 2014.
Putnam, R. D., “E Pluribus Unum: Diversity and Community in the Twenty-first Century The 2006
  Johan Skytte Prize Lecture,” Scandinavian Political Studies, 2007, 30 (2), 137–174.
Rao, G., “Familiarity does not breed contempt: Diversity, discrimination and generosity in Delhi
  schools,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Ricklefs, M. C., A history of modern Indonesia since c. 1200, 4th ed ed., Stanford, Calif: Stanford University
  Press, 2008.
Rigg, J., Southeast Asia (Routledge Revivals): A Region in Transition, Routledge, 2013.
Sanderson, E. and F. Windmeijer, “A weak instrument F-test in linear IV models with multiple endoge-
  nous variables,” Journal of Econometrics, 2016, 190 (2), 212–221.
Sandholm, W. H., Population games and evolutionary dynamics, MIT press, 2010.
  , “Population games and deterministic evolutionary dynamics,” in “Handbook of game theory with
  economic applications,” Vol. 4 2015, pp. 703–778.
Schelling, T. C., “Dynamic models of segregation,” Journal of Mathematical Sociology, 1971, 1 (2), 143–186.
Simpson, A., “Indonesia,” in “Language and national identity in Asia” 2007.
  , Language and national identity in Africa, Oxford University Press, 2008.
Sneddon, J.N., The Indonesian Language: Its History and Role in Modern Society, University of New South
  Wales Press, 2003.
Tanasaldy, T., Regime change and ethnic politics in Indonesia; Dayak politics of West Kalimantan, Brill, 2012.
Thornton, D. L., Javanization of Indonesian politics, University of British Columbia, 1972.
Tirtosudarmo, R., “Transmigration and its centre-regional context: the case of Riau and South Kaliman-
  tan provinces, Indonesia,” 1990.
Weber, E., Peasants into Frenchmen: the modernization of rural France, 1870-1914, Stanford University Press,
  1976.
World Bank, Indonesia: The Transmigration Program in Perspective 1988.
Young, A., “Improved, nearly exact, statistical inference with robust and clustered covariance matrices
  using effective degrees of freedom corrections,” Unpublished Manuscript, 2016.
Young, H. P., “The evolution of social norms,” Annual Review of Economics, 2015, 7 (1), 359–387.


                                                     34
     Figures


                                                            Figure 1: Map of Transmigration Villages
                                                                   Outer Islands
35




                                                             Inner Islands




       Notes: Each colored location on the map corresponds to a Transmigration village settled between 1979 and 1988. The white areas outlined in grey are other villages.
        Figure 2: Ethnic Diversity in Transmigration and Non-Transmigration Villages
                  (a) Fractionalization                                             (b) Polarization




Notes: This figure plots the kernel density of ethnic (a) fractionalization and (b) polarization in 2010 for Transmigration
villages and non-Transmigration villages in the Outer Islands. For both densities, we employ an Epanechnikov kernel and
rule-of-thumb bandwidth.




             Figure 3: Fractionalization, Polarization, and Indonesian Use at Home




Notes: Each circle corresponds to a Transmigration village settled between 1979 and 1988. The villages are grouped into
quintiles of average Indonesian use at home with µ indicating the mean and [., .) indicating the range within-quintile. See
Section 5.3 for a discussion of the three case-study villages: T G is the village of Tanjung Gading, BK is Bukit Kemuning,
and T DJ is Tri Dharma Wirajaya.




                                                            36
          Figure 4: Flexibly-Estimated Effects of Diversity on Indonesian Use at Home




Notes: The figure plots the predicted national language use implied by estimating equation (8) with a full set of interac-
tions between indicators for quintiles of fractionalization and quintiles of polarization. That is, we take the mean national
language use of 0.036 in the omitted category (bottom quintiles of fractionalization and polarization) and add the ✓bij co-
efficient on the given interaction of quintile i of fractionalization and quintile j of polarization. The ✓ij estimates are in
Appendix Table A.5. The quintiles of fractionalization are (1) F 2 [0, 0.196), (2) F 2 [0.197, 0.355), (3) F 2 [0.357, 0.488),
(4) F 2 [0.488, 0.608), and (5) F 2 [0.608, 0.877]. The quintiles of polarization are (1) P 2 [0, 0.351), (2) P 2 [0.356, 0.554),
(3) P 2 [0.555, 0.673), (4) P 2 [0.673, 0.762), and (5) F 2 [0.763, 0.999]. The white space indicates cells with no obser-
vations. Ten out of 25 potential ij cells are not represented as, for example, there are no villages in the first quintile of
fractionalization (i = 1) and the top quintile of polarization (j = 5). The size of the squares/rectangles are arbitrary and
connotes no additional information.




              Figure 5: Effects of Diversity on Indonesian Use at Home by Ethnicity
                  (a) Fractionalization                                                 (b) Polarization




Notes: This figure plots the standardized effects of (a) fractionalization and (b) polarization for the individual-level specifi-
cation in column 6 of Table 3 estimated separately by ethnic group. We report results for the top 10 largest ethnicities with
greater than 12,000 people across the 817 Transmigration villages. We group the Malay, Dayak and Batak sub-ethnicities
into their broader ethnic groups. The graph reports point estimates +/ 2 ⇥ standard-error bars.


                                                               37
                      Figure 6: Shared Language Use and Effective Polarization




Notes: The figure plots kernel density estimates for exogenous and endogenous ethnic polarization, P (d), where d captures
the linguistic distance between groups (see Section 7.1). In the exogenous case, d = is based on predetermined linguistic
classifications of each ethnic group’s native language, and the endogenous measure is based on the actual language spoken
at home by each member of each ethnic group. When individuals from two different groups   ⇣       i and j speak
                                                                                                             ⌘ the same
                                                                                                    branch        
language at home, they are deemed to have zero linguistic distance. Formally, = 1                          ij
                                                                                               max(branchi ,branchj )
                                                                                                                      where the
ratio in parentheses captures the fraction of possible shared branches on linguistic classification trees from the Ethnologue
database, and  = 0.5 here, but the results are similar for  = 0.05. Meanwhile, in the endogenous case, d = ˜ captures
the linguistic distance between groups based on actual languages spoken at home. By construction, ˜ is must be weakly
smaller than ; if individual `i from group i and individual `j from group j speak the same language, then ij = ˜`i `j (see
                                                                    P v P Iv 2
Appendix D.4). Polarization in village v is then defined as Pv (d) = Ii=1   i6=j piv pjv dij where p captures the ethnic group
shares in the village and d = for the solid, exogenous polarization distribution and d = ˜ for the dashed, endogenous
polarization distribution.




                                                              38
Tables


                          Table 2: Nation Building and Language Use at Home
                                                                        Dep. Var. as Adult in 2014:
                                                          Speaks         Changes          In          Trust
                                                        Indonesian       Ethnicity Interethnic Other Ethnic
                                                         at Home        from 1997 Marriage           Groups
                                                                                                    (z-score)
                                                             (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)

                                                                             Panel A: Baseline

     Indonesian was Primary Language                       0.156            0.062           0.053             0.148
       at Home as Child in 1997                           (0.022)          (0.019)         (0.023)           (0.054)


                                                               Panel B: Adding Parental Intermarriage

     Indonesian was Primary Language                       0.151            0.045           0.046             0.131
       at Home as Child in 1997                           (0.022)          (0.019)         (0.023)           (0.054)
     Parents from Different Ethnic Groups                  0.053            0.177           0.092             0.160
                                                          (0.021)          (0.030)         (0.031)           (0.055)

     Number of Individuals                                 8,623            6,594           5,628             8,236
     Dependent Variable Mean                               0.369            0.114           0.103              0.00
     Age, Gender, Education Fixed Effects                   Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes
     Village Fixed Effects                                  Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes

 Notes: This table reports estimates of the correlation between parental daily Indonesian language use at home as a child in
 1997 and the given column’s dependent variable for individuals in the 2014 round of the Indonesia Family Life Survey. Panel
 B augments the baseline specification with a control for whether the child’s parents hail from different ethnic groups. The
 sample is restricted to all individuals greater than 15 years old who live in a different household in 2014 compared to 1997.
 The dependent variables include in column (1) an indicator for whether the individual used the Indonesian language at
 home on a regular basis in 2014, (2) an indicator for whether the individual switched his/her reported ethnicity between
 1997 and 2014, (3) an indicator for whether a married individual is in an interethnic marriage in 2014, (4) an index normal-
 ized to have mean zero and standard deviation one based on ordered response on a 4 point scale to the question “Do you
 trust people from other ethnic groups less than you trust your people from own group?”. Note that the language use at
 home variable is distinct from the 2010 Population Census measure used elsewhere in the paper, which only lists a single,
 primary language at home as opposed to listing all languages used at home. All specifications include the fixed effects
 listed at the bottom of the table where the age FE are for each individual age. Standard errors are clustered at the village
 level of which there are around 1,300 across columns.




                                                              39
                  Table 3: Ethnic Diversity and National Language Use At Home
                                                             Dep. Var.: National Language Use at Home
                                                     (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)                  (6)

                                                           Village-Level                    Individual-Level
  ethnic fractionalization                         0.296                 0.637       0.671         0.499         0.377
                                                  (0.041)               (0.073)     (0.075)       (0.057)       (0.051)
  ethnic polarization                                          0.086     -0.362      -0.392        -0.302        -0.184
                                                              (0.030)   (0.051)     (0.057)       (0.041)       (0.038)

  Number of Villages                                817        817        817         817           817           817
  Number of Individuals                              –          –          –       1,800,499     1,800,499     1,800,499
  Dependent Variable Mean                          0.144      0.144      0.144       0.154         0.154         0.154
  R2                                               0.379      0.303      0.437       0.114         0.221         0.280

  Island FE, Predetermined Controls (x)              X            X        X           X             X             X
  Ethnicity, Age, Relation, Gender FE                                                                X             X
  Birth District, Current District FE                                                                              X

Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (7) where fractionalization and polarization are defined using the self-
reported ethnicities in the 2010 Population Census. Columns 1–3 are village-level regressions where the dependent vari-
able is the share of individuals that report Indonesian as their main language at home in 2010. Columns 4–6 are individual-
level regressions where the dependent variable is an indicator equal to one if the individual reports Indonesian as their
main language at home in 2010. All columns include our baseline set of predetermined controls (x) described in Appendix
D: log village area, three measures of village slope, a ruggedness index, log altitude, three measures of soil quality, two
measures of soil texture, two measures of soil drainage, mean rainfall and temperature from 1948 to 1978, distance to
nearest point in Java/Bali, distance to the nearest pre-1979 road, distance to the coast, distance to the nearest river, dis-
tance to the subdistrict and district capital, and four island fixed effects. Column 5 includes exhaustive fixed effects for
individual ethnicity, age, relation to household head, and gender. Column 6 further includes fixed effects for birth district
and current district. The dependent variable means are across all villages in columns 1–3 and across all individuals in
column 4–6. Standard errors are clustered by district, of which there are 84.




                                                             40
    Table 4: Instrumental Variables Estimates of Diversity and Indonesian Use At Home
                                                             Dep. Var.: National Language Use at Home
                                                                (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)
                                                             village-          individual-level

         ethnic fractionalization                              1.017        0.726          0.599           0.592
                                                              (0.095)      (0.073)        (0.079)        (0.052)
         ethnic polarization                                   -0.793       -0.547         -0.447         -0.420
                                                              (0.095)      (0.061)        (0.051)        (0.046)

         Number of Villages                                     817          817            817            817
         Number of Individuals                                   –        1,800,499      1,800,499      1,800,499
         Dependent Variable Mean                               0.145        0.154          0.154          0.154
         SW fractionalization, p-value                         0.000        0.000          0.000          0.000
         SW polarization, p-value                              0.000        0.000          0.000          0.000
         KP Wald stat                                           7.8          8.7            10.1           22.5
         Hansen J test, p-value                                0.607        0.253          0.411          0.470
         Hausman GMM test OLS=IV, p-value                      0.372        0.807          0.747          0.769
         Island FE, x Predetermined Controls                     X            X              X              X
         Ethnicity, Age, Relation, Gender FE                                                 X              X
         Birth District, Current District FE                                                                X

Notes: This table estimates instrumental variables regressions for the village- and individual-level specifications in
columns 3 and 4–6, respectively, of Table 3. The instruments include (i) dummies for each ventile of the number of
transmigrants from Java/Bali in the initial year of settlement and (ii) the share of each of 15 (out of 16) Inner-Island ethnic
groups among all those born in Java/Bali before the year of settlement. The latter are based on the 2000 Population Census
and measure, for example, the share of Javanese in the total population of Inner-Island ethnics born in Java/Bali before
the year of settlement. We estimate the 2SLS equations using generalized method of moments (GMM) given the many
instruments. The null hypotheses of (i) the Sampson-Windmeijer (SW) test is that the instruments for the given endoge-
nous variable are weak, (ii) the Hansen J test is that the instruments are uncorrelated with the error term and correctly
excluded from the second stage, and (iii) the Hausman GMM test is that the OLS estimates equal the IV estimates. The
Kleibergen-Paap (KP) Wald statistic is a multivariate generalization of the first-stage F statistic. Standard errors in all
columns are clustered by district, of which there are 84.




                                                              41
                                    Table 5: Effects of Diversity on Sub-populations within Transmigration Villages
                                                                           Dep. Var.: Individual Speaks National Language at Home
                                                (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)           (5)          (6)                     (7)              (8)

            Sample:                          baseline     inner-ethnic    inner-born       outer-ethnic     outer-born       outer-born      outer-born       born same
                                                                          < yr. settled                     < yr. settled     APPDT         non-APPDT          district
                                                                                                                                                               yr. settled

            ethnic fractionalization           0.082          0.098           0.081            0.056            0.069           0.069           0.056            0.098
                                              (0.011)        (0.013)         (0.012)          (0.015)          (0.015)         (0.020)         (0.015)          (0.014)
            ethnic polarization               -0.040         -0.058          -0.053            -0.028           -0.024         -0.035           0.001           -0.046
                                              (0.008)        (0.010)         (0.010)          (0.012)          (0.011)         (0.012)         (0.014)          (0.011)

            Number of Individuals           1,800,499      1,267,946         543,655          532,486          408,751         282,030         126,721          626,772
            Dependent Variable Mean           0.154          0.099            0.066            0.285            0.207           0.158           0.316            0.168
            R2                                0.281          0.198            0.143            0.328            0.299           0.305           0.283            0.300

     Notes: This table estimates the full fixed effects, individual-level specification from column 6 of Table 3 for different population subsamples of the Transmigration
     village in 2010. Column 1 reproduces the standardized estimates from column 6 of Table 3 for reference. The subsequent columns restrict the sample to individuals: (2)
     reporting an ethnicity native to the Inner Islands of Java/Bali, (3) born in Java/Bali before the year of settlement, (4) reporting an ethnicity native to the Outer Islands,
42




     (5) born in the Outer Islands before the year of settlement, (6) born in the Outer Islands in the same district or a neighboring one in the same province before the year of
     settlement, (7) born in the Outer Islands in in a different province before the year of settlement, and (8) born in the same district after the year of settlement. While mean
     Indonesian use at home differs across columns, the baseline fixed effects in column 1, also used in every column thereafter, make it possible to compare standardized
     estimates across columns. Standard errors in all columns are clustered by district, of which there are 84.
        Table 6: Intergroup Contact, Segregation, and National Language Use at Home
                                                             Dep. Var.: Individual Speaks National Language at Home
                                                           (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)       (6)

ethnic fractionalization, contiguous settlements          0.054                                           -0.006
                                                         (0.014)                                         (0.014)
ethnic fractionalization, village                                     0.082                               0.021       0.084
                                                                     (0.011)                             (0.010)     (0.010)
ethnic fractionalization, neighborhood                                            0.129                   0.098
                                                                                 (0.008)                 (0.009)
ethnic polarization, contiguous settlements              -0.026                                           0.000
                                                         (0.009)                                         (0.010)
ethnic polarization, village                                          -0.040                              -0.011      -0.031
                                                                     (0.008)                             (0.009)     (0.008)
ethnic polarization, neighborhood                                                 -0.064                  -0.055
                                                                                 (0.008)                 (0.009)
2 out of 2 next-door neighbors of different ethnicity                                         0.192       0.146
                                                                                             (0.010)     (0.008)
1 out of 2 next-door neighbors of different ethnicity                                         0.067       0.035
                                                                                             (0.006)     (0.003)
ethnic segregation                                                                                                   -0.029
                                                                                                                     (0.005)

Number of Individuals                                   1,758,030   1,758,030   1,758,030   1,758,030   1,758,030   1,758,030
Dependent Variable Mean                                   0.154       0.154       0.154       0.154       0.154       0.154
R2                                                        0.276       0.282       0.301       0.301       0.316       0.285

Notes: This table estimates individual-level regressions with different measures of diversity and segregation. The specifi-
cation is based on column 6 of Table 3. The sample size is slightly smaller as the measures of neighbor ethnicity in column
4 are unavailable for a small number of households, and we want to ensure a constant sample across columns. Column
1 measures diversity at the level of contiguous Transmigration villages. While 254 Transmigration villages are isolated
villages, the remainder are part of settlement blocs containing 2–18 villages with half of those containing 2–4. Column 2
is the baseline with own-village-level diversity. Column 3 measures diversity at the sub-village, neighborhood level, of
which there are as many as 59 with the median village having 15. Column 4 measures diversity at the level of immediate
neighbors in housing units adjacent to one’s own. Column 5 includes all measures simultaneously. Column 6 augments
the baseline specification in column 2 with a summary measure of ethnic residential segregation proposed in Alesina and
Zhuravskaya (2011). Standard errors in all columns are clustered by district, of which there are 84.




                                                             43
                                 Table 7: Intergroup Distance Mechanisms
Dep. Var.: National Language Use at Home                                  Distance Between Groups
                                                                 Spatial          Economic        Linguistic
                                                              (1)       (2)      (3)     (4)    (5)       (6)

fractionalization                                            0.134      0.145       0.149      0.165
                                                            (0.015)    (0.015)     (0.015)    (0.019)
polarization                                                -0.068      -0.084     -0.073     -0.102
                                                            (0.011)    (0.012)     (0.012)    (0.016)
segregation                                                 -0.033      -0.031
                                                            (0.006)    (0.006)
fractionalization ⇥ segregation                                        -0.041
                                                                       (0.010)
polarization ⇥ segregation                                               0.018
                                                                       (0.007)
interethnic inequality, agroclimatic similarity                                     -0.033     -0.019
                                                                                   (0.009)    (0.012)
fractionalization ⇥ interethnic inequality                                                     -0.036
                                                                                              (0.015)
polarization ⇥ interethnic inequality                                                           0.012
                                                                                              (0.011)
fractionalization, 44 groups                                                                               0.129
                                                                                                          (0.018)
polarization, 44 groups                                                                                    -0.079
                                                                                                          (0.015)
fractionalization( ), linguistic distance                                                                             0.144
                                                                                                                     (0.016)
polarization( ), linguistic distance                                                                                  -0.092
                                                                                                                     (0.013)

Number of Villages                                            817        817         816        816         817        816
Dependent Variable Mean                                      0.144      0.144       0.145      0.145       0.144      0.145
R2                                                           0.465      0.486       0.453      0.461       0.407      0.439
H0 : F (44) = F baseline, p-value                                                                         [0.669]
H0 : P (44) = P baseline, p-value                                                                         [0.716]
H0 : F ( ) = F baseline, p-value                                                                                     [0.100]
H0 : P ( ) = P baseline, p-value                                                                                     [0.022]

Notes: This table estimates regressions based on augmenting the main, village-level regression in column 3 of Table 3. All
variables are standardized (prior to interacting) for ease of interpretation. Column 1 estimates the village-level analogue of
column 6 in Table 6, and column 2 adds the interaction of segregation with our village-level diversity measures. Columns
3 and 4 consider interethnic inequality in agroclimatic similarity (as a proxy for human capital endowments) among initial
migrants to the village. This between-group inequality measure is akin a standard Greenberg-Gini index. These columns
also control for average and overall inequality in agroclimatic similarity at the village level. Column 5 redefines the di-
versity measures based on an aggregation of the 1,330 self-reported ethnicities into 44 broad ethnic groups determined by
Indonesian demographers (Ananta et al., 2013). Column 6 adjusts the baseline diversity measures based on the linguistic
distance ( ) between ethnic groups according to their native ethnic languages (see Section 7.1). We lose one observation in
columns 3–4 and 6 due to merging difficulties with the underlying agroclimatic and linguistic distance data, respectively.
The bracketed p-values at the bottom of the table for columns 5 and 6 are based on a test of the difference in coefficients
between the given diversity measure and the baseline measure from column 3 of Table 3. Standard errors in all columns
are clustered by district, of which there are 84.


                                                             44
                                     Table 8: Diversity and Intermarriage
                                                               Dep. Var.: post-settlement
                                                                  intermarriage rate in
                                                           2000      2010     2000      2010
                                                                actual       supply-adjusted
                                                            (1)        (2)      (3)      (4)

                      ethnic fractionalization             0.068       0.093     -0.025       -0.006
                                                          (0.012)     (0.008)    (0.022)      (0.013)
                      ethnic polarization                 -0.028      -0.027     -0.081       -0.112
                                                          (0.010)     (0.007)    (0.021)      (0.012)

                      Number of Villages                    815         816        815         816
                      Dependent Variable Mean              0.152       0.179      0.388       0.482
                      R2                                   0.258       0.560      0.114       0.317

Notes: This table estimates the baseline village-level regression from column 3 of Table 3 for interethnic marriage outcomes
as observed in the 2000 and 2010 Population Census. The intermarriage rates are defined over all self-reported ethnicities
by husbands and wives within a household and are restricted to those that were younger than 15 years old (or not yet born)
by the year of settlement and hence plausibly married after arriving in the given Transmigration village. The diversity
measures are standardized and based on the given year of the outcome listed at the top of each column. Columns 1 and
2 are the actual intermarriage rates. Columns 3 and 4 take the actual intermarriage rates and divide by the potential
intermarriage rate (i.e., “supply-adjusted”), which is based on randomly matching the (young) married men and women
10,000 different times and taking the average. The sample size is smaller by a few villages in this table, two in 2000 and
one in 2010, due to missing marriage data for the young cohort. Standard errors in all columns are clustered by district,
of which there are 84.




                  Table 9: Diversity and the Identity Content of Children’s Names
                                               Dep. Var.: precision of name in identifying . . .
                                          Indonesian      intermarried      urban      own-ethnicity
                                        language home      household      household
                                              (1)               (2)           (3)              (4)

        ethnic fractionalization              0.222                  0.196           0.268               -0.215
                                             (0.038)                (0.041)         (0.052)             (0.042)
        ethnic polarization                   -0.127                 -0.113          -0.161              0.081
                                             (0.032)                (0.034)         (0.044)             (0.032)

        Number of Individuals                726,969               676,307          731,628             720,142
        R2                                    0.101                 0.190            0.080               0.101
Notes: This table estimates the baseline individual-level regression from column 5 of Table 3 for the precision of children’s
names (from the 2010 Population Census) in identifying whether they belong to the given identity type listed at the top of
the column. We restrict the sample to children born after the year of settlement for the given village. The index captures
whether name n is likely to belong to identity type g, being in column (1) a household where the modal member speaks
Indonesian at home, (2) a household with the head and spouse being of a different ethnicity, (3) an individual residing
in urban areas, (4) an individual belonging to his/her native ethnicity. These measures are estimated for all individuals
living outside of Transmigration villages elsewhere in Indonesia. See equation (9) and Appendix D.2 for details on the
construction of these indices. We restrict the sample to children with names that are observed for at least 100 other people
in Indonesia (population 234 million) to deal with unique names as in Fryer and Levitt (2004). Standard errors in all
columns are clustered by district, of which there are 84.


                                                             45
                                    Table 10: Diversity and Social Capital
                                                        standardized coefficients
                                                    fractionalization polarization          Dep. Var. Mean         No. of
Dependent Variable                                         (F )              (P )             (1-4 scale)        individuals

1. voluntary public good provision                         0.166               -0.224              2.7               834
                                                          (0.113)             (0.119)

2. join community group(s)                                 0.017               -0.068              2.4               820
                                                          (0.129)             (0.106)

3. pleased with non-coethnics                              0.106               -0.285              2.9               840
                                                          (0.189)             (0.167)

4. trust neighbor to watch house                           0.145               -0.242              2.9               840
                                                          (0.120)             (0.100)

5. trust neighbor to tend children                         -0.080              -0.120              2.7               840
                                                          (0.149)             (0.124)

6. feel safe                                               -0.077              -0.202              3.2               850
                                                          (0.107)             (0.099)

7. ease in obtaining neighbor assistance                   0.005               -0.120              2.7               850
                                                          (0.121)             (0.104)

8. contribute to assist unfortunate neighbors              0.227               -0.199              2.9               850
                                                          (0.097)             (0.113)


Notes: This table estimates an individual-level regression using the sociocultural module of the 2012 National Socioeco-
nomic Survey (Susenas). The survey covers 87 Transmigration villages with up to 850 household heads responding to the 8
questions listed in shorthand statements in each row of the table denoting a separate regression. See Appendix D.2 for the
fully elaborated questions. Responses to these questions are given on a 1 to 4 integer scale, and we re-order the responses
such that higher numbers indicate stronger agreement. The sample varies slightly across outcomes due to non-responses,
though these are not systematic with respect to diversity. The dependent variable and the two diversity indices are stan-
dardized, leaving the coefficients in beta form for ease of interpretation. The specification is otherwise identical to those
in prior tables including controls for the predetermined village-level covariates (x) and island fixed effects as well as age,
age squared and a gender dummy. Standard errors in all columns are clustered by district, of which there are 45.




                                                             46
                      Table 11: Diversity and Village-Level Outcomes: Public Goods, Development, Conflict, and Voting
                   Dependent Variable:                 local development and public goods                      conflict                       voting
                                                         village     light    household                  any ethnic conflict       turnout        Pancasila
                                                       pub. goods intensity exp./capita                  SNPK        Podes                      party 1st-3rd
                                                           (1)         (2)        (3)                      (4)        (5)             (6)            (7)

                   ethnic fractionalization                0.030           0.026           0.067         -0.062       -0.005        -0.001          -0.022
                                                          (0.011)         (0.015)         (0.033)        (0.028)      (0.004)       (0.006)         (0.032)
                   ethnic polarization                    -0.022           -0.025          -0.038         0.066        0.004        -0.003          -0.045
                                                          (0.011)         (0.014)         (0.036)        (0.028)      (0.004)       (0.007)         (0.031)

                   Number of Villages                       817             817            710             244          817           795             817
                   Dependent Variable Mean                 0.412           0.082          12.489          0.045        0.010         0.947           0.470
                   R2                                      0.227           0.109          0.124           0.316        0.028         0.092           0.106

     Notes: This table estimates the baseline village-level regression from column 3 of Table 3 for several outcomes measured from 2000–14: column (1) an index taking the
     mean of five binary indicators for whether the village has a given village-provided public good, including provision of safe drinking water, garbage collection, public
     toilet facilities, 4-wheel road access, and streetlights on the main road as reported in the 2002 Podes; (2) the share of village area covered with any nighttime lights in
47




     2010; (3) the log of mean village-level household expenditures per capita averaged across all available rounds of the National Socioceconomic Survey (Susenas) from
     2000 to 2012, which covers a subset of Transmigration villages in at least one of those years; (4) a binary indicator for any ethnic conflict in the village from 2000 to
     2014 as reported in the SNPK violence database, which only covers a subset of Indonesian provinces; (5) a binary indicator for any ethnic conflict in the village in 2002,
     2005, 2008, 2011, or 2014 as reported by the village head in the Podes data from those years; (6) the share of the voting-age population that voted in the first democratic
     election in 1999 as reported in Podes 1999; (7) a binary indicator for whether the parties finishing in the top 3 in terms of vote shares in the 1999 national legislative
     election adhered to a platform based on the inclusive, nationalist ideology of the Indonesian state known as Pancasila. For measure (3), given the arbitrary sampling
     variation across Susenas rounds, some Transmigration villages are covered more than once while others are never covered across these 15 years. The sample in column
     6 is slightly smaller than in column 7 because the measures come from different rounds of Podes in 1999 and 2002, respectively, and the former introduced difficulties
     merging to the baseline sample of Transmigration villages. The diversity indices are standardized and based on the 2000 Population Census as most outcomes are
     measured before 2010. Standard errors in all columns are clustered by district, of which there are 84.
