NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE WRONG KIND OF AI? ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND THE FUTURE
OF LABOR DEMAND
Daron Acemoglu
Pascual Restrepo
Working Paper 25682
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25682

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2019

We thank Chris Ackerman, David Autor, Erik Brynjolfsson, Stu Feldman, Mike Piore, Jim
Poterba and Hal Varian for useful comments. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from
Google, Microsoft, the Sloan Foundation, the Toulouse Network on Information Technology, the
Schmidt Sciences Foundation, the Smith Richardson Foundation, IBM, Accenture and the
National Science Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Daron Acemoglu and Pascual Restrepo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Wrong Kind of AI? Artificial Intelligence and the Future of Labor Demand
Daron Acemoglu and Pascual Restrepo
NBER Working Paper No. 25682
March 2019
JEL No. J23,J24
ABSTRACT
Artificial Intelligence is set to influence every aspect of our lives, not least the way production is
organized. AI, as a technology platform, can automate tasks previously performed by labor or
create new tasks and activities in which humans can be productively employed. Recent
technological change has been biased towards automation, with insufficient focus on creating
new tasks where labor can be productively employed. The consequences of this choice have been
stagnating labor demand, declining labor share in national income, rising inequality and lower
productivity growth. The current tendency is to develop AI in the direction of further automation,
but this might mean missing out on the promise of the "right" kind of AI with better economic
and social outcomes.

Daron Acemoglu
Department of Economics
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and CIFAR
and also NBER
daron@mit.edu
Pascual Restrepo
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Rd
Boston, MA 02215
and Cowles Foundation, Yale
pascual@bu.edu

Arti…cial Intelligence (AI) is one of the most promising technologies currently being developed and deployed. Broadly speaking, AI refers to the study and development of “intelligent
(machine) agents”, which are machines, softwares or algorithms that act intelligently by
recognizing and responding to their environment.1 There is a lot of excitement, some hype,
and a fair bit of apprehension about what AI will mean for our security, society and economy.
But a critical question has been largely overlooked: are we investing in the “right” type of
AI, the type with the greatest potential for raising productivity and generating broad-based
prosperity? We don’t have a de…nitive answer right now — nobody does. But this is the
right time to ask this question while we can still shape the direction of AI research and the
future of work.

AI As a Technology Platform
Human (or natural) intelligence comprises several di¤erent types of mental activities. These
include simple computation, data processing, pattern recognition, prediction, various types
of problem solving, judgment, creativity, and communication. Early AI, pioneered in the
1950s by researchers from computer science, psychology and economics, such as Marvin
Minsky, Seymour Papert, John McCarthy, Herbert Simon and Allen Newell, sought to develop
machine intelligence capable of performing all of these di¤erent types of mental activities.2
The goal was nothing short of creating truly intelligent machines. Herbert Simon and Allen
Newell, for example, claimed in 1958 “there are now in the world machines that think, that
learn and that create. Moreover, their ability to do these things is going to increase rapidly
until –in a visible future –the range of problems they can handle will be coextensive with
the range to which the human mind has been applied.”3
These ambitious goals were soon dashed. AI came back into fashion in the 1990s, but with
a di¤erent and more modest ambition: to replicate and then improve upon human intelligence
in pattern recognition and prediction (pre-AI computers were already better than humans
in computation and data processing). Many decision problems and activities we routinely
engage in can be viewed as examples of pattern recognition and prediction. These include
recognizing faces (from visual data), recognizing speech (from auditory data), recognizing
abstract patterns in data we are presented with, and making decisions on the basis of past
experience and current information. Though there are researchers working on “Arti…cial
General Intelligence”, much of the research and almost all commercial applications of AI are
in these more modest domains referred to as “Narrow AI”— even if the relevant applications
1

See Russell and Norvig (2009), Neapolitan and Jiang (2018) and Agarwal, Gans and Goldfarb (2018).
See Nilsson (2009) for the history of AI.
3
Forester (1985, p. 86).
2

1

are numerous and varied. The big breakthroughs and the renewed excitement in AI are
coming from advances in hardware and algorithms that enable the processing and analysis of
vast amounts of unstructured data (for example, speech data that cannot be represented in
the usual structured ways, such as in simple, Excel-like databases). Central to this renaissance
of AI have been methods of machine learning (which are the statistical techniques that enable
computers and algorithms to learn, predict and perform tasks from large amounts of data
without being explicitly programmed) and what is called “deep learning” (algorithms that
use multi-layered programs, such as neural nets, for improved machine learning, statistical
inference and optimization).
Even if we focus on its narrow version, AI should be thought of as a technology platform
— there are many ways AI technology can be developed as a commercial or production
technology, with widely varying applications. To some degree, this is true of all clusters of
technologies, but it is more emphatically so for AI.4 To see this, contrast it with a related
but distinct new technology, robotics. Robotics often makes use of AI and other digital
technologies for processing data, but is distinguished from other digital technologies by its
focus on interacting with the physical world (moving around, transforming, rearranging or
joining objects). Industrial robots are already widespread in many manufacturing industries
and in some retail and wholesale establishments. But their economic use is quite speci…c,
and centers on automation of narrow tasks, that is, substituting machines for certain speci…c
activities and functions previously performed by humans.5

Implications of Technology for Work and Labor
How do new technologies impact the nature of production and work? Employment and
wages of di¤erent types of workers? The standard approach, both in popular discussions and
academic writings, presumes that any advance that increases productivity (value added per
worker) also tends to raise the demand for labor, and thus employment and wages. Of course,
technological progress might bene…t workers with di¤erent skills unequally and productivity
improvements in one sector may lead to job loss in that sector. But even when there are
sectoral job losses, the standard narrative goes, other sectors will expand and contribute to
overall employment and wage growth.
This view is critically underpinned by the way in which the economic impact of new
4

Bessen et al. (2018) report that many commercial AI startups view their technology as capable of
“enhancing human capabilities”, while many others recognize that their technologies have a signi…cant
automation component.
5
See Ayres and Miller (1983), Groover et al. (1986), Graetz and Michaels (2015) and Acemoglu and
Restrepo (2018b).

2

technology is conceptualized — as enabling labor to become more productive in pretty much
all of the activities and tasks that it performs. Yet, this not only lacks descriptive realism
(what technology makes labor uniformly more productive in everything?), but may paint
an excessively rosy picture of the implications of new technologies. Indeed, in such a world
Luddites’concerns about the disruptive and job displacing implications of technology would
be misplaced, and they would have smashed all of those machines in vain.
The reality of technological change is rather di¤erent. Many new technologies — those we
call automation technologies — do not increase labor’s productivity, but are explicitly aimed
at replacing it by substituting cheaper capital (machines) in a range of tasks performed by
humans.6 As a result, automation technologies always reduce the labor’s share in value
added (because they increase productivity by more than wages and employment). They may
also reduce overall labor demand because they displace workers from the tasks they were
previously performing. There are countervailing e¤ects to be sure: some of the productivity
gains may translate into greater demand for labor in non-automated tasks and in other
sectors. But even with these e¤ects factored in, automation always reduces the labor share
in value added.
This discussion clari…es an important point: in an age of rapid automation, labor’s relative
standing will deteriorate and workers will be particularly badly a¤ected if new technologies
are not raising productivity su¢ ciently — if these new technologies are not great but just
“so-so”(just good enough to be adopted but not so much more productive than the labor they
are replacing). With so-so automation technologies, labor demand declines: the displacement
is there, while powerful productivity gains contributing to labor demand are missing.
Is this far-fetched? Not really. We have previously studied the implications of one of
the most important automation technologies, industrial robots.7 Industrial robots are not
technologies aimed at increasing labor’s productivity but are designed to automate tasks
that were previously performed by production workers on the factory ‡oor. The evidence is
fairly clear that industries where more industrial robots are introduced experience declines
in labor demand (especially for production workers) and sizable falls in their labor share.
More importantly, local labor markets more exposed to industrial robots, such as Detroit
MI or De…ance OH, have signi…cantly lower employment and wage growth. Furthermore,
the declines in wages and employment fell much more heavily on workers from the lower
half of the earnings distribution and those with less than a college degree, thus exacerbating
inequality. All of this is despite the fact that industry-level data also suggest productivity
6

This approach is developed in Zeira (1998), Autor, Levy and Murnane (2003), Acemoglu and Autor
(2011) and Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018a,b, 2019).
7
Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018b).

3

gains from robots.
Automation is not a recent phenomenon. Many important breakthroughs in the history of
technology have been centered around automation. Most notably, the spectacular advances in
the early stages of the Industrial Revolution in Britain were aimed at automating weaving and
spinning, and the focus then shifted to the factory ‡oors of other industries.8 Other prominent
examples of automation are the mechanization of agriculture and the interchangeable parts
system of American manufacturing.
But if automation tends to reduce the labor share and has mixed e¤ects on labor demand,
why did the labor share remain roughly constant and productivity growth go hand-in-hand
with commensurate wage growth over the last two centuries? To understand this relationship,
we need to recognize di¤erent types of technological advances contributing to productivity
growth. Historically, as automation technologies were being introduced, other technological
advances simultaneously enabled the creation of new tasks in which labor had a competitive
advantage. This generated new activities for labor — tasks in which human labor could be
reinstated into the production process — and robustly contributed to productivity growth
as new tasks improved the division of labor.9 The episode of agricultural mechanization,
which started in the second half of the 19th century, vividly illustrates this pattern. Though
mechanization reduced the labor share and employment in agriculture, overall labor demand
rose because a range of new tasks were introduced in both manufacturing and services. In fact,
this period witnessed not only the rise of clerical occupations but a range of more specialized
blue-collar and white-collar jobs that increased productivity, the demand for labor and the
labor share in manufacturing and services.10 Occupations featuring new tasks have been at
the forefront of employment growth in the US economy in the postwar era as well.11
This perspective then suggests a di¤erent reinterpretation of the history of technology and
a di¤erent way of thinking about the future of work — as a race between automation and new,
labor-intensive tasks. Labor demand has not increased steadily over the last two centuries
because of technologies that have made labor more productive in everything. Rather, many
new technologies have sought to eliminate labor from tasks in which it previously specialized.
All the same, labor has bene…ted from advances in technology, because other technologies
have simultaneously enabled the introduction of new labor-intensive tasks. These new tasks
have done more than just reinstate labor as a central input into the production process; they
have also played a vital role in productivity growth.
8

See Mantoux (1927) and Mokyr (1989).
Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018a).
10
Rasmussen (1982), Olmstead and Rhode (2001), Acemoglu and Restrepo (2019).
11
Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018a).
9

4

Viewed from this perspective, employment and wage growth have been disappointing
over the last two decades partly because productivity growth has been weak, and even more
importantly because new tasks have failed to materialize.12 The future of work will be much
brighter if we can mobilize more of the technologies that increase labor demand and ensure
vigorous productivity growth.

Varieties of AI
This perspective provides a new way of thinking about the economic opportunities and challenges posed by AI. Most AI researchers and economists studying its consequences view it
as a way of automating yet more tasks. No doubt, AI has this capability, and most of its
applications to date have been of this mold — e.g., image recognition, speech recognition,
translation, accounting, recommendation systems, and customer support. But we do not
need to accept that this as the primary way that AI can be and indeed ought to be used.
First, if all we do is continue down the path of automation, with no counterbalancing
innovations to generate new tasks, the implications for labor are depressing. It will not be
the end of work anytime soon,13 but the trend towards lower labor share and anemic growth in
labor demand will continue — with potentially disastrous consequences for income inequality
and social cohesion.
Second, as we go deeper and deeper into AI-based automation, we are moving into areas
in which human labor is quite good (for example think of image and speech recognition
or hand-eye coordination), and machine productivity, at least to start with, is not always
impressive, to say the least. Automation technologies aimed at substituting machines for
humans in these tasks are thus likely to be of the so-so kind. As a result, we cannot even
count on powerful productivity gains to increase our living standards and contribute to labor
demand.
But it doesn’t have to be this way. Since AI is not just a narrow set of technologies with
speci…c, pre-determined applications and functionalities but a technology platform, it can
be deployed for much more than automation; it can be used to restructure the production
process in a way that creates many new, high-productivity tasks for labor. If this type of
“reinstating AI”is a possibility, there would be potentially large societal gains both in terms
of improved productivity and greater labor demand (which will not only create more inclusive
growth but also avoid the social problems created by joblessness and wage declines).
Consider a few examples of how AI applications can create new tasks for labor.
12
13

Acemoglu and Restrepo (2019).
See Dreyfus (1992) and Autor (2015).

5

Education: Education is one of the areas with the least AI penetration. That may
be partly because automation is not an attractive or even feasible option for most of
the core tasks in education. But using AI to create new tasks would be a di¤erent
way of productively deploying this new technology platform. Consider, for example,
classroom teaching. This has not changed for over 200 years. A teacher teaches to
the whole class, even if he or she or an aide may occasionally engage in one-on-one
instruction or provide help for some subset of students. There is evidence, however,
suggesting that many students have di¤erent “learning styles”, and what works for one
student may not work for another, and even what works for one student in one subject
will not work for him or her in every subject.14
At the moment, individualized teaching, targeted and adapted to each student or for
small subsets of students, is impossible, and not just because the resources in terms of
teacher time and skill are lacking. It is mostly because nobody has the information (and
cannot easily acquire and process the information) to determine a student’s optimal
learning style in a speci…c subject or topic. AI can change this. AI software can be
designed to collect and process in real time data about the speci…c reactions, di¢ culties
and successes students have in di¤erent subject areas, especially when taught in di¤erent
styles, and then make recommendations for improved individualized teaching. The
potential improvements in terms of educational productivity could be quite large (we
just don’t know). Societal bene…ts could exceed these direct bene…ts as AI-powered
teaching methods may do better in terms of providing students with skills that will be
more valued in future labor markets (rather than the more backward-looking curricula
and teaching emphasis currently prevailing in schools). Developing and deploying such
technologies would also increase the demand for human labor in teaching — we would
need more teachers with diverse skills to do the individualized teaching, even with help
from AI software and other technologies.
Healthcare: The situation in healthcare is similar. Though there has been more e¤ort
to introduce digital technologies into healthcare, the focus has not been on creating
tasks in which humans can be productively employed (in fact, some of the uses of AI,
for example in radiology, are very much in the mold of automation). AI applications
that collect and analyze information can signi…cantly empower nurses, technicians and
other healthcare providers to o¤er a wider range of services and more real-time health
advice, diagnosis and treatment. The bene…ts in terms of greater labor demand and
productivity are very similar to the education case.
14

See Allport (1937), Cassidy (2004) Honey and Mumford (1986) and Ramirez and Casteneda (1974).

6

Augmented reality: The third area in which the use of AI can signi…cantly change the
production process in a way that may be favorable to labor is through augmented and
virtual reality technologies in manufacturing. Most advanced manufacturing technologies of the last three decades have focused on automation. But companies such as
Amazon and Tesla have discovered that automating all factory-‡oor and manual tasks
is not economically rational, because some tasks are still more productively performed
by humans. One di¢ culty facing companies introducing industrial robots, however, is
that these new technologies do not necessarily integrate well with humans for at least
two reasons. First, most robotics technology is cordoned o¤ from workers because of
safety concerns. Second, human work may not mesh with the degree of precision required by robotics technology. Augmented reality technologies — which use interactive
interfaces in order to increase the ability of humans to perceive, monitor and control
objects — might enable workers to work alongside machines and perform high precision
production and integrated design tasks. This will not just help workers keep some of
the tasks that might have otherwise been automated; it could also create new tasks
in which humans, augmented by digital technology and sensors, can be employed and
contribute to productivity.15
Notably, the examples of new tasks mentioned above go well beyond what are sometimes
emphasized as “enablers” of AI — human tasks involved in training and monitoring new
machines as they automate what the rest of us do. This is critical; work in just enabling
AI is unlikely to generate su¢ cient new tasks and demand for human labor to undergird
broad-based prosperity.

Why the Wrong Kind of AI?
If there are potentially productive and pro…table uses of AI beyond simple automation, can
we count on market forces and innovation by existing companies to take us there? Is there
any reason to worry that AI applications with the promise of reinstating human labor will
not be exploited and resources will continue to pour instead into the wrong kind of AI?
Economists tend to place great trust in the market’s ability to allocate resources in the
most e¢ cient way. But most experts recognize that the market’s star doesn’t shine as brightly
when it comes to innovation. There are several reasons for market failures in innovation in
general, as well as some speci…c reasons that are important in the context of AI.
15

See Ong and Nee (2013) and https://www.ge.com/reports/game-augmented-reality-helping-factoryworkers-become-productive/).

7

Innovation creates externalities — not just the innovator, but the workers that use
the new technology, the …rms that adopt it, and most importantly other …rms and
researchers building on it in the future will bene…t from it. Markets do not do a good
job in the presence of such externalities.
Markets struggle when there are alternative, competing technological paradigms. When
one paradigm is ahead of the other, both researchers and companies tend to follow
that paradigm, even if an alternative could be more productive. Moreover, in such
a situation, once the wrong paradigm pulls ahead, it may be very di¢ cult to reverse
this trend and bene…t from the possibilities o¤ered by the alternative paradigm. To
the extent that di¤erent approaches to AI constitute alternative, competing paradigms,
our trust in the market mechanism getting it right should be even lower.16
To correct market failures in innovation, the US government has historically used publicprivate partnerships to encourage socially bene…cial research. It has played an important role in many leading technologies, including the Internet, sensors, pharmaceuticals,
biotech and nanotechnology.17 But more recently, the US government has been more
frugal in its support for research and more timid in its determination to steer the direction of technological change. Part of this shift is due to the reduction in resources
devoted to government support of innovation and the increasingly dominant role of
the private sector in setting the agenda in high-tech areas (can government o¢ cials
and researchers meaningfully in‡uence the direction of inventive activity in Silicon Valley?). This shift will further discourage research related to future promise (that is not
immediately re‡ected in pro…tability) and other social objectives (such as employment
creation).
Innovation does not just respond to economic incentives. Several noneconomic rewards
a¤ect what types of technologies attract the attention and imagination of researchers.
It is possible that the ecosystem around the most creative clusters in the United States,
such as Silicon Valley, excessively rewards automation and pays insu¢ cient attention to
other uses of frontier technologies. This may be partly because of the values and interests of leading researchers (consider for example the ethos of companies like Tesla that
have ceaselessly tried to automate everything). It is also partly because the prevailing
business model and vision of the large tech companies, which are the source of most
of the resources going into AI, have focused on automation and removing the (fallible)
16
17

See Nelson and Winter (1977), Dosi (1982) and Acemoglu (2012).
Mazzucato (2015).

8

human element from the production process. This last consideration may have become
even more critical as the vast resources of several leading companies are pouring into
academia and shaping the teaching and research missions of leading universities. It is
then no surprise that the best minds in the current generation are gravitating towards
computer science, AI and machine learning, but with a heavy emphasis on automation. An ecosystem that is biased would become much more sti‡ing for the direction
of technological change when it becomes all-encompassing.
There are also additional factors that may have distorted choices over what types of AI
applications to develop. The …rst one is that if employment creation has a social value
beyond what is in the GDP statistics (for example, because employed people are happier
and become better citizens, or because faster growth in labor demand improves income
inequality), this social value will be ignored by the market. The second is related
to the tax policies adopted in the United States and other Western nations, which
subsidize capital and investment while taxing employment. This makes using machines
instead of labor more pro…table, and these pro…ts encourage not just automation but
also automation research. Finally, and complementing these factors, to the extent that
…rms take into account the cost of labor (the wage rate), which tends to be higher than
the social opportunity cost of labor because of imperfections in the labor market, they
will have additional incentives for adopting and developing automation technologies
beyond what is socially optimal.18
Another set of factors blocking the path of novel AI applications reinstating labor is
that these new technologies might need critical complementary inputs that are not
forthcoming. Take the example of education mentioned above. It is not only that
developing AI to create new labor-intensive tasks in education is not viewed the frontier
or one of the “cool”areas of research, say compared to facial recognition. It is also that
complementary skills and resources to make this type of reinstating AI pro…table may
be missing completely. Educational applications of AI would necessitate new, more
‡exible skills from teachers (beyond what is available and what is being invested in
now), and they would need additional resources to hire more teachers to work with these
new AI technologies (after all, that is the point of the new technology, to create new
tasks and additional demand for teachers). In the case of healthcare, limited resources
are not the problem (the share of national income devoted to health is continuing to
grow), but the requisite complementary changes are likely to be organizational. In fact,
18

Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018a).

9

highlighting other barriers to the use of new technologies to create new tasks, the way
that hospitals, insurance companies and the whole medical profession, as represented by
the American Medical Association, is organized is likely to be in the way. If empowering,
and increasing the productivity of, nurses and technicians is perceived to reduce the
demand for the services of doctors or challenge the current business model of hospitals,
it will be strenuously resisted.
All in all, even though we currently lack de…nitive evidence that research and corporate
resources today are being directed towards the “wrong”kind of AI, the market for innovation
gives no compelling reason to expect an e¢ cient balance between di¤erent types of AI. If at
this critical juncture insu¢ cient attention is devoted to inventing and creating demand for,
rather than just replacing, labor, that would be the “wrong”kind of AI from the social and
economic point of view. Rather than undergirding productivity growth, employment and
shared prosperity, rampant automation would contribute to anemic growth and inequality.

Conclusion
Arti…cial Intelligence is set to in‡uence every aspect of our lives, not least the way production
is organized in modern economies. But we shouldn’t assume that, left to its own devices, the
right types of AI will be developed and implemented. Though many today worry about the
security risks and other unforeseen (often non-economic) consequences of AI, we have argued
that there are prima facie reasons for worrying about the wrong kind of AI from an economic
point of view becoming all the rage and the basis of future technological development. The
considerable promise of AI implies that we need to devote care and serious thought to its
implications and to the question of how best to develop this promising technology platform
— before it is too late.

10

References
Acemoglu, Daron (2002) “Technical Change, Inequality, and The Labor Market”,
Journal of Economic Literature, 40(1): 7–72.
Acemoglu, Daron (2012) “Diversity and Technological Progress”, The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity Revisited, University of Chicago Press, pp. 319–360.
Acemoglu, Daron and David Autor (2011) “Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implications for Employment and Earnings”, Handbook of Labor Economics, 4: 1043–1171.
Acemoglu, Daron and Pascual Restrepo (2018a) “The Race Between Man and
Machine: Implications of Technology for Growth, Factor Shares and Employment”, American
Economic Review, 108(6): 1488–1542.
Acemoglu, Daron and Pascual Restrepo (2018b) “Robots and Jobs: Evidence from
US Labor Markets”, NBER Working Paper No. 23285.
Acemoglu, Daron and Pascual Restrepo (2018c) “Modeling Automation”, NBER
Working Paper No. 24321.
Acemoglu, Daron and Pascual Restrepo (2018d) “Arti…cial Intelligence, Automation and Work ”, NBER Working Paper No. 24196.
Acemoglu, Daron and Pascual Restrepo (2019) “Automation and New Tasks: How
Technology Changes Labor Demand”, forthcoming Journal of Economic Perspectives.
Agarwal, Ajay, Joshua S. Gans and Avi Goldfarb (2018) Prediction Machines:
The Simple Economics of Arti…cial Intelligence, Harvard Business Review Press, Cambridge.
Allport, Gordon W. (1937) Personality: A Psychological Interpretation, New York:
Holt and Co.
Autor, David H. (2015) “Why Are There Still So Many Jobs? The History and Future
of Workplace Automation”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(3): 3–30.
Autor, David H., Frank Levy and Richard J. Murnane (2003) “The Skill Content of Recent Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration", The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 118(4): 1279–1333.
Ayres, Robert U. and Steven M. Miller (1983) Robots: Applications and Social
Implications, Ballinger Publishing Co.
Bessen, James E., Stephen M. Impink, Lydia Reichensperger and Robert
Seamans (2018) “The Business of AI Startups” BU School of Law, Law & Economics
Series Paper No. 18-28, November 2018.
Cassidy, Simon (2004) “Learning Styles: An Overview of Theories, Models, and Measures”, Educational Psychology, 24(4): 419–444.
Daugherty, Paul and H. James Wilson (2018) Human + Machine: Reimagining
11

Work in the Age of AI, Harvard Business Review Press.
Dreyfus, Hubert L. (1992) What Computers Still Can’t Do: A Critique of Arti…cial
Reason, MIT Press.
Dosi, Giovanni (1982) “Technology Paradigms and Technological Trajectories,” Research Policy, 11(3): 147–162.
Forester, Tom (1985) The Information Technology Revolution, MIT Press, Cambridge.
Graetz, Georg and Guy Michaels (2018) “Robots at Work”, The Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
Groover, Mikell P., Mitchell Weiss, Roger N. Nagel, and Nicholas G. Odrey
(1986) Industrial Robotics: Technology, Programming, and Applications, McGraw-Hill.
Honey, Peter and Alan Mumford (1986) The Manual of Learning Styles, Peter
Honey Associates.
Kellner, Tomas (2018) “Game On: Augmented Reality Is Helping Factory Workers Become More Productive,”https://www.ge.com/reports/game-augmented-reality-helpingfactory-workers-become-productive/, April 19, 2018.
Mantoux, Paul (1927) The Industrial Revolution in the Eighteenth Century: An Outline of the Beginnings of the Modern Factory System in England, Harcourt, Brace & Co.
Mazzucato, Mariana (2015) The Entrepreneurial State, Anthem Press.
Mokyr, Joel (1989) Industrial Robotics: Technology, Programming, and Applications,
Rowman & Little…eld Publishers.
Neapolitan, Richard E. and Xia Jiang (2018) Arti…cial Intelligence: With an Introduction to Machine Learning, Chapman and Hall/CRC, Second Edition.
Nelson, Richard and Sidney, Winter (1977)“In search of useful theory of innovation”, Research Policy, 6(1): 36–76.
Nilsson, Nils J. (2009) The Quest for Arti…cial Intelligence: A History of Ideas and
Achievements, Cambridge University Press.
Olmstead, Alan and Paul Rhode (2001) “Reshaping the Landscape: The Impact
and Di¤usion of the Tractor in American Agriculture, 1910-1960,”The Journal of Economic
History 61(3): 663–98.
Ong, Soh K. and Andrew Y.C., Nee (2013) Virtual and Augmented Reality Applications in Manufacturing, Springer Science and Business Media.
Ramírez Manuel and Alfredo Castañeda, (1974) Cultural Democracy, Bicognitive
Development, and Education, Academic Press.
Rasmussen, Wayne (1982) “The Mechanization of Agriculture,”Scienti…c American,
247(3): 76–89.

12

Russell, Stuart J. and Peter Norvig (2009) Arti…cal Intelligence: A Modern Approach, Prentice Hall, Third Edition.
Zeira, Joseph (1998) “Workers, Machines, and Economic Growth,”Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 113(4): 1091–1117.

13

