NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AUTOMATION AND NEW TASKS:
HOW TECHNOLOGY DISPLACES AND REINSTATES LABOR
Daron Acemoglu
Pascual Restrepo
Working Paper 25684
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25684

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2019

Prepared for Journal of Economic Perspectives. We thank the editors Enrico Moretti, Gordon
Hanson, and Tim Taylor for their useful guidance and feedback. We also thank David Autor, Nils
Lehr, Ben Moll, and Anna Salomons for comments and suggestions. Giovanna Marcolongo and
Martina Uccioli provided outstanding research assistance, and Georg Graetz, Joachim Hubmer,
Christina Patterson and Gregory Wright generously shared their data and crosswalks with us. We
gratefully acknowledge financial support from Google, Microsoft, the Sloan Foundation, the
Toulouse Network on Information Technology, the Schmidt Sciences Foundation, the Smith
Richardson Foundation, IBM, Accenture, and the National Science Foundation. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Daron Acemoglu and Pascual Restrepo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Automation and New Tasks: How Technology Displaces and Reinstates Labor
Daron Acemoglu and Pascual Restrepo
NBER Working Paper No. 25684
March 2019
JEL No. J23,J24
ABSTRACT
We present a framework for understanding the effects of automation and other types of
technological changes on labor demand, and use it to interpret changes in US employment over
the recent past. At the center of our framework is the allocation of tasks to capital and labor—the
task content of production. Automation, which enables capital to replace labor in tasks it was
previously engaged in, shifts the task content of production against labor because of a
displacement effect. As a result, automation always reduces the labor share in value added and
may reduce labor demand even as it raises productivity. The effects of automation are
counterbalanced by the creation of new tasks in which labor has a comparative advantage. The
introduction of new tasks changes the task content of production in favor of labor because of a
reinstatement effect, and always raises the labor share and labor demand. We show how the role
of changes in the task content of production—due to automation and new tasks—can be inferred
from industry-level data. Our empirical decomposition suggests that the slower growth of
employment over the last three decades is accounted for by an acceleration in the displacement
effect, especially in manufacturing, a weaker reinstatement effect, and slower growth of
productivity than in previous decades.

Daron Acemoglu
Department of Economics
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and CIFAR
and also NBER
daron@mit.edu
Pascual Restrepo
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Rd
Boston, MA 02215
and Cowles Foundation, Yale
pascual@bu.edu

Introduction
The implications of technological change for employment and wages are a source of controversy. Some see the ongoing process of automation, as exemplified by computer numerical control machinery, industrial robots and artificial intelligence, as the harbinger
of widespread joblessness. Others reason that current automation, like previous waves of
technologies, will ultimately increase labor demand, and thus employment and wages.
This paper presents a task-based framework, building on Acemoglu and Restrepo
(2018a, 2018b) as well as Acemoglu and Autor (2011), Autor, Levy and Murnane (2003)
and Zeira (1998), for thinking through the implications of technology for labor demand
and productivity. Production requires tasks which are allocated to capital or labor. New
technologies not only increase the productivity of capital and labor at tasks they currently
perform, but also impact the allocation of tasks to these factors of production—what we
call the task content of production. Shifts in the task content of production can have major
effects for how labor demand changes as well as for productivity.
Automation corresponds to the development and adoption of new technologies that
enable capital to be substituted for labor in a range of tasks. Automation changes the
task content of production adversely for labor because of a displacement effect—as capital
takes over tasks previously performed by labor. The displacement effect implies that automation reduces the labor share of value added. Historical examples of automation are
aplenty. Many early innovations of the Industrial Revolution automated tasks performed
by artisans in spinning and weaving (Mantoux 1928), which led to widespread displacement, triggering the Luddite riots (Mokyr 1990). The mechanization of agriculture, which
picked up speed with horse-powered reapers, harvesters and plows in the second half of
the 19th century and with tractors and combine harvesters in the 20th century, displaced
agricultural workers in large numbers (Rasmussen 1982; Olmstead and Rhode 2001). Today too we are witnessing a period of rapid automation. The jobs of production workers
are being disrupted with the rise of industrial robots and other automated machinery
(Graetz and Michaels 2018; Acemoglu and Restrepo 2018b), while white-collar workers
in accounting, sales, logistics, trading and some managerial occupations are seeing some
of the tasks they used to perform being replaced by specialized software and artificial
intelligence.
By allowing a more flexible allocation of tasks to factors, automation technology also
increases productivity, and via this channel, which we call the productivity effect, it contributes to the demand for labor in non-automated tasks. The net impact of automation
on labor demand thus depends on how the displacement and productivity effects weigh
against each other.
The history of technology is not only about the displacement of human labor by au2

tomation technologies. If it were, we would be confined to a shrinking set of old tasks and
jobs, with a steadily declining labor share in national income. Instead, the displacement
effect of automation has been counterbalanced by technologies that create new tasks in
which labor has a comparative advantage. Such new tasks generate not only a positive
productivity effect, but also a reinstatement effect—they reinstate labor into a broader
range of tasks and thus change the task content of production in favor of labor.1 The
reinstatement effect is the polar opposite of the displacement effect and directly increases
the labor share as well as labor demand.
History is also replete with examples of the creation of new tasks and the reinstatement
effect. In the 19th century, as automation of some tasks was ongoing, other technological
developments generated employment opportunities in new occupations. These included
jobs for line workers, engineers, machinists, repairmen, conductors, managers, and financiers (Chandler 1977; Mokyr 1990). New occupations and jobs in new industries also
played a pivotal role in generating labor demand during the decades of rapid agricultural
mechanization in the United Staes, especially in factories (Rasmussen 1982; Olmsted and
Rhode 2001) and in clerical occupations both in services and manufacturing (Goldin and
Katz 2007; Michaels 2007). Although software and computers have replaced labor in
some white-collar tasks, they have simultaneously created several new tasks. These include tasks related to programming, design and maintenance of high tech equipment, such
as software and app development, database design and analysis, and computer security
related tasks, as well as tasks related to more specialized functions in existing occupations,
including administrative assistants, analysts for loan applications and medical equipment
technicians (see Lin, 2011). Using data from Lin (2011), Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018a)
show that about half of employment growth over 1980-2015 took place in occupations
where job titles or tasks performed by workers changed.
Our conceptual framework offers several lessons. First, the presumption that all technologies increase (aggregate) labor demand simply because they raise productivity is
wrong. Some automation technologies may in fact reduce labor demand because they
bring sizable displacement effects but modest productivity gains (especially when substituted workers were cheap to begin with and the automated technology is only marginally
better than them). Second, because of the displacement effect, we should not expect automation to create wage increases commensurate with productivity growth. In fact, as
we noted already, automation by itself always reduces the labor share in industry value
added and tends to reduce the overall labor share in the economy (meaning that it leads
to slower wage growth than productivity growth). The reason why we have had rapid
1

There are also new tasks in which capital has a comparative advantage (e.g., automated detection).
Throughout our focus is on “labor-intensive” new tasks, and for brevity, we will simply refer to these as
“new tasks”.

3

wage growth and stable labor shares in the past is a consequence of other technological
changes that generated new tasks for labor and counterbalanced the effects of automation
on the task content of production. Some technologies displaced labor from automated
tasks while others reinstated labor into new ones. On net, labor retained a key role in
production. By the same token, our framework suggests that the future of work depends
on the mixture of new technologies and how these change the task content of production.
In the second part of the paper, we use our framework to study the evolution of labor
demand in the United States since World War II and explain how industry data can
be used to infer the behavior of the task content of production and the displacement and
reinstatement effects. We start by showing that there has been a slowdown in the growth of
labor demand over the last three decades and an almost complete stagnation over the last
two. We establish this by studying the evolution of the economy-wide wage bill, which
combines information on average wages and total employment and is thus informative
about changes in overall labor demand. We then use industry data to decompose changes
in the economy-wide wage bill into productivity, composition and substitution effects, and
changes in the task content of production. All technologies create productivity effects
that contribute to labor demand. The composition effect arises from the reallocation of
activity across sectors with different labor intensities. The substitution effect captures the
substitution between labor- and capital-intensive tasks within an industry in response to a
change in task prices (for instance, caused by factor-augmenting technologies making labor
or capital more productive at tasks they currently perform). We estimate changes in the
task content of production from residual changes in industry-level labor shares (beyond
what can be explained by substitution effects). We further decompose changes in the task
content of production into displacement effects caused by automation and reinstatement
effects driven by new tasks. We provide external support for this decomposition by relating
estimated changes in the task content of production to a battery of measures of automation
and introduction of new tasks across sectors.
Our decomposition suggests that the evolution of the US wage bill, especially over
the last 20 years, cannot be understood without factoring in changes in the task content
of production. In particular, we find that the sharp slowdown of US wage bill growth
over the last three decades is a consequence of weaker-than usual-productivity growth and
significant shifts in the task content of production against labor. By decomposing the
change in the task content of production, we estimate stronger displacement effects and
considerably weaker reinstatement effects during the last 30 years than the decades before.
These patterns hint at an acceleration of automation and a deceleration in the creation of
new tasks. They also raise the question of why productivity growth has been so anemic
while automation has accelerated during recent years. We finally use our framework to

4

shed light on this critical question.
An online Appendix available with this paper at http://jep.org contains a more detailed exposition of our framework, proofs, additional empirical results, and details on the
construction of our data.

Conceptual Framework
Production requires the completion of a range of tasks. The production of a shirt, for
example, starts with a design, then requires the completion of a variety of production
tasks, such as the extraction of fibers, spinning them to produce yarn, weaving, knitting,
dyeing, and processing, as well as additional non-production tasks, including accounting,
marketing, transportation, and sales. Each one of these tasks can be performed by human
labor or by capital (including both machines and software). The allocation of tasks to
factors determines the task content of production.
Automation enables some of the tasks previously performed by labor to be produced
by capital. As a recent example, advances in robotics technologies since the 1980s have
allowed firms to automate a wide range of production tasks in manufacturing, such as
machining, welding, painting, and assembling, that were performed manually (Ayres and
Miller 1983; Groover et al. 1986; Acemoglu and Restrepo 2018b). The set of tasks involved
in producing a product is not constant over time, and the introduction of new tasks can
be a major source of labor demand as well as productivity. In textiles, examples of new
labor-intensive tasks include computerized designs, new methods of market research and
various managerial activities for better targeting of demand and cost-saving. By changing
the allocation of tasks to factors, both automation and the introduction of new tasks
impact the task content of production.
Tasks are thus the fundamental unit of production, and the factors of production
contribute to output by performing these tasks. In contrast, the canonical approach

in economics bypasses tasks and directly posits a production function of the form Y =
F (AK K, AL L), which additionally imposes that all technological change takes a factor-

augmenting form. There are three related reasons we prefer our conceptual framework.
First, the canonical approach lacks descriptive realism. Advances in robotics, for example,
do not make capital or labor more productive, but expand the set of tasks that can be
produced by capital. Second, capital-augmenting technological change (an increase in
AK ) or labor-augmenting technological change (an increase in AL ) corresponds to the
relevant factor becoming uniformly more productive in all tasks which, we will show,
ignores potentially important changes in the task content of production. Third and most
importantly, we will also see that the quantitative and qualitative implications of factoraugmenting technological advances are different from those of technologies that change
5

the task content of production. Focusing just on factor-augmenting technologies can force
us into misleading conclusions.

Tasks and Production
We present our task-based framework by first describing the production process in a
single-sector economy.2 Suppose that production combines the output of a range of tasks,

normalized to lie between N − 1 and N .3 Tasks can be produced using capital or labor,

as illustrated in Figure 1. Tasks with z > I are not automated, and can only be produced

with labor, which has a wage rate W . Tasks z ≤ I are automated and can be produced
with capital, which has a rental rate R, as well as labor. We assume that labor has
both a comparative and an absolute advantage in higher indexed tasks. An increase in
I therefore represents the introduction of an automation technology, or automation for
short. An increase in N , on the other hand, corresponds to the introduction of new laborintensive tasks or new tasks for short. In addition to automation (I) and introduction of
new tasks (N ), the state of technology for this sector depends on AL (labor-augmenting
technology) and AK (capital-augmenting technology), which increase the productivities
of these factors in all tasks.
Let us assume that it is cost-minimizing for firms to use capital in all tasks that are

automated (all z ≤ I) and to adopt all new tasks immediately. This implies an allocation

of tasks to factors as summarized in Figure 1, which also shows how automation and new
tasks impact this allocation.
Following the same steps as in Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018a), output can be represented as a constant elasticity of substitution (CES) function of capital and labor,
Y = Π(I, N ) (Γ(I, N ) σ (AL L)
1

(1)

σ−1
σ

+ (1 − Γ(I, N )) σ (AK K)
1

σ−1
σ

)

σ
σ−1

.

As in the canonical model, we have production as a function of the quantities of labor
and capital, L and K. The labor-augmenting technology term AL and capital augmenting
term AK increase the productivity of labor and capital in all tasks they currently produce.
The elasticity of substitution between tasks, σ, determines how easy it is to substitute one
task for another, and is also the (derived) elasticity of substitution between capital and
labor.
2

This also describes the production process in a sector situated in a multi-sector economy, with the
only difference that in that case changes in technology impact relative prices and induce reallocation of
capital and labor across sectors. We discuss these relative price and reallocation effects below.
σ
σ−1

Namely, the production function takes the form Y = (∫N−1 Y (z) σ )
, where Y (z) is the output of
task z. The assumption that tasks lie between N − 1 and N is adopted to simplify the exposition. The
online Appendix presents more detail on underlying assumptions and on derivations of results that follow
throughout the discussion. As one example, nothing major changes if we instead allow tasks to lie on the
interval between 0 and N .
N

3

6

σ−1

The crucial difference from the canonical model is that the share parameters of this

CES depend on automation and new tasks. The share parameter for labor, Γ(I, N ), is

the (labor) task content of production, which represents the share of tasks performed by
labor relative to capital (adjusted for differences in labor and capital productivity across

these tasks). Conversely, 1 − Γ(I, N ) is the (capital) task content of production. Hence,

an increase in Γ(I, N ) shifts the task content of production in favor of labor and against

capital. In the special case where σ = 1, Γ(I, N ) = N − I. More generally, Γ(I, N ) is
always increasing in N and decreasing in I. This, in particular, implies that automation

(greater I) shifts the task content of production against labor because it entails capital
taking over tasks previously performed by labor. In contrast, new (labor-intensive) tasks
shift the task content of production in favor of labor.4 Finally, automation and new tasks
not only change the task content of production but also generate productivity gains by
allowing the allocation of (some) tasks to cheaper factors. The term Π(I, N ), which shows
up as TFP, represents these productivity gains.

The labor share, given by wage bill (W L) divided by value added (Y ), can be derived
as
(2)

sL =

1

1−σ .

1 − Γ(I, N ) AL R
(
)
1+
Γ(I, N )
W AK

This expression, which will be used extensively in the rest of the paper, clarifies the two
distinct forces shaping the labor share (in an industry or the entire economy). As it is
standard, the labor share depends on the ratio of effective factor prices,

W
AL

and

R
.
AK

Intuitively, as effective wages rise relative to effective rental rates of capital, the price of
tasks produced by labor increases relative to the price of tasks produced by capital, and
this generates a substitution effect across tasks. This is the only force influencing the labor
share in the canonical model. Its magnitude and size depends on whether σ is greater

than or less than 1. For example, when tasks are complements (σ < 1), an increase in the

effective wage raises the cost share of tasks produced by labor. The opposite happens when
σ > 1. When σ = 1, we obtain a Cobb Douglas production function and the substitution
effect vanishes, because the share of each task in value added is fixed.

More novel are the effects of the task content of production, Γ(I, N ), on the labor share.

4

Our exposition assumes that the task content of production does not depend on factor-augmenting
technologies or the supply of capital or labor. This will be the case when it is cost-minimizing for firms
in this sector to use capital in all tasks that are automated (all z ≤ I) and use all new tasks immediately.
The Appendix presents the assumption on technology and factor supplies that ensures this is the case.
When this assumption does not hold (for example, because of very large changes in factor-augmenting
technologies or factor supplies), the allocation of tasks to factors will change with factor supplies and
factor-augmenting technologies. Even in this case, the impact of factor-augmenting technologies on the
task content will be small relative to the productivity gains from these technologies.

7

Intuitively, as more tasks are allocated to capital instead of labor, the task content shifts
against labor and the labor share will decline unambiguously. Our model thus predicts
that, independently from the elasticity of substitution σ, automation (which changes the
task content of production against labor) will reduce the labor share in the industry, while
new tasks (which alter the task content of production in favor of labor) will increase it.

Technology and Labor Demand
We now investigate how technology changes labor demand. We focus on the behavior of
the wage bill, W L, which captures the total amount employers pay for labor. Recall that
Wage bill = Value added × Labor share.
Changes is the wage bill will translate into some combination of changes in employment
and wages, and the exact division will be affected by the elasticity of labor supply and labor
market imperfections, neither of which we model explicitly in this paper (for discussion,
see Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2018a, 2018b).
We use this relationship to think about how three classes of technologies impact labor
demand: automation, new tasks and factor-augmenting advances. Consider the introduction of new automation technologies (an increase in I in Figure 1). The impact on labor
demand can be represented as
Effect of automation on labor demand = Productivity effect + Displacement effect.
The productivity effect arises from the fact that automation increases value added, and this
raises the demand for labor from non-automated tasks. If nothing else happened, labor
demand of the industry would increase at the same rate as value added, and the labor
share would remain constant. However, automation also generates a displacement effect—
it displaces labor from the tasks previously allocated to it—which shifts the task content
of production against labor and always reduces the labor share. Automation therefore
increases the size of the pie, but labor gets a smaller slice. There is no guarantee that the
productivity effect is greater than the displacement effect; some automation technologies
can reduce labor demand even as they raise productivity.5
Hence, contrary to a common presumption in popular debates, it is not the “brilliant”
automation technologies that threaten employment and wages, but “so-so technologies”
5

Indeed, in Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018b) we show that industrial robots, a leading example of
automation technology, are associated with lower labor share and labor demand at the industry level and
lower labor demand in local labor markets exposed to this technology. This result is consistent with a
powerful displacement effect that has dominated the productivity effect from this class of automation
technologies.

8

that generate small productivity improvements. This is because the positive productivity
effect of so-so technologies is not sufficient to offset the decline in labor demand due to
displacement. To understand when this is likely to be the case, let us first consider where
the productivity gains from automation are coming from. These are not a consequence
of the fact that capital and labor are becoming more productive in the tasks they are
performing, but follow from the ability of firms to use cheaper capital in tasks previously
performed by labor. The productivity effect of automation is therefore proportional to
cost-savings obtained from such substitution. The greater is the productivity of labor in
tasks being automated relative to its wage and the smaller is the productivity of capital in
these tasks relative to the rental rate of capital, the more limited the productivity gains
from automation will be. Examples of so-so technologies include automated customer
service, which has displaced human service representatives but is generally deemed to be
low-quality and thus unlikely to have generated large productivity gains. They may also
include several of the applications of artificial intelligence technology to tasks that are
currently challenging for machines.
Different technologies are accompanied by productivity effects of varying magnitudes,
and hence, we cannot presume that one set of automation technologies will impact labor
demand in the same way as others. Likewise, because the productivity gains of automation
depend on the wage, the net impact of automation on labor demand will depend on the
broader labor market context. When wages are high and labor is scarce, automation will
generate a strong productivity effect and will tend to raise labor demand. When wages
are low and labor is abundant, automation will bring modest productivity benefits and
could end up reducing labor demand. This observation might explain why automation
technologies adopted in response to the scarcity of (middle-aged) production workers in
countries where the labor force is aging rapidly, such as Germany, Japan and South Korea,
appear to have more positive effects than in the United States (on cross-country patterns,
see Acemoglu and Restrepo 2018e; on the effect of robots in the US, see Acemoglu and
Restrepo, 2018b, and in Germany, see Dauth et al. 2018). It also suggests a reinterpretation of the famous Habakkuk hypothesis that the faster growth of the 19th-century US
economy compared to Britain was due to its relative scarcity of labor (Habakkuk, 1962;
see also Allen, 2009, for a similar argument in the context of the British Industrial Revolution). Labor scarcity encourages automation and the high wages it causes help explain
why this automation process led to rapid productivity and further wage growth.
Consider next the effect of the introduction of new tasks on the wage bill, which is
captured by an increase in N in our framework. This expands the set of tasks in which
humans have a comparative advantage and its effect can be summarized as
Effect of new tasks on labor demand = Productivity effect + Reinstatement effect.
9

The reinstatement effect captures the change in the task content of production, but now
in favor of labor as the increase in N reinstates labor into new tasks. This change in
task content always increases the labor share. It also improves productivity as new tasks
exploit labor’s comparative advantage. The resulting productivity improvement, together
with the change in task content, ensures that labor demand always increases following the
introduction of new tasks.
Finally, as we claimed previously, the implications of factor-augmenting technologies
are very different from those of automation and new tasks, because they do not change
the task content of production. In particular,
Effect of factor-augmenting
technologies on labor demand

= Productivity effect + Substitution effect.

With factor-augmenting technological improvements, either labor or capital becomes more
productive in all tasks, making the productivity effect proportional to their share in value
added.
Factor-augmenting technologies also impact labor demand via the substitution effect
introduced above, which changes the labor share but does not alter the task content of
production. Available estimates of σ place this parameter to be less than but close to
1, which implies that the substitution effects of factor-augmenting technologies are small
relative to their productivity effects.
In summary, in contrast to automation and new tasks that can generate significant
displacement and reinstatement effects, factor-augmenting technologies affect labor demand mostly via the productivity effect and have a relatively small impact on the labor
share. As a result, they are unlikely to generate a lower labor demand from technological advances: capital-augmenting technologies always increase labor demand, and laboraugmenting technologies do the same for plausible parameter values, in particular, so long
as σ > 1 − sL (see Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2018c).6

Tasks, Production and Aggregate Labor Demand
We now embed the model of tasks and production in an economy with multiple industries
and investigate how technology changes aggregate labor demand by characterizing the
6

Many other technologies share the feature that they do not impact the task content of production. For
example, improvements in the quality or productivity of equipment in any subset of already-automated
tasks in (N − 1, I) (what Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2018d, call a “deepening of automation”) will have an
impact on labor demand identical to capital-augmenting technologies. These technologies do not change
the allocation of tasks to factors (as a new piece of equipment is replacing an older one), and so they affect
labor demand mostly through the productivity effect.

10

behavior of the (economy-wide) wage bill. In our multi-sector economy we have
Wage bill = GDP × ∑ Labor share sector i × Share of value added in sector i.
i∈I

The multi-sector perspective offers an additional margin for adjustment in response to
automation, which we refer to as the composition effect. Following automation in sector i
(an increase in I for that sector) we have
Effect of automation in i
on agg. labor demand

= Productivity effect+Displacement effect+Composition effect.

The first two effects are the same as above—the productivity effect represents the impact
of automation in sector i on GDP, while the displacement effect represents the change in
the task content of production sector i (which affects the labor share within this sector).
These effects are scaled by the size of sector i, since larger sectors will have larger aggregate
effects.
The composition effect, which was absent when we were focusing on the effect of
automation in a one-sector economy, captures the implications of sectoral reallocations
(changes in the share of value added across sectors). For example, automation in sector i
may reallocate economic activity towards sector j (depending on demand elasticities and
input-output linkages). This reallocation contributes positively to aggregate labor demand
when sector j has higher labor share than the contracting sector i, and negatively when
the opposite holds.
A similar decomposition applies to new tasks. Following the introduction of new tasks
in sector i (an increase in N for that sector) we have
Effect of new tasks in i
on agg. labor demand

= Productivity effect+Reinstatement effect+Composition effect,

where the new feature is again the composition effect.
The mechanization of agriculture in the US illustrates how these forces jointly determine the behavior of aggregate labor demand. Data from Budd (1960) show the replacement of manual labor by horse-powered reapers, harvesters. From about 1850 to 1870,
there was a sharp decline in the labor share in agriculture from 33% to 17%—a telltale
sign of the displacement effect created by mechanization. Meanwhile, despite rapid mechanization of agriculture, at the time making up one-third of the US economy, two forces
combined to generate an increase in aggregate labor demand. First, and in part as a consequence of mechanization, value added and employment were reallocated from agriculture
to the industrial sector. This created a powerful composition effect, as industry was (and

11

still continues to be) much more labor intensive than agriculture. In addition, the labor
share within the industrial sector rose further during this process, from 47 percent in
1850 to 55 percent by 1890. This change in industry labor share signals the presence of
a powerful reinstatement effect created by the introduction of new labor-intensive jobs
in this sector. This interpretation is consistent with significant growth in new factory
jobs in farm equipment (Olmstead and Rhode 2001), cotton milling (Rasmussen, 1982)
and subsequently, clerical occupations in trade and manufacturing industries (Goldin and
Katz, 2007; Michaels, 2007).
Finally, the effects of factor-augmenting technologies in a multi-industry context can
be analyzed similarly. Although they too generate composition effects and may affect
aggregate labor demand via this channel, factor-augmenting technologies still have no
impact on the task content of production. Absent powerful composition effects, they
continue to affect labor demand mostly via their productivity effect.

Sources of Labor Demand Growth in the US
We now use our framework to shed light on the factors that have shaped the evolution of
US labor demand since World War II. To do this, we develop a decomposition of observed
changes in the total wage bill in the economy. Our decomposition requires data on industry
value added, factor payments and labor shares.
We show in the online Appendix that the change in aggregate wage bill between two
periods can be decomposed as
Change in aggregate wage bill = Productivity effect + Composition effect

+ Substitution effect + Change in task content.

The productivity effect is the sum of the contributions from various sources of technology
to value added and thus GDP. Correspondingly, in our empirical exercise we measure this
effect using changes in (log) GDP per capita.
The composition effect captures changes in labor demand resulting from reallocation of
value added across sectors. As discussed in the previous section, this is related to the gap
between the labor share of contracting and expanding sectors. In our empirical exercise,
we measure it as the sum of the change in the value added share of an industry weighted
by its labor share (if all sectors had the same labor share, this term would be equal to
zero). The composition effect includes not only the sectoral reallocation brought by new
technologies but also compositional changes resulting from structural transformations and
sectoral reallocation due to preferences (for example, Herrendorf, Rogerson, and Valentinyi
2013; Hubmer 2018; Aghion, Jones, and Jones 2017), differences in factor intensities (for
12

example, Acemoglu and Guerrieri 2008), differential sectoral productivity growth (for
example, Ngai and Pissarides, 2007) or international trade in final goods (for example,
Autor, Dorn, and Hanson 2013).
The substitution effect is an employment-weighted sum of the substitution effects of
industries, and thus depends on industry-level changes in effective factor prices and the
elasticity of substitution σ (as shown in equation (2)). To estimate the substitution effect
in an industry, we choose as our baseline Oberfield and Raval’s (2014) estimate of the
elasticity of substitution between capital and labor, σ = 0.8.7 In addition, we utilize

information on sectoral factor prices from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), Bureau
of Labor Statistics (BLS) and National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA). To convert

K
observed factor prices into effective ones, we start with a benchmark where AL
i /Ai grows

at a common rate equal to average labor productivity, which we take to be 2 percent a year
between 1947 and 1987 and 1.46 percent a year between 1987 and 2017. The motivation

for this choice is that, if all technological progress were labor-augmenting, this would be
8
the rate of growth in AL
i required to match the behavior of labor productivity.

The change in task content is given by an employment-weighted sum of the changes
in task content of production of industries. We estimate industry-level change in task
content as the residual change in labor share (observed directly in the data) which cannot
be explained by the substitution effect. Namely,
Change in task content in i =Percent change in labor share in i
− Substitution effect in i.

Intuitively, with competitive factor and product markets, the change in task content of
production and the substitution effect are the only forces impacting the labor share of an
industry. Hence, changes in task content can be inferred once we have estimates of the
substitution effect.
Under additional assumptions, we can also separate the change in task content into its
two components: the displacement and reinstatement effects. Assume that an industry
will not simultaneously undertake automation and introduce new tasks (this is implied,
7

We show in the Appendix that the results are very similar for reasonable variations in σ. Note also
that the relevant σ is the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor at the industry level. This
is greater than the firm-level elasticity, estimated to be between 0.4 and 0.7 (e.g., Chirinko et al., 2011),
because of output substitution between firms. Note also that our framework, in particular the central role
of changes in the task content of production, makes it clear that this elasticity of substitution cannot be
estimated from aggregate data.
K
8
Our estimates for the growth rate of AL
i /Ai should be interpreted as upper bounds, since in general
growth in GDP per worker will be driven not just by labor-augmenting technological changes. Because in
our main exercise σ < 1, this implies that we are also understating the importance of displacement effects in
K
reducing the task content of production. Nevertheless, reasonable variations on the growth rate of AL
i /Ai
have small impacts on our decomposition results as we show in the online Appendix.

13

for example, by the directed technological change reasoning in Acemoglu and Restrepo,
2018a, where depending on factor prices, an industry will engage in one type of innovation
or the other). Then, when the labor share of an industry declines beyond what one would
expect based on factor prices, we estimate a positive displacement effect resulting from
automation in that industry. Conversely, when the labor share in an industry rises beyond
what one would expect based on factor prices, we estimate a positive reinstatement effect,
attributed in our model to the introduction of new tasks. Motivated by this reasoning,
we compute the displacement effect as the five-year moving average of the change in task
content for industries with a negative change, and the reinstatement effect as the five-year
moving average of the change in task content for industries with a positive change. The
five-year time window is chosen to minimize the influence of measurement error in industry
labor shares. To the extent that there are simultaneous introduction of new automation
technologies and new tasks in a given industry within a five-year period, our estimates
will be lower bounds both for the displacement and reinstatement effects.

Sources of Labor Demand: 1947-1987
We first apply this decomposition to data from the four decades following World War II,
from 1947 to 1987. For this period, we have data from the BEA for 58 industries on value
added and labor shares.9 We combine these with data from the NIPA on quantities of
capital and labor in each industry to obtain measures of factor prices. We consolidate
the data into 43 industries that covered the private sector and can be tracked consistently
over time and across sources.
Figure 2 presents the evolution of the labor share for six broad sectors: construction, services, transportation, manufacturing, agriculture and mining. Except for mining
and transportation—two small sectors accounting for 10 percent of GDP—there are no
significant declines in labor shares in these broad sectors. In fact, the labor share in manufacturing and services increased modestly during this period. The bottom panel of the
figure shows the evolution of the share of value added of these sectors and confirms the
secular reallocation from manufacturing towards services starting in the late 1950s.
Figure 3 presents our decomposition using the 43 industries in our sample. We have
divided the wage bill by population, so that changes in population do not confound the
effects we are focusing on. The top panel in Figure 3 shows that wage bill per capita
grew at 2.5% per year during this period. The rapid and steady growth of the wage bill
9

Our measure of labor demand is given by the wage bill in the private sector and thus excludes selfemployment income. This avoids the need for apportioning self-employment income between labor and
capital income. Elsby et al. (2013) explore this issue in detail and conclude that labor income from selfemployment has either declined or remained constant as a share of total labor income over this period.
This implies that labor share inclusive of self-employment income likely declined by even more, and thus, if
anything, focusing on the labor share in the private sector understates the overall decline in labor demand.

14

during this period is largely explained by the productivity effect (2.4% per year). The
substitution and composition effects are small, and during this period changes in the task
content of production are small as well.
The middle panel of Figure 3 shows that, even though the overall change in the task
content of production during this period is small, there is considerable displacement and
reinstatement. Between 1947 and 1987, the displacement effect reduced labor demand
at about 0.48% per year, but simultaneously, there was an equally strong reinstatement
effect, equivalent to an increase in labor demand of 0.47% per year. The bottom panel
of Figure 3 depicts a similar pattern in manufacturing, where the overall change in task
content was also small, while displacement and reinstatement effects were substantial.
In sum, our findings suggest that during the four decades following World War II
there was plenty of automation, but this was accompanied with the introduction of new
tasks (or other changes increasing the task content of production in favor of labor) in
both manufacturing and the rest of the economy that counterbalanced the adverse labor
demand consequences of automation.

Sources of Labor Demand: 1987-2017
For the 1987-2017 period, we use data from the BEA for 61 industries covering the private
sector and complement them with data from the BLS on factor prices.
The top panel of Figure 4 presents the evolution of the labor share for the same six
broad sectors used above. In contrast to the 1947-1987 period, there is a sizable decline
in the labor share in manufacturing, construction, and mining. The bottom panel of
the figure shows the continued reallocation of economic activity from manufacturing to
services.
The top panel of Figure 5 shows a striking slowdown in the growth of labor demand
between 1987 and 2017. Wage bill per capita grew at a modest 1.33% per year during
the entire period and essentially stagnated since 2000. The first factor accounting for the
deceleration of labor demand during this period is the slowdown of productivity growth
(1.54% per year compared to 2.4% in 1947-1987). The second factor contributing to
slower wage bill growth, especially after the late 1990s, is a significant negative shift in the
task content of production against labor (of 0.35% per year), which caused labor demand
to decouple from productivity. Cumulatively, changes in the task content of production
reduced labor demand by 10% during this period.
The middle and bottom panels of Figure 5 show that, relative to the earlier period,
the change in task content is driven by a deceleration in the introduction of technologies
reinstating labor (reinstatement increased labor demand only by 0.35% per year compared
to 0.47% in 1947-1987) and an acceleration of displacement (displacement reduced labor

15

demand by 0.7% per year compared to 0.48% in 1947-1987). This pattern is particularly pronounced in manufacturing where the displacement effect reduced labor demand
at about 1.1% per year or about 30% cumulatively. These results are consistent with
Elsby et al. (2013) who document the important role of within-industry changes that are
uncorrelated with factor prices in accounting for the aggregate behavior of the labor share.
The change in the balance between displacement and reinstatement also corroborates the
findings of Autor and Salomons (2018) who find that technological improvements after
1980 have been associated with declines in the labor share, while those in the previous
decades have not been.
Finally, the top panel also shows that the composition and substitution effects had
a very limited impact on the wage bill. Although there is a sizable shift away from
manufacturing, which is itself not unrelated to automation in this sector as well as to
import competition, the resulting composition effects are small because the labor share
in manufacturing is similar to that in the expanding service industries (see the top panel
of Figure 4). These findings highlight that unlike the 19th-century mechanization of
agriculture, there are no powerful composition effects contributing to labor demand. Even
more importantly, there appears to be no equivalent of the powerful reinstatement effects
that accompanied the mechanization of agriculture.
In summary, the deceleration of labor demand growth over the last 30 years is due to
a combination of anemic productivity growth and adverse shifts in the task contents of
production owing to rapid automation that is not being counterbalanced by the creation
of new tasks.10

What Does the Change in Task Content Capture?
A natural concern is that our estimates of the change in task content capture something
different than displacement effects from automaton technologies and reinstatement effects
of new tasks. Here, we provide additional evidence that our estimates are informative
about changes in the task content of production. We focus on the 1987-2017 period where
we have measures of automation and can compute proxies for new tasks at the industry
level, and then document the correlation between these measures and our estimates of the
change in the task content of production.
10

In the Appendix, we verify that this pattern is robust to different values of the elasticity of substitution
and to reasonable variations in the rates of factor-augmenting technological changes. Furthermore, we
computed the changes in factor-augmenting technologies at the industry level that would be necessary
to explain changes in industry labor shares without any change in task content of production. We found
that this would require gargantuan changes in factor-augmenting technologies and productivity increases—
several folds larger than the observed increases in total factor productivity during the last seven decades.
This exercise underscores the need for major changes in the task content of production to account for the
evolution of sectoral labor shares and the wage bill.
We also demonstrate in the Appendix that the order in which the decomposition is carried out (composition effects first and within-industry changes next) does not matter for the results.

16

We have three measures of industry-level automation technologies. The proxies are:
(1) the adjusted penetration of robots measure from Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018b) for
19 industries, which are then mapped to our 61 industries; (2) the share of routine jobs
in an industry in 1990, where we define routine jobs in an occupation as in Acemoglu
and Autor (2011) and then project these across industries according to the share of the
relevant occupation in the employment of the industry in 1990 (see also vom Lehn, 2018);
(3) the share of firms (weighted by employment) across 148 detailed manufacturing industries using automation technologies, which include automatic guided vehicles, automatic
storage and retrieval systems, sensors on machinery, computer-controlled machinery, programmable controllers, and industrial robots.11
Table 1 shows that with all these proxies there is the expected negative relationship
between higher levels of automation and our measure of changes in the task content of
production in favor of labor (see also visual representations of these relationships in the
online Appendix). These negative relationships remain very similar when we add various
control variables, including a dummy for the manufacturing sector as well as imports from
China (the growth of final goods imports from China as in Autor, Dorn and Hanson,
2013; Acemoglu et al., 2015) and a measure of offshoring of intermediate goods (Feenstra
and Hanson, 1999; Wright, 2013). Consistent with our conceptual framework, changes in
task content are unrelated to imports of final goods from China, but are correlated with
offshoring, which often involves the offshoring of labor-intensive tasks (see Elsby et al.
2013). Controlling for offshoring does not change the relationship we report in Table 1
because offshoring is affecting a different set of industries than our measures of automation
(see the Appendix).
We also looked at a series of proxies for the introduction of new tasks across industries,
and how they are correlated with our measure of the change in task content for 1987-2017.
Our four proxies for new tasks are: (1) the 1990 share of employment in occupations
with a large fraction of new job titles, according to the 1991 Dictionary of Occupational
Titles compiled by Lin (2011); (2) the 1990 share of employment in occupations with a
large number of “emerging tasks” according to O*NET, which correspond to new tasks
that workers identify as becoming increasingly important in their jobs; (3) the share
of employment growth in an industry accounted for by “new occupations,” defined as
occupations that were not present in that industry in 1990 but are present in 2016; and (4)
the percent increase in the number of occupations in an industry between 1990 and 2016.
11

These data are from the Survey of Manufacturing Technologies (SMT), and are available in 1988 and
1993 for 148 four-digit SIC industries which are all part of three three-digit manufacturing sectors: fabricated metal products, nonelectrical machinery, electric and electronic equipment, transportation equipment, and instruments and related products (see Doms et al., 1997). For this exercise, we computed
measures for the change in task content of these manufacturing industries using detailed data from the
BEA input-output tables for 1987 to 2007.

17

The first two measures are projected onto industries using the share of these occupations
in industry employment in 1990. All four of these measures are meant to capture major
changes in the types of activities performed in occupations (then mapped to industries) or
the introduction of certain new activities into an industry. We thus expect the correlations
between these proxies for new tasks and our measure of changes in task content in favor of
labor to be positive and significant, and they are. These results hold regardless of whether
or not we include additional controls in Table 1.
These correlations bolster the interpretation that our estimates of changes in task content of production contain valuable information on displacement from automation technologies and reinstatement from the introduction of new tasks.

Confounding Factors
Our approach has been predicated on competitive markets and has also abstracted from
various other changes potentially affecting labor markets in the US. We now briefly discuss
these issues.
First, as we have already noted, trade in final goods should have no impact on our
estimates of the change in the task content of production (because they will affect prices
and sales, which are captured by our productivity effect, and they induce sectoral reallocations, which are part of our composition effects). This is confirmed by our results in
Table 1. Offshoring, on the other hand, will directly change the task content of production because it involves the replacement of some labor-intensive tasks by services from
abroad (Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg, 2008). Our estimates in Table 1 confirm this, but
show that offshoring does not change the quantitative or qualitative relationship between
various measures of automation and our estimates of the change in the task content of
production.
Second, as also noted above, sectoral reallocations resulting from structural transformation do not affect the task content of production either and are part of our composition
effects. The fact that these composition effects are small suggests that these sectoral reallocations have not been a major factor in the slowdown in labor demand and changes
in labor share in national income.
Third, we have abstracted from the presence of workers with different skills, and one
question is whether changes in the skill composition of the workforce would affect our
estimates of the change in the task content of production. The answer is no provided that
industry-level factor payments are well measured. Hence, as long as the increase in the
wage bill caused by skill upgrading in a sector is factored in, this compositional change
does not cause a shift in the task content of production. An implication is that secular
changes such as population aging and increased female labor force participation, though

18

they will impact the composition of the workforce and factor prices, should not confound
our estimates of changes in task content of production.
Third, changes in factor supplies should also have no impact provided that our estimates of the substitution effect (which form the basis of our estimates of the change in
the task content of production) remain accurate.
In contrast to these factors, deviations from competitive labor or product markets
would potentially confound our estimates of task content. Particularly worth noting are
deviations from competitive labor markets. If the supply side of the market is determined
by bargaining or other rent-sharing arrangements, then our approach still remains valid
provided that firms are on their labor demand curve (for overall labor or for different
types of labor in the presence of heterogeneity). This is because our analysis only uses
information from the labor demand side, so whether workers are along a well-defined labor
supply curve is not important. On the other hand, changes in the extent of monopsony
and bilateral bargaining and holdup problems forcing firms of their labor demand curve
would potentially confound our estimates. A similar confounding would result if there are
changing product market markups. Though these issues are important, they are beyond
the scope of the current paper and are some of the issues we are investigating in ongoing
work.

What Explains the Changing Nature of Technology and Slow Productivity Growth Since 1987?
Our results suggest that it is the combination of adverse shifts in the task content of
production—driven by accelerated automation and decelerating reinstatement—and weak
productivity growth that accounts for the sluggish growth of labor demand over the last
three decades and especially since 2000. Why has the balance between automation and
new tasks changed recently? Why has productivity growth been so disappointing despite
the acceleration in automation technologies? Though we do not have complete answers to
these questions, our conceptual framework points to a number of ideas worth considering.
There are two basic reasons why the balance between automation and new tasks may
have changed. First, the innovation possibilities frontier linking these two types of technological change may have shifted, facilitating further automation and making the creation
of new tasks more difficult (see Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2018a, for a formal analysis). For
example, new general-purpose technologies based on advances in hardware and software
may have made further automation cheaper or we may have run out of ideas for generating
new high-productivity (labor-intensive) tasks. Though these are all logically possible, we
find the second reason for a change in this balance more plausible: we may have moved
along a given innovation possibilities frontier because incentives for automation have in-

19

creased and those for creating new tasks have declined. There are several factors that may
push in this direction. To start with, the US tax code aggressively subsidizes the use of
equipment (e.g., via various tax credits and accelerated amortization) and taxes the employment of labor (e.g., via payroll taxes). The tendency towards further (and potentially
excessive) automation may have been reinforced by the growing focus on automation and
use of artificial intelligence for removing the human element from most of the production
process. This focus has recently been boosted both by the central role that large tech
companies have come to play in innovation with their business model based on automation and small workforces, and by the vision of many of the luminaries of the tech world
(think of the efforts of Tesla to automate everything, which turned out to be very costly).
Finally, the declining government support for innovation may have also contributed by
discouraging research with longer horizon, which likely further disadvantaged the creation
of new tasks (which bear fruit more slowly) relative to automation.
The factors discussed in the previous paragraph may contribute not just to the changing balance between automation and new tasks but also to the slowdown in productivity
growth. First, since new tasks contribute to productivity, slower reinstatement will be
associated with slower productivity growth. Therefore, factors tilting the balance against
new tasks likely translate into lost opportunities for improved productivity. In addition,
the lower wage growth resulting from a weak reinstatement effect indirectly makes automation less productive—because productivity gains from automation are increasing in
the effective wage in tasks being replaced, and lower wages thus reduce these productivity
gains.
Second, if innovations in both automation and new tasks are subject to diminishing
returns (within a given period of time or over time), a significant change in the balance
between these two types of new technologies will push us towards more marginal developments and cause slower productivity growth.
Third, as we already emphasized, productivity gains from automation could be quite
small for so-so technologies—when automation substitutes for tasks in which labor was
already productive and capital is not yet very effective. In this light, further automation,
especially when it is induced by tax distortions or excessive enthusiasm about automating
everything, would take the form of such so-so technologies and would not bring much
productivity gains.
Finally, Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018d) suggest there may be a mismatch between
the available skills of the workforce and the needs for new technologies. This could further
reduce productivity gains from automation and hamper the introduction of new tasks,
because the lack of requisite skills reduces the efficiency with which new tasks can be
utilized.

20

If the balance between automation and new tasks has shifted inefficiently and this is
contributing to rapid automation, the absence of powerful restatement effects and the slowdown of productivity growth, then there may be room for policy interventions, which could
improve both job creation and productivity growth. These might include removing incentives for excessive automation (such as the preferential treatment of capital equipment)
and policies designed to rebalance the direction of technological change (see Acemoglu
and Restrepo, 2019, for a more detailed discussion in the context of artificial intelligence).

Concluding Remarks
This paper develops a task-based model to study the effects of different technologies on labor demand. At the center of our framework is the task content of production—measuring
the allocation of tasks to factors of production. Automation, by creating a displacement
effect, shifts the task content of production against labor, while the introduction of new
tasks in which labor has a comparative advantage improves it via the reinstatement effect.
These technologies are qualitatively different from factor-augmenting ones which do not
impact the task content of production. For example, automation always reduces the labor
share and may reduce labor demand, and new tasks always increase the labor share.
We then show how changes in the task content of production and other contributors to
labor demand can be inferred from data on labor shares, value added and factor prices at
the industry level. The main implication of our empirical exercise using this methodology
is that the recent stagnation of labor demand is explained by an acceleration of automation,
particularly in manufacturing, and a deceleration in the creation of new tasks. In addition,
and perhaps reflecting this shift in the composition of technological advances, the economy
also experienced a marked slowdown in productivity growth, contributing to sluggish labor
demand.
Our framework has clear implications for the future of work too. Our evidence and
conceptual approach support neither the claims that the end of human work is imminent
nor the presumption that technological change will always and everywhere be favorable to
labor. Rather, it suggests that if the origin of productivity growth in the future continues
to be automation, the relative standing of labor, together with the task content of production, will decline. The creation of new tasks and other technologies raising the labor
intensity of production and the labor share are vital for continued wage growth commensurate with productivity growth. Whether such technologies will be forthcoming depends
not just on our innovation capabilities but also on the supply of different skills, demographic changes, labor market institutions, tax and R&D policies of governments, market
competition, corporate strategies and the ecosystem of innovative clusters. We have also
pointed out a number of reasons why the balance between automation and new tasks may
21

have become inefficiently tilted in favor of the former, with potentially adverse implications for jobs and productivity and some directions for policy interventions to redress this
imbalance.

22

References
Acemoglu, Daron and David Autor (2011) “Skills, tasks and technologies: Implications for employment and earnings,” Handbook of Labor Economics, 4: 1043–1171.
Acemoglu, Daron, David Autor, David Dorn, Gordon H. Hanson, and Brendan Price (2015) “Import Competition and the Great US Employment Sag of the 2000s,”
Journal of Labor Economics 34:S141–S198.
Acemoglu, Daron and Veronica Guerrieri (2008) “Capital Deepening and Nonbalanced Economic Growth” Journal of Political Economy, 116(3): 476–498.
Acemoglu, Daron and Pascual Restrepo (2018a) “The Race Between Machine
and Man: Implications of Technology for Growth, Factor Shares and Employment” American Economic Review, 108(6): 1488–1542.
Acemoglu, Daron and Pascual Restrepo (2018b) “Robots and Jobs: Evidence
from US Labor Markets” NBER WP No. 23285.
Acemoglu, Daron and Pascual Restrepo (2018c) “Modeling Automation” NBER
WP No. 24321.
Acemoglu, Daron and Pascual Restrepo (2018d) “Artificial Intelligence, Automation and Work” NBER Working Paper No. 24196.
Acemoglu, Daron and Pascual Restrepo (2018e) “Demographics and Automation” NBER WP No. 24421.
Acemoglu, Daron and Pascual Restrepo (2018f ) “The Wrong Kind of AI? Artificial Intelligence and the Future of Labor Demand,” Toulouse Network for Information
Technology, special issue.
Allen, Robert C. (2009) The British Industrial Revolution in Global Perspective,
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press
Aghion, Philippe, Benjamin F. Jones, and Charles I. Jones (2017) “Artificial
Intelligence and Economic Growth,” NBER Working Paper No. 23928.
Autor, David, Frank Levy and Richard Murnane (2003) “The Skill Content
of Recent Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration,” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 118(4): 1279–1333.
Autor, David, David Dorn, and Gordon Hanson (2013) “The China Syndrome:
Local Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States.” American
Economic Review 103(6): 2121–68
Autor, David and Anna Salomons (2018) “Is Automation labor Displacing?
Productivity Growth, Employment, and the Labor Share,” Brooking papers on Economic
Activity.
Ayres, Robert, and Steven Miller (1983) Robotics: Applications and Social Implications, Ballinger Publishing Company.
23

Budd, Edward C. (1960) “Factor Shares, 1850-1910,” in Trends in the American
Economy in the Nineteenth Century, Princeton University Press.
Chandler, Alfred D. (1977) The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in
American Business, Harvard University Press: Cambridge, MA.
Chirinko, Robert, Fazzari, Steven, and Andrew Meyer (2011) “A New Approach to Estimating Production Function Parameters: The Elusive Capital- Labor Substitution Elasticity,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 29:587–594.
Dauth, Wolfgang, Sebastian Findeisen, Jens Suedekum and Nicole Woessner (2018) “Adjusting to Robots: Worker-Level Evidence,” Opportunity and Inclusive
Growth Institute, Working Paper 13.
Doms, Mark, Timothy Dunne and Kenneth Troske (1997) “Workers, Wages,
and Technology,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(1): 253-?290.
Elsby, Michael, Bart Hobijn, and Aysegul Sahin (2013) “The Decline of the
U.S. Labor Share,” Brooking Papers on Economic Activity, 2: 1–63.
Feenstra, Robert, and Gordon Hanson (1999) “The Impact of Outsourcing and
High-Technology Capital on Wages: Estimates for the United States, 1979-1990.” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(3): 907–940.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence Katz (2007) The Race between Education and
Technology, Belknap Press.
Grossman Gene M. and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg (2008) “Trading Tasks: A
Simple Theory of Offshoring,” American Economic Review, 98:5, 1978–1997.
Graetz, Georg and Guy Michaels (2018) “Robots at Work,” Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
Groover, Mikell, Mitchell Weiss, Roger Nagel, and Nicholas Odrey (1986)
Industrial Robotics: Technology, Programming and Applications, Mcgraw-Hill Inc.
Habakkuk, John H. (1962) American and British Technology in the Nineteenth
Century. London: Cambridge University Press.
Herrendorf, Berthold, Richard Rogerson and Ákos Valentinyi (2013) “Two
Perspectives on Preferences and Structural Transformation,” AER, 103(7): 2752–2789.
Hubmer, Joachim (2018) “The Race Between Preferences and Technology,” Yale.
Lin, Jeffrey (2011) “Technological Adaptation, Cities, and New Work” Review of
Economics and Statistics 93(2): 554–574.
Mantoux, Paul (1928) The Industrial Revolution in the Eighteenth Century: An
Outline of the Beginnings of the Modern Factory System in England. New York: Harcourt.
Michaels, Guy (2007) “The Division of Labor, Coordination, and the Demand for
Information Processing,” CEPR Discussion Paper 6358.
Mokyr, Joel (1990) The Lever of Riches: Technological Creativity and Economic

24

Progress, Oxford University Press: New York.
Oberfield, Ezra and Devesh Raval (2014) “Micro Data and Macro Technology,”
NBER WP No. 20452
Olmstead, Alan and Paul Rhode (2001) “Reshaping the Landscape: The Impact and Diffusion of the Tractor in American Agriculture, 1910-1960,” The Journal of
Economic History 61(3): 663–98.
Rasmussen, Wayne (1982) “The Mechanization of Agriculture,” Scientific American, 247(3): 76–89.
Wright, Greg (2014) “Revisiting the Employment Impact of Offshoring,” European
Economic Review 66:63–83.
vom Lehn, Christian (2018) “Understanding the Decline in the U.S. Labor Share:
Evidence from Occupational Tasks,” European Economic Review, 108, 191–220.
Zeira, Joseph (1998) “Workers, Machines, and Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(4): 1091–1117.

25

Figure 1: The allocation of capital and labor to the production of tasks and the impact
of automation and the creation of new tasks.

26

Labor share, 1947−1987
80
70

Manufacturing
Construction

60
50

Services
Transportation

40
Mining

30

Agriculture

20

1947

1952

1957

1962

1967

1972

1977

1982

1987

Share GDP, 1947−1987
Services

60

50

40

30
Manufacturing

20

10

Agriculture

0
1947

1952

1957

1962

1967

1972

1977

1982

Transportation
Construction
Mining

1987

Figure 2: The labor share and sectoral evolutions, 1947-1987.
Note: The top panel shows the labor share in value added in services, manufacturing, construction,
transportation, mining and agriculture between 1947 and 1987, while the bottom panel shows the share of
value added in these sectors relative to GDP. Data from the BEA industry accounts.

27

Wage bill, 1947−1987
100

Observed wage bill
Productivity effect

80

60

40

20
Substitution effect
Composition effect
Change in task content

0
1947

1952

1957

1962

1967

1972

1977

1982

1987

Change in task content of production, 1947−1987
20
Reinstatement

10

0

Change in task content

−10

Displacement

−20
1947

1952

1957

1962

1967

1972

1977

1982

1987

Manufacturing task content of production, 1947−1987
20
Reinstatement

10

0
Change in task content

−10

−20
1947

Displacement

1952

1957

1962

1967

1972

1977

1982

1987

Figure 3: Sources of changes in labor demand, 1947-1987.
Note: The top panel presents the decomposition of wage bill divided by population between 1947 and 1987.
The middle and bottom panels present our estimates of the displacement and reinstatement effects for the
entire economy and the manufacturing sector, respectively. See text for the details of the estimation of
the changes in task content and displacement and reinstatement effects.

28

Labor share, 1987−2017
70

Construction

60

Services
Transportation
Manufacturing

50

40

Agriculture
Mining

30

20
1987

1992

1997

2002

2007

2012

2017

Share GDP, 1987−2017
Services

70
60
50
40
30
20
Manufacturing

10
0
1987

Agriculture

1992

1997

2002

2007

2012

Transportation
Construction
Mining

2017

Figure 4: The labor share and sectoral evolutions, 1987-2017.
Note: The top panel shows the labor share in value added in services, manufacturing, construction,
transportation, mining and agriculture between 1987 and 2017, while the bottom panel shows the share of
value added in these sectors relative to GDP. Data from the BEA industry accounts.

29

Wage bill, 1987−2017
Productivity effect

40

Observed wage bill

30

20

10
Composition effect
Substitution effect

0

Change in task content

−10
1987

1992

1997

2002

2007

2012

2017

Change in task content of production, 1987−2017
Reinstatement

10
5
0
−5
Change in task content

−10
−15
−20
1987

Displacement

1992

1997

2002

2007

2012

2017

Manufacturing task content of production, 1987−2017
Reinstatement

10

0

−10

−20

Change in task content

−30
Displacement

1987

1992

1997

2002

2007

2012

2017

Figure 5: Sources of changes in labor demand, 1987-2017.
Note: The top panel presents the decomposition of wage bill divided by population between 1987 and 2017.
The middle and bottom panels present our estimates of the displacement and reinstatement effects for the
entire economy and the manufacturing sector, respectively. See text for the details of the estimation of
the changes in task content and displacement and reinstatement effects.

30

Table 1: Relationship between change in task content of production and proxies for
automation and new tasks.

(1)

Controlling
for
manufacturing
(2)

Controlling for
Chinese import
and offshoring
(3)

-1.400
(0.372)
61
0.18

-0.996
(0.342)
61
0.22

-1.107
(0.330)
61
0.28

Observations
R-squared

-0.394
(0.122)
61
0.14

-0.241
(0.159)
61
0.19

-0.321
(0.164)
61
0.27

Detailed manufacturing industries (SMT):
Share of firms using automation technologies,
1988-1993
Observations
R-squared

-0.390
(0.165)
148
0.08

Proxies for new tasks:
Share of new job titles, based on 1991 DOT
and 1990 employment by occupation
Observations
R-squared

1.609
(0.523)
61
0.12

1.336
(0.530)
61
0.23

1.602
(0.541)
61
0.32

Number of emerging tasks, based on 1990
employment by occupation
Observations
R-squared

8.423
(2.261)
61
0.14

7.108
(2.366)
61
0.25

7.728
(2.418)
61
0.33

Share of employment growth between 1990 and
2016 in new occupations
Observations
R-squared

2.121
(0.723)
61
0.08

1.638
(0.669)
61
0.20

1.646
(0.679)
61
0.26

Percent increase in number of occupations
represented in industry
Observations
R-squared

0.585
(0.156)
61
0.14

0.368
(0.207)
61
0.19

0.351
(0.215)
61
0.25

Raw data

Proxies for automation technologies:
Adjusted penetration of robots, 1993-2014
Observations
R-squared
Share of routine jobs in industry, 1990

-0.397
(0.166)
148
0.09

Note: The table reports estimates of the relationship between the change in task content of production
between 1987-2017 and proxies for automation technologies and new tasks. Column 1 reports estimates
of the bivariate relationship between change in task content of production and the indicated proxy at
the industry level. Column 2 includes a dummy for manufacturing industries as a control. In addition,
Column 3 controls for the increase in Chinese imports (defined as the increase in imports relative to US
consumption between 1991 and 2011, as in Acemoglu et al. 2016) and the increase in offshoring (defined
as the increase in the share of imported intermediates between 1993 and 2007, as in Feenstra and Hanson,
1999). Except for the panels using the Survey of Manufacturing Technologies (SMT), all regressions are
for the 61 industries used in or analysis of the 1987-2017 period. When using the SMT, the regressions
are for 148 detailed manufacturing industries. Standard errors robust against heteroskedasticity are in
parenthesis. When using the measure of robot penetration, we cluster standard errors at the 19 industries
for which this measure is available.

31

Online Appendix for “Automation and New Tasks: How
Technology Displaces and Reinstates Labor”
This Appendix contains four parts. Section 1 presents our theoretical framework formally and derives expressions for the change in labor demand. Section 2 provides details
of our empirical exercise. Section 3 presents additional findings, decompositions, and
robustness checks. Section 4 describes the sources of data used.

A1

Theory

This subsection outlines our model in detail. This material complements our discussion
in the text.

Full Model Description
Denote the level of production of the sector by Y . Production takes place by combining
a set of tasks, with measure normalized to 1, using the following production function
Y = (∫

(A 1)

N
N −1

Y (z)

σ−1
σ

σ
σ−1

dz)

,

where Y (z) denotes the output of task z for z ∈ [N − 1, N ] and σ ≥ 0 is the elasticity of
substitution between tasks.

Tasks can be produced using capital or labor according to the production function
⎧
⎪
⎪ AL γ L (z)l(z) + AK γ K (z)k(z)
Y (z) = ⎨ L L
⎪
⎪
⎩ A γ (z)l(z)

if z ∈ [N − 1, I]

if z ∈ (I, N ].

We denote total employment and capital used in the sector (economy) by
L =∫

N

N −1

and

l(z)dz

K =∫

N

N −1

k(z)dz,

and take them as given for now.
As mentioned in the text, we assume that it is cost-minimizing to use capital in all
automated tasks (see next subsection).
Following the same steps outlined in Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018a), we can write
the equilibrium output in the economy as
(A 2)

σ−1
I
N
σ
σ
⎛
σ−1
σ−1 ⎞
γ K (z)σ−1 dz) (AK K) σ + (∫ γ L (z)σ−1 dz) (AL L) σ
Y (L, K; θ) = (∫
.
I
⎝ N −1
⎠
1

1

A-1

σ

Therefore, the expression for the task content of production, defined in the text, is
Γ(I, N ) =

(A 3)

L
σ−1
∫I γ (z)
.
I
N L
K
σ−1
σ−1
∫N −1 γ (z) dz + ∫I γ (z)
N

The TFP term is then
Π(I, N ) = (∫

I

γ (z)
K

N −1

σ−1

dz + ∫

N
I

γ (z)
L

σ−1

)

1
σ−1

.

The labor share follows directly from the expression in equation (A 2). Because of
the CES structure, the labor share is given by equation (2). The labor share can also be
expressed as a function of labor, capital and factor-augmenting technologies as well as the
task content of production:
(A 4)

sL (L, K; θ) =

1
1 − Γ(I, N ) σ AK K
1+(
) ( L )
Γ(I, N )
A L
1

σ−1
σ

.

Restriction that Ensures I Binds
As mentioned in the text, we assume that it is cost-minimizing to use capital in all automated tasks. The formal assumption that ensures this is the case is given by
1 − Γ(I, N ) AL γ L (I)
K 1 − Γ(I, N ) AL γ L (N )
( K K
) <
<
( K K
) .
Γ(I, N )
A γ (I)
L
Γ(I, N )
A γ (N − 1)
σ

(A 5)

σ

When this restriction holds, we have that
(A 6)

AL γ L (I) W AL γ L (N )
<
<
,
AK γ K (I) R AK γ K (N − 1)

which implies that new automation technologies (an increase in I) and new tasks (an
increase in N ) raise productivity and will be immediately adopted. The special case in
which the above assumption does not hold is analyzed in detail in Acemoglu and Restrepo
(2018a).

Technology and Labor Demand
This subsection explains how changes in automation, new tasks and factor-augmenting
technologies impact labor demand in the one sector model, and thus establishes the results
presented in the text. We provide all of the following derivations for the case with a fixed
stock of capital and labor, K and L.
For a given level of factor utilization, L and K, labor demand from the sector can be
A-2

written as
W d (L, K; θ) =

(A 7)

Y (L, K; θ)
× sL (L, K; θ).
L

Labor demand W d (L, K; θ) is decreasing in L and increasing in K. We next analyze the
effects of different types of technologies on labor demand. All of the expressions we present
next can be obtained by differentiating (A 7) and then using (A 2) and (A 4).
The effect of automation—an increase in I—on labor demand is given by
∂ ln W d (L, K; θ) ∂ ln Y (L, K; θ)
=
∂I
∂I
1 1 − sL (L, K; θ) ∂ ln Γ(I, N )
+
σ 1 − Γ(I, N )
∂I

(Productivity effect)
(Displacement effect).

Moreover, we can also use equation (A 2) to compute the productivity effect as
⎡
1−σ
1−σ ⎤
⎥
∂ ln Y (L, K; θ)
1 ⎢
W
R
⎥ > 0.
⎢(
=
)
−
(
)
⎥
⎢
K
K
L
L
∂I
σ − 1 ⎢ A γ (I)
A γ (I)
⎥
⎦
⎣
This expression also establishes our claim in the text that productivity effects are increasing in the wage W (holding the productivity of labor in the marginal task, AL γ L (I),

constant).

The effect of new tasks—an increase in N —on labor demand is given by
∂ ln W d (L, K; θ) ∂ ln Y (L, K; θ)
=
∂N
∂N
1 1 − sL (L, K; θ) ∂ ln Γ(I, N )
+
σ 1 − Γ(I, N )
∂N

(Productivity effect)
(Reinstatement effect)

where the productivity effect from new tasks is given by
⎡
1−σ
1−σ ⎤
⎥
W
1 ⎢
R
∂ ln Y (L, K; θ)
⎢
( L L
=
)
−( K K
) ⎥
⎢
⎥ > 0.
∂N
σ − 1 ⎢ A γ (N )
A γ (N − 1)
⎥
⎣
⎦
Finally, turning to the implications of factor-augmenting technologies, we have
∂W d (L, K; θ) L
=s (L, K; θ)
∂ ln AL
σ−1
(1 − sL (L, K; θ))
+
σ
∂W d (L, K; θ)
=(1 − sL (L, K; θ))
∂ ln AK
1−σ
+
(1 − sL (L, K; θ))
σ

A-3

(Productivity effect)
(Substitution effect),
(Productivity effect)
(Substitution effect).

Multi-sector Economy
This section explains how technology affects aggregate labor demand in a model with
multiple sectors. The decomposition for labor demand we derive here both establishes the
decomposition presented in the text and provides the basis for our empirical exercise.

Index industries by i and let I represent the set of industries. We denote the price of the

goods produced by sector i by Pi , while its factor prices are denoted by Wi and Ri —which
continue to satisfy the assumption imposed in (A 6). The technology available to sector

K
i is summarized by θi = {Ii , Ni , AL
i , Ai }, and Li and Ki are the quantities of labor and

capital used in each sector, so that output (value added) of sector i is Yi = Y (Li , Ki ; θi ).

In addition, the comparative advantage schedules for labor and capital, γiL and γiK , are
also part of the industry’s technology but as in the text, we hold these fixed throughout.
We denote the task content of sector i by Γi = Γ(Ni , Ii ) and its labor share by sL
i . Total
value added (GDP) in the economy is Y = ∑i∈I Pi Yi , and we define χi =

P i Yi
Y

as the share

of sector i’s in total value added. Finally, we denote by sL the economy-wide labor share.
Changes in economy-wide wage bill, W L, can then be exactly decomposed as
(A 8)
d ln(W L) =d ln Y
+∑
i∈I

(Productivity effect)
sL
i
dχi
sL

+ ∑ ℓi
i∈I

(Composition effect)

1 − sL
i
d ln Γi
1 − Γi

(Change task content)

K
L
+ ∑ ℓi (1 − σ)(1 − sL
i )(d ln Wi /Ai − d ln Ri /Ai )

(Substitution effect)

i∈I

where ℓi =

W i Li
WL

is the share of the wage bill generated in sector i. Note that this derivation

does not require these prices to be equal across sectors, and so it can accommodate several
different assumptions on factor mobility, heterogeneous types of labor and how factor
payments are determined. Moreover, it applies for any changes in the environment, though
our focus is on changes in technologies as summarized by the vector θ = {θi }i∈I .

We next provide the derivation of this decomposition. Note that the wage bill can be

expressed as

L
W L = ∑ Wi Li = ∑ Pi Yi sL
i = ∑ Y χi s i .
i∈I

i∈I

i∈I

Here, Pi is the price of sector i (in terms of the final good, Y ) and Yi the output of the
sector.

A-4

Totally differentiating this expression, we obtain
L
L
dW ⋅ L + W ⋅ dL = ∑ dY ⋅ χi sL
i + ∑ Y ⋅ dχi ⋅ si + ∑ Y χi ⋅ dsi .
i∈I

i∈I

i∈I

Dividing both sides by W L, using the definitions of χi (=

P i Yi
Y )

and sL
i (=

W i Li
Pi Yi ),

and

rearranging, we get
Y
Pi Yi Wi Li
Wi Li
Pi Yi
dW dL
dY
Y
Y
+
=∑
⋅
⋅
⋅
+∑
⋅ dχi ⋅
+∑
⋅
⋅ dsL
i .
W
L i∈I Y W L Y
Pi Yi i∈I W L
Pi Yi i∈I W L Y
Now canceling terms and using the definition of ℓi (=

W i Li
W L ),

we obtain

sL
dsL
dW dL
dY
i
+
=∑
⋅ ℓi + ∑ L
⋅ dχi + ∑ ℓi ⋅ Li .
W
L i∈I Y
si
i∈I s
i∈I
Next noting that

dx
x

= d ln x, and that ∑i∈I ℓi = 1, this expression can be written as

d ln W + d ln L = d ln Y + ∑
i∈I

sL
i
⋅ dχi + ∑ ℓi ⋅ d ln sL
i .
sL
i∈I

Finally, differentiating (2), we have
(A 9)

d ln sL
i =

(1 − sL
i )
1 − Γi

L
K
d ln Γi + (1 − σ)(1 − sL
i )(d ln Wi /Ai − d ln Ri /Ai ).

Substituting this into the previous expression, we obtain (A 8).
As the derivation shows, the decomposition in equation (A 8) is quite general. To
derive it, we do not need to make assumptions about factor mobility across sectors, inputoutput linkages or the consumer demand-side (about their marginal rate of substitution
across different types of goods). We can also accommodate different types of labor being
employed in different industries and certain types of labor market imperfections. The only
(and the critical) assumption is that firms are along their labor demand curve, so that

in each industry we have Wi Li = Pi Yi sL
i . This holds whenever the labor share equals the

elasticity of output with respect to labor.

Alternative Production Function
Suppose that instead of (A 1), we assume the following sectoral production function
Yi = N 1−σ (∫
1

0

N

Yi (z)

A-5

σ−1
σ

σ
σ−1

dz)

,

which implies that new tasks will not replace old ones but are used additionally in the
production process.
Following the same steps as in Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018a), with this production
function we obtain that output is again given by the equation in the text but now
L
σ−1
∫I γ (z)
Γ(I, N ) = I
N
∫0 γ K (z)σ−1 dz + ∫I γ L (z)σ−1
N

gives the task content of production and
1

I
N
σ−1
1
1
Π(I, N ) = ( ∫ γ K (z)σ−1 dz + ∫ γ L (z)σ−1 )
N 0
N I

The main difference with what we have done so far is that now, the impact of new
tasks on output is given by
−1
L
σ−1
Ni
σ
dYi σ
σ−1 γ (Ni )
1 1
1 Yi σ
σ
γ L (z)σ−1 dz)
= ( ∫
−
(AL
L
)
i
i
dNi
σ Ni I i
Ni
σ Ni
σ−1

σ−1

1

⎛
d ln Yi
1
Wi
=
[ L L
]
dNi
(σ − 1)Ni ⎝ Ai γ (Ni )

1−σ

⎞
−1
⎠

Provided that the effective wage in new tasks less than one, new tasks continue to increase
output.

A2

Details of Empirical Exercise

In this section, we describe how we use the decomposition presented in the previous section
to estimate productivity, composition and substitution effects and the changes in the task
content of production.

Productivity and Composition Effects
Equation (A 8) shows how small (infinitesimal) changes in the wage bill can be decomposed
into productivity, composition and substitution effects and the change in the task content
of production. We now explain how this theoretical result can be used for decomposing
discrete changes in the wage bill. Throughout, as explained in the text, we normalize the
economy-wide wage bill by total population in order to abstract from differential changes
in population across different periods.
In this subsection, we show how a change in the wage bill can be decomposed into
productivity and composition effects and a change in industry labor shares. In the next
subsection, we then show how a change in industry labor share can be broken into a

A-6

substitution effect and a change in the task content of production.
We index time in years with the subscript t. Let t0 denote the starting year of our
decomposition. Because the economy-wide wage bill is the sum of wage bills across industries, we have:
ln (Wt Lt ) = ln (Yt ∑ χi,t sL
i,t )
i

ln(Wt0 Lt0 ) = ln (Yt0 ∑ χi,t0 sL
i,t0 ) .
i

We can then express the percent change in wage bill normalized by population, Nt , between
t0 and t as
(A 10)

ln (

Wt Lt
Yt
Wt Lt
Yt
) − ln ( 0 0 ) = ln ( ) − ln ( 0 )
Nt
Nt0
Nt
Nt0
L
+ ln (∑ χi,t sL
i,t ) − ln (∑ χi,t0 si,t )
i

i

L
+ ln (∑ χi,t0 sL
i,t ) − ln (∑ χi,t0 si,t0 ) .
i

i

The first line in equation (A 10) represents changes in GDP per capita, which directly
corresponds to our productivity effect (the term d ln Y in equation (A 8)). Hence, the
empirical counterpart of our productivity effect is
Productivity effectt0 ,t = ln (

Yt
Yt
) − ln ( 0 ) .
Nt
Nt0

The second line in equation (A 10) captures the impact of sectoral shifts (changes
in χt,i over time) on labor demand holding the labor share within each sector constant.

Conceptually, this corresponds to the composition effect (the term ∑i

sL
i,t
sL
t

dχi in equation

(A 8)). Thus, we measure the composition effect as

L
Composition effectt0 ,t = ln (∑ χi,t sL
i,t ) − ln (∑ χi,t0 si,t ) .
i

i

To further illustrate the connection between our empirical measure of the composition
effect and equation (A 8), we use a first-order Taylor expansion of the previous expression,

A-7

L
in particular expanding ln (∑i χi,t sL
i,t ) around ln (∑i χi,t0 si,t ), we obtain

Composition effectt0 ,t ≈

1
( χ sL − χ sL )
L ∑ i,t i,t ∑ i,t0 i,t
χ
s
∑i i,t0 i,t i
i

=∑
i

sL
i,t

∑j χj,t0 sL
j,t

(χi,t − χi,t0 ).

This approximation shows that, as in the second line of equation (A 8), the empirical
counterpart of the composition effect equals a weighted sum of changes in sectoral shares
of GDP. In both cases, the weights capture how labor intensive a sector is relative to the
rest.
Finally, the third line captures the role of changes in labor shares within sectors
(changes in sL
i,t over time) on labor demand holding the sectoral shares of GDP constant
at their initial value. Conceptually, this corresponds to the combined effect of substitution and changes in task content. This is because, as noted in the text, with competitive
markets the labor share changes only due to the substitution effect and changes in the
task content of production.

Estimating the Substitution Effects and the Task Content of Production
With another first-order Taylor expansion, in particular expanding ln (∑i χi,t0 sL
i,t ) around

ln (∑i χi,t0 sL
i,t0 ), the third term in equation (A 10) can be expressed as
L
ln (∑ χi,t0 sL
i,t ) − ln (∑ χi,t0 si,t0 )
i
i

≈∑

∂ ln (∑j χj,t0 sL
j,t0 )
∂ ln sL
i,t0

i

=∑
i

χi,t0 sL
i,t0

∑j χj,t0 sL
j,t0

L
⋅ (ln sL
i,t − ln si,t0 )

L
⋅ (ln sL
i,t − ln si,t0 )

L
= ∑ ℓi,t0 (ln sL
i,t − ln si,t0 ) ,
i

where the last line uses the fact that χi,t0 sL
i,t0 =
χi,t0 sL
i,t0

∑j χj,t0 sL
j,t0

=

Wi,t0 Li,t0
,
Yt 0

and therefore

Wi,t0 Li,t0
= ℓi,t0 .
∑j Wj,t0 Lj,t0

Equation (2) shows that the labor share can be written as a function of effective factor

L
prices and the task content of production, sL
i,t = s (ρi,t , Γi,t ), where ρi,t =

K
Wi,t Ai,t
L
Ai,t Ri,t

is the

relative effective price of labor. To further decompose the percent change in labor share
L
within an industry, ln sL
i,t − ln si,t0 , we use another first-order Taylor expansion, this time

A-8

ln sL (ρi,t , Γi,t ) around ln sL (ρi,t0 , Γi,t0 ). This yields:
L
ln sL
i,t − ln si,t0 ≈

Wi,t
Ri,t
∂ ln sL (ρi,t0 , Γi,t0 )
A
)
(ln
− ln
− gi,t
0 ,t
∂ ln ρi,t0
Wi,t0
Ri,t0
+

∂ ln sL (ρi,t0 , Γi,t0 )
(ln Γi,t − ln Γi,t0 ) ,
∂ ln Γi,t0

K
where gt0 ,t is the growth rate of AL
t /At between t0 and t. From equation (2), it follows

that

∂ ln sL (ρi,t0 , Γi,t0 )
=(1 − σ)(1 − sL
i,t0 ),
∂ ln ρi,t0

L
∂ ln sL (ρi,t0 , Γi,t0 ) (1 − si,t0 )
=
,
∂ ln ρi,t0
1 − Γi,t0

and so we obtain the approximation
L
L
ln sL
i,t − ln si,t0 ≈(1 − σ)(1 − si,t0 ) (ln

(A 11)

+

(1 − sL
i,t0 )
1 − Γi,t0

Wi,t
Ri,t
A
)
− ln
− gi,t
0 ,t
Wi,t0
Ri,t0

(ln Γi,t − ln Γi,t0 ) ,

The first line is the substitution effect in industry i. The second line represents changes
in the task content of production, which in our model are driven by automation and the
creation of new tasks in industry i.
Based on equation (A 11), we compute the substitution effect in an industry between
t0 and t as
Substitution effecti,t0 ,t = (1 − σ)(1 − sL
i,t0 ) (ln

Wi,t
Ri,t
A
− ln
− gi,t
).
0 ,t
Wi,t0
Ri,t0

We use data on factor prices from the BLS (described in the data section of this Appendix).
A
We impose a baseline value for σ of 0.8 and different estimates for gi,t
as described in
0 ,t

the text.
With estimates of the industry-level substitution effect at hand, we estimate the change
in task content in an industry between t0 and t as the residual from equation (A 11):
L
L
Change task contenti,t0 ,t = ln sL
i,t − ln si,t0 − (1 − σ)(1 − si,t0 ) (ln

Ri,t
Wi,t
A
).
− ln
− gi,t
0 ,t
Wi,t0
Ri,t0

The economy-wide contribution of the substitution effect is given by
Substitution effectt0 ,t = ∑ ℓi,t0 Substitution effecti,t0 ,t ,
i∈I

which maps directly to the fourth line in the theoretical decomposition in equation (A 8).

A-9

Finally, the economy-wide change in the task content of production is computed by aggregating across industry-level changes in task content:
Change task contentt0 ,t = ∑ ℓi,t0 Change task contenti,t0 ,t .
i∈I

Displacement vs. Reinstatement
We can further decompose changes in task content into displacement and reinstatement
effects. To do so, we assume, as noted in the text, that over five-year windows, an industry
engages in either automation or the creation of new tasks but not in both activities. This
assumption implies that
(A 13)

Displacementt−1,t = ∑ ℓi,t0 min {0,

1 t+2
∑ Change task contenti,τ −1,τ }
5 τ =t−2

Reinstatementt−1,t = ∑ ℓi,t0 max {0,

1 t+2
∑ Change task contenti,τ −1,τ } .
5 τ =t−2

i∈I

i∈I

We can compute the total contribution of displacement and reinstatement effects by cumulating these expressions over t0 and t,

A3

Additional Empirical Findings

In this section, we describe additional empirical results and robustness checks.

The Role of Factor-Augmenting Technologies
Figure A1 provides our decomposition for 1947-1987 and 1987-2017 using different asA
sumptions for the term gi,t,t
—the growth rate of labor-augmenting technologies relative
0

to capital-augmenting ones. We see very small differences when we impose different growth
rates of factor-augmenting technological change.
Even more telling about the limited role of factor-augmenting technologies in accounting for the changes in labor demand in the US economy is a complimentary exercise
where we compute the changes in factor-augmenting technologies at the industry level
that would be necessary to explain changes in industry labor shares without any change
in task content of production (and without any technological regress).
Suppose that there are no changes in task content—thus no true displacement and
reinstatement effects. As a result, observed changes in the labor share of an industry
K
must be explained by factor-augmenting technological advances (that is, the AL
i,t and Ai,t

terms cannot decline and either increase or stay constant). In particular, we can back
up the growth rate of factor-augmenting technologies required to explain the observed
A-10

changes in labor shares as
L
ln AL
i,t − ln Ai,t0 =

and

K
ln AK
i,t − ln Ai,t0 =

1
× Displacementi,t0 ,t > 0
(σ − 1)(1 − sL
i,t0 )

1
× Reinstatementi,t0 ,t > 0.
(1 − σ)(1 − sL
i,t0 )

Under the additional assumption that there are no distortions, we can then use the
envelope theorem to conclude that the improvements in AL
i,t increase TFP by
(A 14) Contribution of AL to TFPt,t0 = ∑ χi,t0
i

sL
i,t0

× Displacementi,t,t0 > 0,

1 − sL
i,t0

×Reinstatementi,t,t0 > 0.

(σ − 1)(1 − sL
i,t0 )

and the improvements in AK
i,t increase TFP by
(A 15) Contribution of AK to TFPt,t0 = ∑ χi,t0
i

(1 − σ)(1 − sL
i,t0 )

Figure A2 provides the counterfactual TFP increases that one would have to observe
K
if displacement were explained by increases in AL
i and reinstatement by increases in Ai

across all industries. The implied increases in TFP are gargantuan—several folds larger
than the observed TFP increases during the last seven decades. Very large changes in
factor-augmenting technologies would be necessary to explain the sizable changes in industry labor shares and especially the declines in manufacturing labor share between 1987
and 2017. This exercise underscores the need for major changes in the task content of
production to account for the evolution of sectoral labor shares and aggregate labor demand.

The Decline in Manufacturing
Our main findings show that the acceleration of automation was particularly pronounced
in manufacturing during 1987-2017. During this period, the wage bill in manufacturing
declined in absolute terms. We can use our framework to study the sources of decline in
manufacturing labor demand.
Equation (A 8) must be extended to include the role of the price of manufacturing

A-11

goods. Changes in total wage bill in manufacturing can then be decomposed as
d ln(W L)manuf =d ln Pmanuf

(Price effect)

+ d ln Ymanuf
+∑(
i∈M

sL
i
− 1) dχi
sL

(Composition effect)

1 − sL
i
d ln Γi
1 − Γi

(Change task content)

+ ∑ ℓi
i∈M

(Productivity effect)

K
L
+ ∑ ℓi (1 − σ)(1 − sL
i )(d ln Wi /Ai − d ln Ri /Ai )

(Substitution effect)

i∈M

where the sums are now computed over manufacturing industries, Ymanuf denotes the
quantity of manufacturing output, and Pmanuf denotes the relative price of manufacturing
goods.
The price effect arises because technological improvements in manufacturing will reduce its relative price, Pmanuf , which generates a negative effect on labor demand of the
sector. This is one of the main mechanisms that explains the structural transformation of
the economy (see Ngai and Pissarides, 2007).
Figure A3 presents this decomposition for manufacturing for 1947-1987 and 1987-2017.
As in the text, we normalize manufacturing wage bill by population. The figure shows
that, from 1947 to 2007, quantities produced by the sector grew at a steady rate of 3% per
year. However, in line with theories of structural transformation, this did not translate
into an equally large increase in labor demand in the sector because of a strong price effect,
which has reduced the wage bill in manufacturing at a rate of 1.3% per year between the
mid-1960s and 2007.
More importantly, our decomposition also shows that besides the standard price effects,
changes in the task content of the manufacturing sector also played a sizable role in
explaining the absolute decline in manufacturing labor demand. During the 1987-2017
period, the displacement effect from automation reduced labor demand in the sector at
a rate of 1.1% per year (33% cumulatively), making displacement as important as the
price effect during this period (accounting for a cumulative decline of 40%). Within
manufacturing, composition effects were negative but not as important as displacement
and price effects, and reduced labor demand by less than 0.3% per year during the 19872017 period (9% cumulatively).

Correlates of Automation and New Tasks
We complement the evidence presented in Table 1 of the text with a series of figures.
Figure A4 present the relationships between our three proxies for automation with

A-12

changes in task content visually. The fourth panel of Figure A4 also shows the relationship
between offshoring and our measure of change in task content of production. Though the
two variables are correlated, it is clear that there is a large amount of change in task
content unrelated to offshoring. Figure A5 present the relationships between our four
proxies for new tasks with changes in task content visually.
Finally, Table A 1 shows that the gross change in task content (the sum of the absolute
value of the displacement and reinstatement effects in an industry) predicts an increase in
industry output (columns 1 and 2) and higher TFP (columns 3 and 4).12 Both of these
correlations support our interpretation that changes in the task content of production
signal an undergoing process of automation or new task creation, which raises productivity.
In columns 5 and 6, we look at skill intensity of an industry, measured by the share of
college-educated workers among all employees (from the 1990 Census and 2012-2016 ACS).
Industries experiencing more displacement or reinstatement are also becoming more skillintensive. A natural interpretation of this finding is that automation technologies have
mostly substituted for low-skill workers, while new tasks have benefit mostly high-skill
labor (which is in line with the theoretical predictions in Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2018a).

Robustness Exercises
We also conducted a series of robustness checks.
∎ Figure A6 investigates whether the order in which we decompose the wage bill in
equation (A 10) (composition effects first within-industry changes next) matters. The figure presents the results from reversing this order and undertaking within-industry changes
first and composition effects thereafter. In this alternative decomposition, equation (A 10)
takes the form:
(A 17)

ln (

Wt Lt
Yt
Wt Lt
Yt
) − ln ( 0 0 ) = ln ( ) − ln ( 0 )
Nt
Nt0
Nt
Nt0
L
+ ln (∑ χi,t sL
i,t ) − ln (∑ χi,t si,t0 )
i

i

L
+ ln (∑ χi,t sL
i,t0 ) − ln (∑ χi,t0 si,t0 ) ,
i

i

where the second line represents the role of within-industry changes in the labor share and
the last line is the composition effect in this case.
Following the same steps as before, we find that with this ordering the overall contri12

Both of these measures are available for the 61 industries used in our analysis from the BEA KLEMS
industry accounts

A-13

bution of the substitution effect is
Substitution effectt0 ,t = ∑
i∈I

χi,t sL
i,t0

∑j χj,tsL
j,t0

Substitution effecti,t0 ,t ;

the economy-wide change in the task content of production is
Change task contentt0 ,t = ∑
i∈I

χi,t sL
i,t0

∑j χj,t sL
j,t0

Change task contenti,t0 ,t ;

and the composition effect is given by
L
Composition effectt0 ,t = ln (∑ χi,t sL
i,t0 ) − ln (∑ χi,t0 si,t0 ) .
i

i

We can see from Figure A6 that the results are very similar to our baseline.
∎ Figure A7 presents a decomposition of the wage bill for the entire economy (inclusive self-employment income) using data from the BLS. These data are available for 60
industries. See Elsby et al. (2013) for details regarding the imputation procedure followed
by the BLS. The results are similar to those reported in the text.
∎ Figure A8 presents estimates of the displacement and reinstatement effect using
yearly changes in the task content. For comparison, we also present the five-year moving
averages used in the text. Predictably, the implied displacement and reinstatement effects
are larger, but the overall patterns are similar and we find that displacement effects have
become stronger and reinstatement effects weaker during the last three decades.
∎ Figures A9, A10 and A11 provide our decomposition for the 1947-1987 period using
different values for the elasticity of substitution σ, while Figures A12, A13 and A14 do the
same for 1987-2017. The results are very similar for the different values of the elasticity
of substitution.

A4

Data Sources

We now provide the sources of the various data we use in the text and in this Appendix.
Aggregate data: We use aggregate data on employment, population and the PCE
(Personal Consumption Expenditure) price index for the US economy obtained from
FRED.
Data for 1987-2017: We use the BEA GDP by Industry Accounts for 1987-2017.
These data contain information on value added and worker compensation for 61 private
industries (19 manufacturing industries and 42 non-manufacturing industries) defined according to the 2007 NAICS classification system.
We use price data from the BLS Multifactor Productivity Tables, which report for each
A-14

industry measures of worker compensation and capital income, and indices of the quantity
of labor used, the composition of labor used, and the quantity of capital used. The BLS
then estimates a price index for labor—the wage Wi,t —as:
comp
L
− ∆ ln Lqty
∆ ln Wi,t = ∆ ln Yi,t
i,t − ∆ ln Li,t ,
L
where Yi,t
denotes worker compensation in industry i, Lqty
i,t denotes the index for the

quantity of labor used (in full-time equivalent workers), and Lcomp
denotes the index for
i,t
the composition of labor used (adjusting for the demographic characteristics of workers).
The BLS also estimates a price index for the use of capital—the rental rate Ri,t —as:
qty
K
∆ ln Ri,t = ∆ ln Yi,t
− ∆ ln Ki,t
,
qty
K
where Yi,t
denotes capital income in industry i and Ki,t
denotes the index for the quantity

of capital used, which they construct from data on investment (deflated to quantities)
using the perpetual inventory method. The BLS computes capital income as a residual by
subtracting the costs of labor, energy, materials and services from gross output. Therefore,
K
L
by construction, Yi,t
+ Yi,t
account for the entire value added of industry i.

In our decomposition exercise for 1987-2017, we use the BLS measures for Wi,t and
Ri,t . Finally, the BLS reports data for all of the NAICS industries, but pools the car
manufacturing industry (NAICS code ) with other transportation equipment (NAICS
code ). We use the pooled price indices for both of these industries in our decomposition.
Data for 1947-1987: We use the BEA GDP by Industry Accounts for 1947-1987.
These data contain information on value added and worker compensation for 58 industries,
defined according to the 1977 SIC (21 manufacturing industries and 37 non-manufacturing
industries). We converted these data to constant dollars using the PCE price index.
The BLS does not report price indices for this period, so we constructed our own
following their procedure. Specifically, we computed a price index for labor—the wage
Wi,t —as:
(A 18)

L
− ∆ ln Lqty
∆ ln Wi,t = ∆ ln Yi,t
i,t ,

L
where Yi,t
denotes worker compensation in industry i and Lqty
i,t denotes the index for the

quantity of labor used (in full-time equivalent workers). Both of these measures come
from the BEA Industry Accounts. Unlike the wage index from the BLS, our wage index
for 1947-1987 does not adjust for the composition of workers.
Second, we construct a price index for the use of capital—the rental rate Ri,t —as:
(A 19)

qty
L
∆ ln Ri,t = ∆ ln(Yi,t − Yi,t
) − ∆ ln Ki,t
,

A-15

L
where Yi,t − Yi,t
denotes capital income in industry i, which following the BLS we compute
qty
as value added minus labor costs. Also, Ki,t
is an index for the quantity of capital used,

which we take from NIPA Fixed Asset Tables by industry. These tables provide, for each
industry, an index of capital net of depreciation constructed from data on investment
(deflated to quantities) using the perpetual inventory method. We take the indices for
total assets, but there are also indices for equipment, intellectual property and structures.
The data from NIPA are at a slightly different level of aggregation than the data from
the BEA. To address this issue, we aggregated the data to 43 consolidated industries
(18 manufacturing industries and 25 non-manufacturing industries) which can be tracked
consistently over time with these two sources of data.
Alternative way of computing the substitution effect and changes in task
content: Our baseline estimation of the substitution effect and changes in task content
within an industry requires estimates of Wi,t and Ri,t as well as σ and the growth rate of
A
factor augmenting technologies, gi,t,t
.
0

One can equivalently estimate the substitution effect and changes in the task content
using only data on the quantity of labor and capital used in industry i, together with
A
estimates for the growth rate of factor augmenting technologies, gi,t,t
. In particular, the
0

substitution effect and the change in the task content of production in industry i can also
be computed as:
(A 20) Substitutioni,t,t0 =(1 − σ) ln
Task contenti,t,t0 =σ ln

sL
i,t
sL
i,t0

sL
i,t
sL
i,t0

⎛
− (1 − σ)(1 − sL
i,t0 ) ln
⎝

Lqty
i,t
Lqty
i,t0

− ln

qty
Ki,t
qty
Ki,t
0

A ⎞
,
+ gi,t,t
0
⎠

qty
qty
Ki,t
⎛ Li,t
A ⎞
−
ln
ln
+ (1 − σ)(1 − sL
)
i,t0
qty
qty + gi,t,t0
⎠
⎝ Li,t
Ki,t
0

0

This equivalence shows how one can implement our methodology using factor price data
or quantity indices of the capital and labor used in each industry. Both methodologies
produce identical result so long as price and quantity indices by industry satisfy equations
(A 18) and (A 19).
Detailed manufacturing data: For our exercise using the Survey of Manufacturing
Technologies, we used a detailed set of four-digit industries. We obtained the data for
these industries from the 1987, 1992, 1997, 2002, and 2007 BEA Input-Output Accounts.
One challenge when using these data is that industries are reported using different classifications over the years. To address this issue, we use the crosswalks created by Christina
Patterson, who mapped the detailed industries to a consistent set of four-digit manufacturing industries, classified according to the 1987 SIC.
In addition, in a few cases, value added is below the compensation of employees, and
in such instances, we recoded value added as equal to the compensation of employees,

A-16

ensuring that the labor share remains between 0 and 1. Finally, we converted these data
to constant dollars using the PCE price index.
For these four-digit SIC industries, we compute indices for the quantity of capital and
labor used from the NBER-CES manufacturing database. For labor, we computed an index
of employment adjusting for the composition of workers (between production and nonproduction workers). For capital, we used the NBER-CES measure of real capital stock
in each industry, which is constructed from data on investment (deflated to quantities)
using the perpetual inventory method. We then computed the change in task content and
substitution effect using the formulas in (A 20).
Data for 1850-1910: The historical data for 1850 to 1910 referenced in our discussion
of the mechanization of Agriculture come from Table 1 in Budd (1960) and is presented
in Figure A15. We use Budd’s adjusted estimates, which account for changes in selfemployment during this period. Table A1 in Budd (1960) also provides data on total
employment. We converted Budd’s estimates to 1910 dollars using a historical series for
the price index from the Minneapolis Federal Reserve Bank.
As noted in the text, the data on wage bill as a share of income in agriculture and
industry are from Budd (1960). These numbers ignore proprietors income accruing to
farmers and entrepreneurs, which are partly compensation for labor. Johnson (1948,
1954) provide estimates for the labor share of income inclusive of proprietors income in
the early 1900s. The resulting labor shares in 1900-1910 are between 45% and 55% for
agriculture (as opposed to an 18% wage share) and 70% for the overall economy (as
opposed to a 47% wage share). Because (owner-occupied) farming was more important in
agriculture than entrepreneurship in the rest of the economy, the gap in the labor intensity
of agriculture relative to the overall economy halves once one takes into account farmers
and entrepreneurs income.
Even with these adjustments, it is still the case that agriculture was a relatively capitalintensive sector, with the capital to labor ratio (including land) in agriculture being twice
that of manufacturing, trade, and services (Johnson, 1954). As a consequence, the reallocation of economic activity away from agriculture to manufacturing, trade and services is
again estimated to have generated a positive composition effect. Although the adjustment
for proprietors income affects the size of the composition effect, it does not change the
conclusion that the labor share within agriculture declined during this period while the
labor share in manufacturing, trade, and services increased. This is largely because, as
noted in Budd (1960), during this period the percentage of proprietors income within each
sector remained roughly constant.
Proxies for automation technologies: The measure of adjusted penetration of
robots is from Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018b). It is available for 19 industries which are

A-17

then mapped to the 61 industries in our analysis.
Acemoglu and Autor’s (2011) share of routine occupations measures the share of occupations that are highly susceptible to computerization and automation. Routine occupations include sales, clerical, administrative support, production, and operative occupations. This measure is available for 243 Census industries, which we mapped to the 61
industries used in our analysis.
The measure of adoption of automation technologies from the Survey of Manufacturing
Technologies (SMT) is available for 1988 and 1993 (see Doms et al., 1997). We combine
both surveys and use the share of firms (weighted by employment) using automation technologies, which include automatic guided vehicles, automatic storage and retrieval systems,
sensors on machinery, computer-controlled machinery, programmable controllers, and industrial robots. This measure is available for 148 four-digit SIC industries are all part
of the following three-digit “technology-intensive” manufacturing industries: fabricated
metal products, nonelectrical machinery, electric and electronic equipment, transportation equipment, and instruments and related products. To exploit these disaggregated
data, in these models we use estimates of changes in the task content over 1987-2007 for
these 148 four-digit SIC industries computed from the BEA input-output data.
Proxies for new tasks: The share of new job titles by occupation from the 1991
Dictionary of Occupational Titles comes from Lin (2011). We mapped this measure to
our 61 industries using the share of employment by occupation from the 1990 Census.
The measure of emerging tasks by occupation comes from O*NET. Since 2008, O*NET
has been tracking “emerging tasks”, defined as those that are not currently listed for an
occupation but are identified by workers as becoming increasingly important in their jobs.
As with the Dictionary of Occupational Titles data, we projected this measure to industries
using the employment distribution across occupations in the 1990 Census.
Finally, both measures of occupational diversity were computed using the 1990 Census
and the 2012-2016 American Community Survey.
Measure of offshoring: The measure of offshoring is based on work by Feenstra and
Hanson (1999), which was extended by Wright (20130). This measure is available for over
400 NAICS industries which we then mapped to the 61 industries in our analysis. For
each industry, this measure captures the penetration of trade among the industries that
supply it with intermediate goods between 1993 and 2007.

Appendix References
Acemoglu, Daron and David Autor (2011) “Skills, tasks and technologies: Implications for employment and earnings,” Handbook of Labor Economics, 4: 1043–1171.
Acemoglu, Daron and Pascual Restrepo (2018a) “The Race Between Machine
A-18

and Man: Implications of Technology for Growth, Factor Shares and Employment” American Economic Review, 108(6): 1488–1542.
Elsby, Michael, Bart Hobijn, and Aysegul Sahin (2013) “The Decline of the
U.S. Labor Share,” Brooking Papers on Economic Activity, 2: 1–63.
Feenstra, Robert, and Gordon Hanson (1999) “The Impact of Outsourcing and
High-Technology Capital on Wages: Estimates for the United States, 1979-1990.” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(3): 907–940.
Gale D. Johnson (1954) “Allocation of Agricultural Income,” Journal of Farm
Economics, 30(4):724–749.
Gale D. Johnson (1954) “The Functional Distribution of Income in the United
States, 1850-1952,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 36(2):175–182.
Lin, Jeffrey (2011) “Technological Adaptation, Cities, and New Work” Review of
Economics and Statistics 93(2): 554–574.
Wright, Greg (2014) “Revisiting the Employment Impact of Offshoring,” European
Economic Review 66:63–83.

A-19

Change in task content of production, 1947−1987
20

L

K

L

K

L

K

L

K

A /A grows at a rate of 3%
Reinstatement
L
K
A /A grows at a rate of 1%

10

0

A /A grows
Change
in task
at acontent
rate of 3%
A /A grows at a rate of 1%

−10

AL/AK grows at a rate of 3%
Displacement
A /A grows at a rate of 1%

−20
1947

1952

1957

1962

1967

1972

1977

1982

1987

Change in task content, 1987−2017
15
L

K

L

K

L

K

L

K

A /A grows at a rate of 2%
Reinstatement
L
K
A /A constant

10
5
0
−5

A /A grows at a rate of 2%
Change in task content

−10

A /A constant

−15
A /A grows at a rate of 2%
Displacement
L
K
A /A constant

−20
1987

1992

1997

2002

2007

2012

2017

Figure A1: Estimates of the displacement and reinstatement effects for
K
different assumed growth rates for AL
i /Ai .
Note: This figure presents our baseline estimates of the displacement and reinstatement
K
effects based on equation (A 13) for different values of the growth rate of AL
i /Ai . The
top panel is for 1947-1987, and as the baseline, assumes a growth rate for the relative
labor-augmenting technological change of 2%. The bottom panel is for 1987-2017, and as
the baseline, assumes a growth rate for the relative labor-augmenting technological change
of 1.5%. Results for an elasticity of substitution σ = 0.8.

A-20

Implied TFP growth, 1947−1987
200
Contribution of AL

150

100

Contribution of AK

50
Observed TFP

0
1947

1952

1957

1962

1967

1972

1977

1982

1987

Implied TFP growth, 1987−2017
200

Contribution of AL

150

100

Contribution of AK

50
Observed TFP

0
1987

1992

1997

2002

2007

2012

2017

Figure A2: Counterfactual TFP changes.
Note: This figure presents the counterfactual TFP changes that would be implied if our
estimates of the displacement and reinstatement effect in 1947-1987 and 1987-2017 were
accounted for by industry-level changes in labor-augmenting and capital-augmenting technological changes alone, respectively, as derived in equations (A 14) and (A 15). For
comparison, the figure also reports the observed increase in TFP for both periods.

A-21

Manufacturing wage bill, 1947−1987
100
Productivity effect

80
60

Observed wage bill

40
20
Composition
effect
Substitution
effect
Change in task content

0
−20

Price effect

−40
1947

1952

1957

1962

1967

1972

1977

1982

1987

Manufacturing wage bill, 1987−2017
60

40

Productivity effect

20

0

Substitution effect
Composition effect

−20

Change in task content
Observed wage bill
Price effect

−40
1987

1992

1997

2002

2007

2012

2017

Figure A3: Labor demand in Manufacturing.
Note: This figure presents the decomposition derived in equation (A3) for the manufacturing wage bill in 1947-1987 and 1987-2017. The top panel is for 1947-1987 and assumes
a growth rate for the relative labor-augmenting technological change of 2%. The bottom panel is for 1987-2017 and assumes a growth rate for the relative labor-augmenting
technological change of 1.5%. Results for an elasticity of substitution σ = 0.8.

A-22

Change in task content, 1987−2017
50

Change in task content, 1987−2017
50

Farms

Farms

Forestry and fishing

Forestry and fishing

Apparel and leather and allied

0

Fabricated metal
Furniture
Textiles
Plastics and rubber

0
Plastics and rubber

Automotive
Chemical

−50
Mining, except oil and gas

−50
Mining, except oil and gas

Petroleum and coal

−100

Petroleum and coal

−100
0

10

20

30

40

0

20

Adjusted penetration of robots, 1993−2014
Change in task content, 1987−2007

40

60

80

Share of routine jobs in industry, 1990
Change in task content, 1987−2017

3641

A-23

50

50

3633
3861

Farms
Forestry and fishing

3764
Apparel and leather and allied
Miscellaneous manufacturing

3519

0

0
3489
Primary metals

3721

Computers

3561

−50
−50
Mining, except oil and gas
Petroleum and coal

−100

3795

−100
0

20

40

60

Share of firms using automation technologies, 1988−1993

80

0

2

4

6

8

10

Exposure to intermediate imports (% of total intermediates), 1993−2007

Figure A4: Automation technologies, offshoring, and changes in the task content of production.
Note: Each panel presents the bivariate relationship at the industry level between change in task content and the indicated proxy for automation technologies or
offshoring. Diamond markers designate manufacturing industries and circles non-manufacturing industries. The proxies are: adjusted penetration of robots, 1993-2014
(from Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2018b), share of employment in routine occupations in 1990 (Acemoglu and Autor, 2011), share of firms (weighted by employment)
using automation technologies, from the 1988 and 1993 SMT, and exposure to imports of intermediate goods, from Feenstra and Hanson (1999). See text for details.

Change in task content, 1987−2017
50

Change in task content, 1987−2017
50

Farms

Farms

Forestry and fishing

Forestry and fishing

Amusement
andcare
recreation
Ambulatory
health
services

Live
entertainment
Social
assistance
Educational
services
Hospitals
Computer systems design

0

Educational services

Hospitals
Legal services

0

Data services and internet

−50

−50
Mining, except oil and gas
Petroleum and coal

Mining, except oil and gas
Petroleum and coal

−100

−100
5

10

15

20

1

Share of new job titles, based on 1991 DOT and 1990 employment by occupation
Change in task content, 1987−2017

A-24

50

3

4

5

Change in task content, 1987−2017
50

Farms

Farms

Forestry and fishing

Forestry and fishing

Professional services

Live entertainment
Management of companies

Live entertainment
Computer
systemsactivities
design
Other transportation
and support

Administrative and support services

0

2

Number of emerging tasks, based on 1990 employment by occupation

0

Data services and internet
Pipeline transportation

−50

−50

Mining, except oil and gas
Petroleum and coal

Mining, except oil and gas

−100

Petroleum and coal

−100
0

5

10

Share of employment growth between 1990 and 2016 in new occupations

15

−40

−20

0

20

Percent increase in number of occupations represented in industry

Figure A5: New tasks and change in task content of production.
Note: Each panel presents the bivariate relationship at the industry level between change in task content and the indicated proxy for new tasks. Diamond markers
designate manufacturing industries and circles non-manufacturing industries. The proxies are: share of new job titles (from Linn, 2011), number of emerging tasks
(from ONET), share employment growth between 1990 and 2016 in “new occupations”—those that were not present in the industry in 1990—, and the percent
increase in the number of occupations present in the industry between 1990 and 2016. See text for details.

Wage bill, 1947−1987 (alternative ordering)
100

Observed wage bill
Productivity effect

80

60

40

20

Substitution
effect
Composition
effect
Change in task
content

0
1947

1952

1957

1962

1967

1972

1977

1982

1987

Wage bill, 1987−2017 (alternative ordering)
Productivity effect

40

Observed wage bill

30

20

10

Composition effect
Substitution effect

0

Change in task content

−10
1987

1992

1997

2002

2007

2012

2017

Figure A6: Alternative Ordering of the Wage Bill Decomposition.
Note: The two panels present decompositions of changes in wage bill using the alternating ordering in
equation (A 17). The top panel presents the decomposition of labor demand (wage bill) between 1947 and
1987. The bottom panel presents the decomposition of labor demand (wage bill) between 1987 and 2017.
Results for an elasticity of substitution σ = 0.8 and relative labor-augmenting technological change at the
rate of 2% per year (for 1947-1987) and 1.5% a year (for 1987-2017).

A-25

Wage bill, 1987−2017, BLS data
Productivity effect

40

Observed wage bill

30

20

10
Composition effect

0

Substitution effect

−10

Change in task content

1987

1992

1997

2002

2007

2012

2017

Change in task content of production, 1987−2017, BLS data
10
Reinstatement

5

0

−5

−10
Change in task content

−15

−20
1987

Displacement

1992

1997

2002

2007

2012

2017

Manufacturing task content of production, 1987−2017, BLS data
10

Reinstatement

0

−10

−20

Change in task content

−30
1987

Displacement

1992

1997

2002

2007

2012

2017

Figure A7: Sources of changes in labor demand, 1987-2017.
Note: The top panel presents the decomposition of labor demand (wage bill) between 1987 and 2017 using
BLS data. The middle and bottom panels present our estimates of the displacement and reinstatement
effects for the entire economy and the manufacturing sector, respectively. Results for an elasticity of
substitution σ = 0.8 and relative labor-augmenting technological change at the rate of 1.5% a year.

A-26

Change in task content of production, 1947−1987
Reinstatement, yearly

40

20

Reinstatement

0

Change in task content

Displacement

−20

−40
Displacement, yearly

1947

1952

1957

1962

1967

1972

1977

1982

1987

Change in task content of production, 1987−2017
30

Reinstatement, yearly

20
Reinstatement

10
0
−10

Change in task content

−20

Displacement

−30
Displacement, yearly

−40
1987

1992

1997

2002

2007

2012

2017

Figure A8: Estimates of the displacement and reinstatement effects, yearly
and five-year changes.
Note: This figure presents our baseline estimates of the displacement and reinstatement
effects based on equation (A 13) and additional estimates using yearly changes (rather
than five-year windows). The top panel is for 1947-1987 and assumes a growth rate for
the relative labor-augmenting technological change of 2%. The bottom panel is for 19872017 and assumes a growth rate for the relative labor-augmenting technological change of
1.5%. Results for an elasticity of substitution σ = 0.8.

A-27

Wage bill, 1947−1987 , sigma=0.6

Wage bill, 1947−1987 , sigma=0.8

100

Observed wage bill
Productivity effect

100

80

80

60

60

40

40

20

20
Substitution effect
Composition effect

0

Observed wage bill
Productivity effect

Substitution effect
Composition effect
Change in task content

0

Change in task content

1947

1952

1957

1962

1967

1972

1977

1982

1987

1947

Wage bill, 1947−1987 , sigma=1

A-28

Observed wage bill
Productivity effect

80

60

60

40

40

20

20

Substitution
effect
Composition
effect
Change in task
content

0
1957

1962

1967

1972

1977

1982

100

80

1952

1957

1987

Wage bill, 1947−1987 , sigma=1.2

100

1947

1952

1962

1967

1972

1977

1982

1987

Observed wage bill
Productivity effect

Change in task
content
Composition
effect
Substitution
effect

0
1947

1952

1957

1962

1967

1972

1977

1982

1987

Figure A9: Sources of changes in labor demand for the entire economy, 1947-1987, for different values of σ.
Note: This figure presents the decomposition of labor demand (wage bill) between 1987 and 2017 based on equation (A 8) in the text. The
panels present the results for the vauels of σ indicated in their headers. In all panels, we assume relative labor-augmenting technological
change at the rate of 2% a year.

Change in task content of production, 1947−1987 , sigma=0.6

Change in task content of production, 1947−1987 , sigma=0.8

20

20
Reinstatement
Reinstatement

10

10

0

0

Change in task content

Change in task content

−10

−10

Displacement

−20

Displacement

−20

1947

1952

1957

1962

1967

1972

1977

1982

1987

1947

Change in task content of production, 1947−1987 , sigma=1

1952

1957

1962

1967

1972

1977

1982

1987

Change in task content of production, 1947−1987 , sigma=1.2
Reinstatement

Reinstatement

20

A-29

20
10
10
Change in task content

Change in task content

0

0

−10

−10

−20
−20
Displacement

1947

1952

1957

1962

1967

1972

1977

1982

1987

Displacement

1947

1952

1957

1962

1967

1972

1977

1982

1987

Figure A10: Estimates of the displacement and reinstatement effects for the entire economy, 1947-1987, for different
values of σ.
Note: This figure presents our baseline estimates of the displacement and reinstatement effects based on equation (A 13) in the text. The
panels present the results for the values of σ indicated in their headers. In all panels, we assume relative labor-augmenting technological
change at the rate of 2% a year.

Manufacturing task content of production, 1947−1987 , sigma=0.6

Manufacturing task content of production, 1947−1987 , sigma=0.8

20

20
Reinstatement

Reinstatement

10

10

0

0

Change in task content
Change in task content

−10

−10

Displacement

−20
1947

1952

1957

1962

1967

1972

1977

1982

1987

−20

Displacement

1947

Manufacturing task content of production, 1947−1987 , sigma=1

1952

1957

1962

1967

1972

1977

1982

1987

Manufacturing task content of production, 1947−1987 , sigma=1.2
Reinstatement

Reinstatement

A-30

20
20
10
10
Change in task content

Change in task content

0

0

−10

−10

−20
−20
Displacement

1947

1952

1957

1962

1967

1972

1977

1982

1987

Displacement

1947

1952

1957

1962

1967

1972

1977

1982

1987

Figure A11: Estimates of the displacement and reinstatement effects for manufacturing, 1947-1987, for different
values of σ.
Note: This figure presents our baseline estimates of the displacement and reinstatement effects based on equation (A 13) in the text. The
panels present the results for the values of σ indicated in their headers. In all panels, we assume relative labor-augmenting technological
change at the rate of 2% a year.

Wage bill, 1987−2017 , sigma=0.6

Wage bill, 1987−2017 , sigma=0.8
Productivity effect

40

Observed wage bill

Productivity effect

40

30

30

20

20

10

Observed wage bill

10
Composition effect

0

Substitution effect

Change in task content

−10
1987

1992

1997

2002

2007

2012

2017

Composition effect
Substitution effect

0

Change in task content

−10
1987

Wage bill, 1987−2017 , sigma=1

1992

1997

2002

2007

2012

Wage bill, 1987−2017 , sigma=1.2
Productivity effect

A-31

40

Observed wage bill

Productivity effect

40

30

30

20

20

10

10
Composition effect
Substitution effect

0

Change in task content

−10
1987

1992

1997

2017

2002

2007

2012

2017

Observed wage bill

Composition effect
Substitution effect

0

Change in task content

−10
1987

1992

1997

2002

2007

2012

2017

Figure A12: Sources of changes in labor demand for the entire economy, 1987-2017, for different values of σ.
Note: This figure presents the decomposition of labor demand (wage bill) between 1987 and 2017 based on equation (A 8) in the text. The
panels present the results for the values of σ indicated in their headers. In all panels, we assume relative labor-augmenting technological
change at the rate of 1.5% a year.

Change in task content of production, 1987−2017 , sigma=0.6

Change in task content of production, 1987−2017 , sigma=0.8
Reinstatement

10

Reinstatement

10
5

5

0

0

−5

−5
Change in task content

−10

−10

−15

−15
Displacement

−20
1987

1992

1997

2002

2007

2012

2017

Change in task content

−20

Displacement

1987

Change in task content of production, 1987−2017 , sigma=1

1992

1997

2002

2007

2012

2017

Change in task content of production, 1987−2017 , sigma=1.2
Reinstatement

Reinstatement

A-32

10
10
5

5

0

0
−5

−5
Change in task content

−10

Change in task content

−10
−15

−15
−20
−20
Displacement

1987

1992

1997

2002

2007

2012

2017

Displacement

1987

1992

1997

2002

2007

2012

2017

Figure A13: Estimates of the displacement and reinstatement effects for the entire economy, 1987-2017, for different
values of σ.
Note: This figure presents our baseline estimates of the displacement and reinstatement effects based on equation (A 13) in the text. The
panels present the results for the values of σ indicated in their headers. In all panels, we assume relative labor-augmenting technological
change at the rate of 1.5% a year.

Manufacturing task content of production, 1987−2017 , sigma=0.6

Manufacturing task content of production, 1987−2017 , sigma=0.8
Reinstatement

10

Reinstatement

10

0

0

−10

−10

Change in task content

−20

−20

Change in task content

−30
Displacement

−30
1987

1992

1997

2002

2007

2012

2017

Displacement

1987

Manufacturing task content of production, 1987−2017 , sigma=1

1992

1997

2002

2007

2012

2017

Manufacturing task content of production, 1987−2017 , sigma=1.2
Reinstatement

A-33

10

Reinstatement

10

0

0

−10

−10

−20

−20

Change in task content

Change in task content

−30
−30

Displacement

1987

1992

1997

2002

2007

2012

2017

Displacement

1987

1992

1997

2002

2007

2012

2017

Figure A14: Estimates of the displacement and reinstatement effects for manufacturing, 1987-2017, for different
values of σ.
Note: This figure presents our baseline estimates of the displacement and reinstatement effects based on equation (A 13) in the text. The
panels present the results for the values of σ indicated in their headers. In all panels, we assume relative labor-augmenting technological
change at the rate of 1.5% a year.

Labor share, 1850−1910
60

Industry

50
Overall

40

30

20
Agriculture

1850

1860

1870

1880

1890

1900

1910

Share GDP, 1850−1910
Industry

80

70

60

50

40

30

20
1850

Agriculture

1860

1870

1880

1890

1900

1910

Figure A15: Labor share and sectoral evolutions during the mechanization
of agriculture, 1850-1910.
Note: The top panel shows the labor share in value added in industry (services and
manufacturing) and agriculture between 1850-1910, while the bottom panel shows the
share of value added in these sectors relative to GDP. Data from Budd (1960).

A-34

Table A 1: Relationship between gross change in task content of production, quantities produced, TFP, and skill intensity of industries.
log change quantity, 1987-2016

Gross change in task content

Change skill intensity, 1990-2016

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.799
(0.262)

0.321
(0.152)

0.161
(0.206)

0.233
(0.141)
-0.357
(0.407)
17.930
(1.219)
-0.187
(0.086)

0.096
(0.037)

-0.286
(0.427)

0.581
(0.235)
-3.463
(1.541)
40.957
(2.726)
-0.884
(0.162)

-0.000
(0.019)

0.096
(0.037)
0.324
(0.149)
0.593
(0.219)
-0.037
(0.018)

61
0.08

61
0.61

61
0.12

61
0.60

61
0.16

61
0.23

Chinese import competititon
Offshoring of intermediates

A-35

Manufacturing

log change TFP, 1987-2016

Computer industry
Observations
R-squared

Note: The table reports estimates between gross changes in task content of production and the change in quantities, TFP, and skill intensity of industries. The
gross change in task content is defined as the sum of the absolute values of the displacement and reinstatement effects computed in equation (A 13). Columns 1-2
present results for the change in quantities produced (from the BEA-KLEMS). Columns 3-4 present results for the change in TFP (from the BEA-KLEMS). Columns
5-6 present results for the change in skill requirements, measured by the share of college educated workers in each industry (from the 1990 US Census and the
pooled 2012-2016 ACS). All regressions are for the 61 industries used in or analysis of the 1987-2017 period. Standard errors robust against heteroskedasticity are in
parenthesis.

