                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                MACROECONOMIC EFFECTS OF DEBT RELIEF:
        CONSUMER BANKRUPTCY PROTECTIONS IN THE GREAT RECESSION

                                        Adrien Auclert
                                        Will S. Dobbie
                                   Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham

                                      Working Paper 25685
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25685


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2019




A previous version of this paper circulated under the title "Debtor Protections and the Great
Recession.'' We are extremely grateful to Guido Imbens, David Scharfstein, and Andrei Shleifer
for their help and support. We thank David Berger, Jediphi Cabal, John Campbell, Gabriel
Chodorow-Reich, Fritz Foley, Sonia Gilbukh, Sam Hanson, Kyle Herkenhoff, David Laibson,
Atif Mian, Kurt Mitman, Ben Moll, Matt Rognlie, Isaac Sorkin, Jeremy Stein, Ludwig Straub,
Adi Sunderam, Jacob Wallace, Johannes Wieland, Danny Yagan, Crystal Yang, Eric Zwick, and
numerous seminar participants for helpful comments and suggestions. We also thank Joanne Hsu,
David Matsa, and Brian Melzer for sharing their data on state Unemployment Insurance laws.
Daniele Caratelli, Sara Casella, Rebecca Sachs, and Bailey Palmer provided excellent research
assistance. The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research. All remaining errors are ours.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Adrien Auclert, Will S. Dobbie, and Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Macroeconomic Effects of Debt Relief: Consumer Bankruptcy Protections in the Great Recession
Adrien Auclert, Will S. Dobbie, and Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham
NBER Working Paper No. 25685
March 2019
JEL No. D14,E32,F45,K35

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper argues that the debt forgiveness provided by the U.S. consumer bankruptcy system
helped stabilize employment levels during the Great Recession. We document that over this
period, states with more generous bankruptcy exemptions had significantly smaller declines in
non-tradable employment and larger increases in unsecured debt write-downs compared to states
with less generous exemptions. We interpret these reduced form estimates as the relative effect of
debt relief across states, and develop a general equilibrium model to recover the aggregate
employment effect. The model yields three key results. First, substantial nominal rigidities are
required to rationalize our reduced form estimates. Second, with monetary policy at the zero
lower bound, traded good demand spillovers across states boosted employment everywhere.
Finally, the ex-post debt forgiveness provided by the consumer bankruptcy system during the
Great Recession increased aggregate employment by almost two percent.

Adrien Auclert                                  Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham
Department of Economics                         Yale University School of Management
Stanford University                             165 Whitney Ave
579 Serra Mall                                  New Haven, CT 06511
Stanford, CA 94305-6072                         paulgp@gmail.com
and NBER
aauclert@stanford.edu

Will S. Dobbie
Industrial Relations Section
Louis A. Simpson International Bldg.
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-2098
and NBER
wdobbie@princeton.edu
    There is a widespread view that the deterioration of household balance sheets contributed to the

sharp decline in U.S. employment between 2007 and 2009. According to this view, the sudden fall

in house prices and the simultaneous contraction in credit supply led to a large drop in aggregate

consumption as households adjusted towards lower debt levels. Since monetary policy was unable

to offset this fall in aggregate demand, employment levels collapsed nationwide (e.g., Eggertsson and

Krugman 2012; Mian and Sufi 2014b). An important implication of this view is that ex-post debt

forgiveness could have prevented such a collapse by mitigating the decline in aggregate demand.1 To

date, however, there is little credible evidence on the macroeconomic effects of debt relief. Credible

estimates of these effects are critical for understanding the contribution of consumer bankruptcy to

the business cycle, as well as evaluating proposals for large-scale debt forgiveness during recessions.

    In this paper, we use a combination of quasi-experimental estimates and a general equilibrium

model to estimate the effects of ex-post debt forgiveness on macroeconomic outcomes during the

Great Recession. We focus on the debt forgiveness provided the U.S. consumer bankruptcy system, the

largest debt relief program in the United States. We overcome the endogeneity issues that bias simple

time-series comparisons by first estimating the relative effect of ex-post debt forgiveness during the

Great Recession, leveraging quasi-random variation in the generosity of bankruptcy asset exemptions

across states. We then develop a general equilibrium model to recover the aggregate effect of this

ex-post debt forgiveness from these relative cross-state effects.

    The U.S. consumer bankruptcy system allows eligible households who file for bankruptcy to dis-

charge most unsecured debts, after relinquishing assets above state-specific exemption limits. Eligible

households are therefore insured against all financial risk above the level of assets that can be seized

in bankruptcy in their state. Bankruptcy exemptions also provide a natural threat point in negotia-

tions with creditors, thereby providing a form of informal debt relief even when these households

do not formally file for bankruptcy (e.g., Mahoney 2015). Households benefiting from the consumer

bankruptcy system are, naturally, more financially distressed than the general population (e.g., Dob-

bie, Goldsmith-Pinkham and Yang 2015), and, as a result, have very high marginal propensities to

consume (MPCs, e.g., Gross, Notowidigdo and Wang 2016). The debt forgiveness provided by the

bankruptcy system could therefore boost aggregate demand if the households who implicitly finance

the bankruptcy system have relatively low MPCs. While this is a natural hypothesis, our paper is the
  1 For  example, Mian and Sufi (2014a) argue that “severe recessions are special circumstances because macroeconomic
failures prevent the economy from reacting to a severe drop in demand. [...] When such failures prevent the economy from
adjusting to such a large decline in consumption, government policy should do what it can to boost household spending.
Debt forgiveness is exactly one such policy, and arguably the most effective.”


                                                           1
first to test it systematically.

    The formal and informal debt relief provided by the consumer bankruptcy system during eco-

nomic downturns—and hence the potential boost to aggregate demand—is also economically large,

both in absolute terms and compared to other social insurance programs. Figure 1 shows the employment-

to-population ratio in the United States between 2000 and 2017, together with estimates of the amount

of unsecured credit discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy and total net charge-offs on non-real estate

consumer credit in each year.2 By way of comparison, we also show total payments by the Unemploy-

ment Insurance (UI) system, an important automatic stabilizer, and total payouts by the Home Afford-

able Modification Program (HAMP) and two other mortgage debt relief programs under the umbrella

of the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP). Both the amount of unsecured debt formally discharged

through Chapter 7 bankruptcy and total net charge-offs on consumer credit increased sharply in 2008,

just as employment fell across the country, with total net charge-offs on consumer credit reaching a

peak of almost 1.5 percent of PCE in 2010. UI payments also increased by a similar magnitude during

this time period, with total payments peaking at about 1.5 percent of PCE in 2010. By comparison,

HAMP payments peaked years later at only 0.2 percent of PCE.

    Our empirical strategy exploits the economically significant variation in the generosity of the

bankruptcy exemptions—and hence the informal and formal debt relief provided by the bankruptcy

system—across states. The cross-state variation in bankruptcy exemptions is particularly large for

home equity, the largest and most important exemption category. New York, for example, allowed

households to protect up to $100,000 of home equity in bankruptcy prior to the crisis, while Illinois

allowed households to protect only $30,000. The variation in homestead exemptions has also been

remarkably stable over time. The initial variation in homestead exemption amounts largely emerged

as states formalized their state-level approaches to bankruptcy in the late nineteenth century, in ways

that are likely unrelated to current state characteristics (Goodman 1993; Skeel 2001). Consistent with

this idea, we show that most state characteristics are uncorrelated with state bankruptcy protections

in the years just prior to the financial crisis. The combination of substantial cross-state variation in

bankruptcy exemptions and economically large transfers during the financial crisis makes the con-

sumer bankruptcy system an ideal setting to study the aggregate effects of ex-post debt forgiveness.

    In the first part of the paper, we use this variation in a difference-in-differences design that com-
   2 We report the face value of both net charge-offs and the amount of unsecured credit discharged in Chapter 7. Total

charge-offs are net of recoveries. We scale all program payouts by annual personal consumption expenditures (PCE) for
comparability over time.



                                                          2
pares outcomes in states with more generous bankruptcy exemptions (the “treated” states) to states

with less generous exemptions (the “control” states). This difference-in-differences specification ex-

plicitly controls for any pre-existing differences between states with more and less generous exemp-

tions, including any time-invariant effects of bankruptcy protections such as over-borrowing or neg-

ative effects on credit supply (Gropp, Scholz and White 1997; Severino and Brown 2017). We also

explicitly control for any common time effects of the financial crisis, including any common general

equilibrium effects such as changes in monetary policy (Nakamura and Steinsson 2014), aggregate

labor supply (Beraja, Hurst and Ospina 2016), or aggregate total factor productivity. The identify-

ing assumption for our difference-in-differences specification is that, in the absence of any variation

in bankruptcy exemptions, outcomes in states with more and less generous exemptions would have

evolved in parallel during the Great Recession. This “parallel trends” assumption implies that there

are no other reasons why the Great Recession would impact high- and low-exemption states differ-

ently, an assumption that we provide extensive support for in our analysis.

    Using a rich panel of county-level credit data and employment data, we find that states with

more and less generous bankruptcy exemptions had statistically identical outcomes during the 2001

to 2007 period. Starting in 2008, however, the states with more generous bankruptcy exemptions had

significantly smaller declines in local non-tradable employment and larger increases in consumer debt

write-downs compared to the states with less generous exemptions. For example, we find that a one

standard deviation increase in the generosity of bankruptcy protections (approximately $60,000 on a

base of $254,000) leads to a 0.399 percentage point increase in non-tradable employment from 2008

to 2010, and a $55 increase in annual debt charge-offs per person over the same time period. The

employment results are also extremely persistent, remaining economically and statistically significant

through at least 2013. In sharp contrast, we find only a small and statistically insignificant effect on

local tradable employment in all years.

    Our difference-in-differences estimates provide us with credible estimates of the relative effect of

an increase in ex-post debt relief across states, holding fixed any common general equilibrium effects.

In the second part of the paper, we show that the informativeness of these estimates for the aggregate

effect of debt relief depends on the sign and the magnitude of these general equilibrium effects. We

first develop a simple two-region framework in which debt relief in one region can have an effect on

both regions. We then define the concept of the relative debt relief multiplier, which differs from the ag-

gregate debt relief multiplier by the magnitude of the spillover effect in the control region. Calculating


                                                    3
the relative debt relief multipliers from our empirical differences-in-differences estimates, we obtain

a multiplier of 1.81 for non-tradable employment and approximately zero for tradable employment.

These multipliers have the interpretation that every additional percent of state consumption charged

off as a result of bankruptcy exemptions led to a 1.81 percentage point relative increase in non-tradable

employment during the Great Recession. But our framework makes clear that a large relative multi-

plier might mask a small aggregate effect of ex-post debt forgiveness—for example, if local prices or

monetary policy adjust to offset the effect on economic activity in the aggregate. Conversely, a small

relative multiplier might mask a large aggregate effect of debt forgiveness—for example, if there are

positive demand spillovers across states. Simple “scaling up” exercises that interpret relative multi-

pliers as approximately equal to aggregate multipliers therefore rely on an implicit assumption of zero

general equilibrium spillovers.

    In the final part of the paper, we evaluate the potential importance of these general equilibrium

effects by developing a New Keynesian model that captures regional linkages through trade, labor

markets, and a common monetary policy. Our model combines elements from the closed-economy

literature with borrower-saver heterogeneity (e.g., Eggertsson and Krugman 2012) with elements from

the open economy currency union literature (e.g., Nakamura and Steinsson 2014). Specifically, we

develop a two-agent, two-region, two-good model, where borrowers and savers are spread across

high- and low-exemption regions and consume both tradable and non-tradable goods. We model ex-

post debt relief as a transfer from savers to borrowers, so that it does not affect interest rates or credit

supply ex-ante. In our baseline calibration with standard preferences and relatively sticky prices, we

show that our model produces relative multipliers for both non-tradable and tradable employment

that are in line with our empirical estimates, with relative debt relief multipliers larger than one for

non-tradable employment and close to zero for tradable employment.

    Three features of the model generate these contrasting relative debt relief multipliers for non-

tradable and tradable employment: (1) heterogeneity in marginal propensities to consume between

borrowers and savers, (2) nominal price rigidities, and (3) trade linkages across regions. Because bor-

rowers have higher marginal propensities to consume than savers, debt relief temporarily increases

aggregate spending on all goods in the high-exemption region. Because of nominal price rigidities,

this temporary increase in aggregate spending leads to an increase in both non-tradable and tradable

employment in the high-exemption region. Because traded goods can also be imported, tradable em-

ployment rises in the low-exemption region as well. These three features therefore lead to a positive


                                                     4
relative multiplier for non-tradable employment, and an approximately zero relative multiplier for

tradable employment. However, we show that this result relies crucially on our calibration choice

of relatively rigid prices. Under flexible prices, the higher spending in the high-exemption region

instead translates into an appreciation of the terms of trade and a reallocation of tradable demand

to the low-exemption region. This reallocation induces a negative relative tradable multiplier, and

this multiplier becomes more negative as prices become more flexible. Hence, the fact that we do not

observe a significant relative decline in tradable employment in high-exemption regions is macroe-

conomic evidence for a high degree of price rigidity over the period (see Mian and Sufi 2014b for a

related argument).

    We use the model to recover an estimate of the aggregate effect of debt relief during the Great

Recession. Under the assumption that monetary policy was at the zero lower bound throughout the

period, the model implies that ex-post debt relief had positive effects on employment in both sec-

tors and in both regions. Ex-post debt relief directly increases spending and employment in both

sectors in the high-exemption region, which increases tradable employment in the low-exemption re-

gion through a demand spillover effect. The increase in tradable employment in the low-exemption

region then increases non-tradable spending and employment in that region. Calibrating the model

to the observed path of debt write-downs during the financial crisis, we find that average employ-

ment across regions in the second half of 2009 would have been almost 2 percent lower in both the

non-tradable and the tradable sector in the absence of the ex-post debt forgiveness provided by the

consumer bankruptcy system.

    We conclude by using the model to conduct three policy counterfactuals. First, we ask how the

effect of ex-post debt relief changes in normal times when the zero lower bound does not bind. We find

that even with a relatively aggressive monetary policy response, debt relief continues to have positive

effects in both regions and in both sectors. Second, we ask how the effect of debt relief changes with

the size of the relief provided to borrowers. We find that the debt relief multiplier is initially invariant

to the size of the relief provided to borrowers, but eventually falls as the size of debt relief grows

large due to the concavity of borrowers’ consumption functions. Finally, we ask how the effect of ex-

post debt relief changes with the location of the savers that pay for the relief provided to borrowers.

We find that the debt relief multiplier is invariant to the location of these savers, as savers smooth

consumption in response to wealth transfers no matter where they are located.

    Our results are related to a literature showing how deteriorating household balance sheets can


                                                     5
amplify an economic downturn. Hall (2011), Eggertsson and Krugman (2012), Guerrieri and Loren-

zoni (2017) and Midrigan and Philippon (2018) illustrate this mechanism theoretically. Mian, Rao and

Sufi (2013) show an empirical link between the fall in house prices and household consumption in

the United States during the Great Recession, and Mian and Sufi (2014b) study the subsequent effects

on non-tradable and tradable employment. Most recently, Verner and Gyongyosi (2018) show that

an increase in debt burdens led to higher default rates and a collapse in spending in Hungary, trans-

lating into a worse local recession and depressed house prices.3 We contribute to this literature by

showing that the ex-post debt forgiveness provided by the consumer bankruptcy system stabilized

employment levels in the United States during the Great Recession. Our findings are consistent with

theoretical work showing that interventions in debt markets can increase welfare when the economy

is depressed (Farhi and Werning 2016b, Korinek and Simsek 2016), as well as work arguing that the

consumer bankruptcy system should include a macroprudential objective (Dávila 2016, Auclert and

Mitman 2018).4

     Our paper is also related to recent work estimating the effects of mortgage modifications made

during the Great Recession. Agarwal et al. (2017) show that HAMP decreased the number of fore-

closures and increased durable spending, but that the program only reached one-third of targeted

households due to its uneven implementation across lenders. Building on this work, Ganong and

Noel (2018) show that the principal write-downs made through HAMP had no impact on underwater

borrowers, while the program’s maturity extensions had a large positive impact. Finally, Piskorski and

Seru (2018) find that regional variation in the extent and speed of the post-crisis recovery is strongly re-

lated to frictions affecting the pass-through of lower interest rates and debt relief to households. These

frictions nearly doubled the time it took for house prices, consumption, and employment to recover

after the financial crisis. We complement the work in this literature by showing that the unsecured

debt relief provided by the consumer bankruptcy system also boosted aggregate demand during the

Great Recession, and by explicitly addressing the theoretical issue of how to aggregate cross-regional

results.

     In another related contribution, Hausman, Rhode and Wieland (2019) analyze the effect of redis-
    3 The relative debt shock multipliers implicit in Verner and Gyongyosi (2018) are quantitatively similar to our relative

debt relief multipliers. For example, the headline estimates in Verner and Gyongyosi (2018) translate into a relative debt
shock multiplier of around 1.5 on auto spending and -0.08 on aggregate unemployment, while our calibrated model implies
a relative debt relief multiplier of 0.8 on total consumption and 0.2 on aggregate employment. These results suggest that the
aggregate effects of unexpected variation in the level of consumer debt may be similar over time and across countries.
    4 See McKay and Reis (2016) and Kekre (2018) for a similar argument related to the macroprudential objective of unem-

ployment insurance.



                                                             6
tribution from dollar devaluation during the early 1930s. They show that this redistribution led to a

substantial economic response of farmers, especially in areas with a high farm debt burden, and they

use a general equilibrium framework to scale up their estimates. Our work focuses on a different

time period and relies on explicit direct transfers to indebted consumers via debt relief, rather than

indirect increases in the prices of the products that they sell. Our results are complementary in that

we also find that redistribution towards indebted consumers can have large aggregate effects during

a recession.

    Finally, our paper builds on the local fiscal multipliers literature that has convincingly shown

that, while cross-state comparisons allow one to use plausibly exogenous variation to draw conclu-

sions about the effects of shocks or policies on regional economies, a general equilibrium model is

needed to draw conclusions about the aggregate effect of these shocks or these policies (e.g., Naka-

mura and Steinsson 2014; Farhi and Werning 2016a; Suárez Serrato and Wingender 2016; Chodorow-

Reich Forthcoming; Martin and Philippon 2017; House, Proebsting and Tesar 2017; Dupor et al. 2019;

Corbi, Papaioannou and Surico Forthcoming). The typical approach in this literature is to calculate

a relative multiplier from cross-sectional variation, and then use a structural model to discuss the re-

lationship to the aggregate multiplier. We build on this literature by applying these concepts to the

case of debt relief, by showing formally why the relative and aggregate effects differ by the magni-

tude of the spillover effect in the control region, and by making use of both tradable and non-tradable

employment outcomes as “identified moments.”

    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section I provides a brief overview of the

consumer bankruptcy system and describes our data and empirical strategy. Section II presents our

difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of bankruptcy protections on employment and credit

outcomes during the financial crisis. Section III establishes the relationship between relative multipli-

ers and aggregate multipliers, and calculates relative debt relief multipliers in our context. Section IV

develops our general equilibrium model and performs counterfactuals. Section V concludes.




                                                   7
                              I. Background, Data, and Empirical Design

This section summarizes the most relevant information regarding our institutional setting and data,

describes our empirical strategy, and provides support for the baseline assumptions required for our

difference-in-differences estimator.


                                                  A. Background

Under the U.S. bankruptcy code, eligible households can discharge most unsecured debts by filing

for Chapter 7 bankruptcy, after relinquishing assets above state-specific exemption limits. The U.S.

bankruptcy system allows most households to choose between Chapter 7 bankruptcy, which requires

households to forfeit all assets above their state’s exemption limits in exchange for a discharge of debt

and protection from collection efforts, and Chapter 13 bankruptcy, which adds the protection of most

assets in exchange for the partial repayment of debt. Chapter 13 filers are required to repay at least

as much as creditors would have received under Chapter 7, meaning that the state-specific Chapter

7 exemption limits also directly impact the generosity of Chapter 13 in each state. Chapter 7 is also

chosen by approximately 75 percent of bankruptcy filers in the United States, as most filers have

relatively low levels of non-exempt wealth. For these reasons, we focus on the Chapter 7 bankruptcy

exemption limits for the remainder of the paper.5

    Bankruptcy exemptions also provide a natural threat point in settlements with creditors, thereby

providing a form of informal debt relief even when households do not formally file for bankruptcy.

In our context, these settlements are most likely to occur after borrowers become delinquent on a

debt, but before they formally file for bankruptcy protection. These settlements can be the result of

borrowers contacting the creditor directly, but can also be arranged by non-profit credit counselors or

for-profit debt settlement companies working on behalf of the borrowers, particularly when borrowers

are delinquent on several debts simultaneously (Wilshusen 2011). The bankruptcy system provides

a natural threat point in these settlements, as households can always threaten to file for Chapter 7

protection as an outside option. Consistent with this idea, Mahoney (2015) shows that uninsured

households with a greater financial cost of bankruptcy make higher out-of-pocket medical payments,

conditional on the amount of care received.
  5 The   2005 Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act (BAPCPA) changed several relevant features of
the U.S. bankruptcy code. First, BAPCPA increased filing fees and imposed mandatory credit counseling for both chapters.
Second, BAPCPA reduced the generosity of the bankruptcy code by restricting Chapter 7 to households that passed an
income or repayment test, making it more difficult for high-income households to shield their home equity in through the
bankruptcy system. These changes should not influence our results, however, as they were applied uniformly across states
prior to the onset of the financial crisis.


                                                           8
    The formal and informal debt relief provided by the consumer bankruptcy system during eco-

nomic downturns is economically large, both in absolute terms and compared to other social insur-

ance programs. The average Chapter 7 bankruptcy filer between 2008 and 2010 discharged more than

$94,000 in unsecured debt, with more than 2.8 million households filing for Chapter 7 over this time

period (U.S. Courts 2017, see also Figure 1). In other words, Chapter 7 helped bankruptcy filers for-

mally discharge more than $263 billion in unsecured debt during the Great Recession. The informal

debt relief provided by the bankruptcy system, as well as the secured debt discharges through Chap-

ter 7 and both the unsecured and secured debt discharges through Chapter 13, only add to this total.

By comparison, UI payouts totaled $319.1 billion over this time period (Whittaker and Isaacs 2016),

while the payouts made by the Home Affordable Modification Program (HAMP) and two other debt

relief programs under the umbrella of the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) totaled $106 billion

(U.S. Treasury 2018).

    Our empirical strategy exploits the considerable variation in the generosity of the bankruptcy

exemptions across states. Appendix Table A1 shows Chapter 7 exemptions by state and category

in 2007, just prior to the onset of the financial crisis. The variation is particularly large for the home

equity exemptions, the largest and most important exemption category. Seven states allow households

to protect an unlimited amount of home equity in bankruptcy, for example, while three states do not

allow households to protect any home equity. There is also variation in the other exemption categories,

albeit at much lower levels, with vehicle exemptions ranging from $0 in 12 states to at least $10,000

in three states, savings exemptions ranging from $0 in 39 states to at least $1,000 in seven states, and

wildcard exemptions, which can be applied to any asset, ranging from $0 in 20 states to at least $10,000

in three states.

    The variation in homestead exemptions has also been remarkably stable over time, with the initial

variation in homestead exemption amounts largely emerging as states formalized their state-level

approaches to bankruptcy in the late nineteenth century, in ways that are likely unrelated to current

state characteristics (Goodman 1993; Skeel 2001). The population-weighted correlation between the

2007 and 1991 homestead exemption ranks, for example, is 0.88, while the correlation between the 2007

and 1920 homestead exemption ranks is 0.60 among the 38 states with exemptions in both time periods

(see Appendix Figure A1). Consistent with this idea, we show below that most state characteristics

are uncorrelated with state bankruptcy protections in the years just prior to the financial crisis.




                                                    9
                                           B. Data and Summary Statistics

Our empirical analysis uses information from county-level employment and inflation data, and individual-

level credit data aggregated to the county level.


County Employment Data. We measure employment outcomes between 2001 and 2013 using county-

level data from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW). The data are derived from

individual-level Unemployment Insurance (UI) tax files submitted by each state to the Bureau of La-

bor Statistics (BLS). The BLS uses these individual-level files to calculate quarterly employment by

county and industry.6

     There are two important challenges in constructing consistent employment measures over our

sample period using the QCEW data. The first is that the industry codes in the QCEW data change

from NAICS 2002 to NAICS 2007, and then to NAICS 2012 over this time period. We address this

issue using the publicly-available NAICS code crosswalks and the Mian and Sufi (2014b) industry

definitions to create a consistent time series of employment in each county and industry.7 The second

challenge is that the QCEW employment data are suppressed in certain county-industry-year-quarter

bins for confidentiality reasons. Following Mian and Sufi (2014b), we address this issue by imput-

ing employment in suppressed county-industry-year-quarter bins using information from the County

Business Patterns (CBP) data.8

     We use the cleaned and harmonized QCEW employment data to construct a panel dataset for

non-tradable employment, tradable and other employment, and total employment. We follow the

industry groupings defined in Mian and Sufi (2014b), where non-tradable employment is defined

as the retail and restaurant sectors, tradable employment is defined as industries with sufficiently

large imports and exports from the rest of the United States, and other employment is defined as all

other industries excluding the construction sector. In our analysis, we combine tradable and other

employment into a single category, which we refer to as “tradable employment” for simplicity. We

normalize all employment measures by the number of working-age adults in each county to account
   6 See   www.bls.gov for additional information on the underlying data.
   7 The publicly-available NAICS crosswalks lack an exact one-to-one mapping of NAICS codes across all years.    To address
this issue, we first construct the Mian and Sufi (2014b) industry definitions of non-tradable, tradable, and other industries
in each set of three-digit NAICS codes. We then assign the definitions to 2002 NAICS and 2012 NAICS for all industries
where the definitions perfectly align. Then, when the mappings disagree (e.g., a tradable and non-tradable industry are
both mapped to the same case), we manually choose an industry definition in cases when the definitions disagree. Our
NAICS crosswalk is available upon request.
   8 Payroll data is also available from the QCEW and CBP. However, there is no way to impute suppressed cells in the

payroll data, and, as a result, there is substantial measurement error in these data that varies by employment density.



                                                             10
for any secular population trends over the years we examine. Information on population totals comes

from the U.S. Census.


Credit Bureau Data. We measure credit outcomes between 2001 and 2013 using records from the

Equifax / New York Fed Consumer Credit Panel (CCP), a representative five percent random sample

of all individuals in the U.S. with credit files.9 Like other credit report data, the CCP data are de-

rived from public records, collection agencies, and trade lines data from lending institutions. The data

include a comprehensive set of consumer credit outcomes, including information on credit scores, un-

secured credit lines, auto loans, and mortgages. The data also include year of birth and geographic

location at the ZIP-code level. We identify homeowners as any individuals who currently have mort-

gage or home equity debt outstanding, or those individuals who have had mortgage debt in the eight

years prior to 2007.10 No other demographic information is available at the individual level. We ag-

gregate these data to the county level unless otherwise mentioned. See Avery et al. (2003) and Lee and

Van der Klaauw (2010) for additional details on the underlying credit report data.


House Price Data. County-level house price indices between 2001 and 2013 come from CoreLogic.

We use quarterly data from 1240 counties over the sample period. We also use zipcode-level house

price estimates from Zillow.com when calculating home equity values.


Inflation Data. Price index data comes from the BLS Consumer Price Index (CPI), measured at the

Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) level for 26 MSAs at the half-year frequency. Following Mian,

Sufi and Verner (2017), we use these price indices to construct annualized inflation measures from

2001 to 2013 in three categories: overall, non-tradable, and tradable inflation. We use the All Items

index for overall inflation, the Services index to measure non-tradable inflation, and Commodities to

measure tradable inflation. We then use an MSA-to-county crosswalk to map these measures to our

dataset.
   9 The credit bureau data do not include the approximately 22 million adults (nine percent of adults) in the United States
without credit files, or information on non-traditional forms of credit such as payday lending, pawn shops, and borrowing
from relatives. The data are therefore likely to be less representative on the behaviors and outcomes of very poor popula-
tions.
   10 Our measure of homeownership will not include individuals whose homes are fully owned. In our data, 48 percent

of individuals are defined as homeowners, compared to around 68 percent in the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). Tai
(2017) shows that the majority of this discrepancy in homeownership comes from individuals who are 55 and older.




                                                            11
Summary Statistics. Table 1 provides descriptive statistics for key outcomes before, during, and

after the financial crisis. We report the average percentage change in employment and credit outcomes

for 2001q1 to 2007q4, 2007q4 to 2010q4, and 2010q4 to 2013q4, as well as the change in consumer

price and house price indices over the same time periods. Total employment, scaled by working-age

population, declined slightly prior to the financial crisis, falling by 2.57 percent from 2001q1 to 2007q4.

Employment then fell sharply during the crisis, dropping by 7.41 percent from 2007q4 to 2010q4,

before recovering by 4.06 percent from 2010q4 to 2013q4. Non-tradable and tradable employment

both followed similar trends as overall employment, although non-tradable employment increased

prior to the crisis.

    Debt charge-offs were approximately unchanged from 2001q1 to 2007q4, before increasing sharply

by $124.78 per person from 2007q4 to 2010q4. Charge-offs then declined by $241.67 per person from

2010q4 to 2013q4, reflecting both the tighter credit markets and improved economic conditions dur-

ing this time period. Formal bankruptcy and foreclosure rates increased by 0.158 and 0.145 percentage

points, respectively, before the financial crisis, with much larger increases for foreclosures from 2007q4

to 2010q4. Bankruptcy rates then fell by 0.91 percentage points from 2010q4 to 2013q4, with foreclosure

rates increasing by 0.057 percentage points. Credit card limits grew from 2001q1 to 2007q4 by almost

$3,000 per person, but substantially declined by nearly the same amount from 2007q4 to 2010q4, fol-

lowed by a recovery of $955 per person from 2010q4-2013q4. Credit card debt also increased slightly

from 2001q1 to 2007q4, but fell both during and after the financial crisis. Consistent with the results

in Foote, Loewenstein and Willen (2016) and Adelino, Schoar and Severino (2018), mortgage credit

increased sharply prior to the financial crisis, with a change of more than $26,000 per person from

2001q1 to 2007q4. Mortgage credit increased by another $1,839 per person from 2007q4 to 2010q4,

before falling by $3,977 per person from 2010q4 to 2013q4.

    In contrast to the economically large changes in employment and credit outcomes, consumer

prices were relatively stable over this time period. Prices on all consumer goods, for example, in-

creased by 21.8 percent from 2001q1 to 2007q4 (an annualized rate of 2.4 percent), 5.0 percent from

2007q4 to 2010q4 (an annualized rate of 1.4 percent), and 6.4 percent from 2010q4 to 2013q4 (an an-

nualized rate of 2.1 percent). Non-tradable and tradable prices follow a similar trend, although non-

tradable prices increased less from 2001q1 to 2007q4 compared to tradable prices. House prices, how-

ever, increased by over 40 percent from 2001q1 to 2007q4, before falling by roughly 22 percent from

2007q4 to 2010q4. House prices then partially recovered after the crisis, increasing by 11 percent from


                                                    12
2010q4 to 2013q4.


                                                 C. Empirical Design

We estimate the relative impact of ex-post debt forgiveness across states using a difference-in-differences

design that compares outcomes in states with more generous bankruptcy exemptions (the “treated”

states) to states with less generous exemptions (the “control” states). Our difference-in-differences

design explicitly controls for any pre-existing differences between states with more and less generous

exemptions, such as any time-invariant effects of bankruptcy protections on credit demand and credit

supply (Gropp, Scholz and White 1997; Severino and Brown 2017). We also explicitly control for any

common time effects of the financial crisis, such as the large negative aggregate demand shock for both

tradable and non-tradable goods. The key identifying assumption for our difference-in-differences

specification is that, in the absence of any variation in bankruptcy exemptions, outcomes in states

with more and less generous exemptions would have evolved in parallel during the Great Recession.

This “parallel trends” assumption allows us to interpret the difference between states with more and

less generous bankruptcy exemptions during the financial crisis as the causal effect of more gener-

ous bankruptcy exemptions in the presence of a large aggregate shock, an assumption we provide

extensive support for below.


Bankruptcy Protection Measure Calculation. We measure the generosity of bankruptcy protections

in each state prior to the Great Recession using the average cost of filing for Chapter 7 bankruptcy

in each state, s, using the pre-crisis bankruptcy asset exemptions in state s and the balance sheets of

individuals in all other states, −s. By using the pre-crisis bankruptcy exemptions in each state, our

bankruptcy protection measure removes any endogenous changes to the exemptions made during

the financial crisis. By using balance sheets of individuals in all other states, our protection measure

also removes any potential effects of the bankruptcy exemptions on household characteristics such

as asset holdings or income. Our bankruptcy protection measure therefore isolates the generosity of

each state’s bankruptcy exemptions, purged of any variation due to the characteristics of states’ actual

residents and any changes to the exemption laws that states made in response to the crisis.11
  11 Our bankruptcy protection measure is closely related to the “simulated instrument” measure developed by Currie and
Gruber (1996) to isolate exogenous variation in Medicaid eligibility across states, and adapted by Mahoney (2015) to isolate
exogenous variation in the generosity of bankruptcy exemptions across states. Our measure is also closely related to the
financial cost of bankruptcy measure developed by Fay, Hurst and White (2002). Our measure differs from the bankruptcy
protection measures used in Fay, Hurst and White (2002) and Mahoney (2015) in two ways. First, we are able to directly
measure balance sheet values for some assets, rather than relying on assets and liabilities from surveys as in Fay, Hurst and
White (2002) and Mahoney (2015). Second, Mahoney (2015) also exploits within-state variation based on average differences


                                                             13
     We calculate our bankruptcy protection measure in three steps. First, we calculate the financial

cost of filing Chapter 7 bankruptcy, Bis , for individual i in state s using individual-level data on both

asset values and unsecured debts. Following Fay, Hurst and White (2002) and Mahoney (2015), we

define the financial cost of bankruptcy for individual i in state s as the value of i’s assets that can be

seized under Chapter 7 bankruptcy in state s minus the value of any debts that can be discharged

under Chapter 7 and plus a common filing fee:


                           Bis = Seizable Assetsis − Dischargeable Debti + Filing Cost


where an individual’s seizable assets Seizable Assetsis is the sum of individual i’s seizable home eq-

uity, vehicle equity, retirement savings, financial assets, and other assets:


                Seizable Assetsis = max(Home Equityi − Homestead Exemptions , 0)

                                     + max(Auto Equityi − Auto Exemptions , 0)

                                     + max(Retirement Assetsi − Retirement Exemptions , 0)

                                     + max(Financial Assetsi − Financial Assets Exemptions , 0)

                                     + max(Other Assetsi − Wildcard Exemptions , 0),


We measure dischargeable debt using the level of unsecured debt from credit cards in the CCP credit

bureau data described above; home equity using mortgage balances from the CCP credit bureau data

and zipcode-level housing values from Zillow; and vehicle equity, retirement assets, and other finan-

cial assets using the 2005 and 2007 PSID Wealth Files datasets, excluding households with at least one

individual who is enrolled in public insurance or is over the age of 65 in the survey year. We use state

bankruptcy exemption laws from 2007 for all asset categories to remove any endogenous changes to

the exemptions made during the financial crisis.12

     Second, we calculate the average cost of filing for bankruptcy in state s, B̄s , using the household
in asset holdings across different age, race, and education cells. We ignore this within-state heterogeneity, both because we
are interested in the aggregate effect of the bankruptcy laws, and because are unable to measure across-group heterogeneity
in asset holdings using our data.
  12 In robustness checks below, we show that we obtain similar estimates when using state exemption laws in 1991, the

earliest year for which information on exemption laws is available for all 50 states, and well before either the financial crisis
or the pre-crisis increase in house prices and employment.




                                                               14
characteristics of individuals in all other states −s:


                                            B̄s = | I−s |−1    ∑       Bsj
                                                              j∈ I−s


where I−s is the entire sample of individuals in all states excluding state s, and Bsj is the financial cost

of bankruptcy measure for individual j if they were subject to the laws of state s. By using household

characteristics of individuals in all other states, −s, we make sure that the variation in B̄s is only driven

by the differences in exemption laws across states, and therefore remove any potential effects of the

bankruptcy exemptions on household characteristics such as asset holdings or income.

    Finally, we rescale our bankruptcy protection measure to have a mean of zero and standard devi-

ation of one for simplicity in all our regression specifications. We also multiply our rescaled measure,

B̂s , by negative one so that we can interpret positive numbers as a higher level of bankruptcy protec-

tion:
                                                    B̄s − Es [ B̄s ]
                                            B̂s = − p
                                                        Vars ( B̄s )

Bankruptcy Protection Variation. Appendix Figure A2 plots the financial cost of bankruptcy by

state B̄s , or our bankruptcy protection measure before we multiply by negative one and rescale to

have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. There is considerable geographic variation in

the average financial cost of bankruptcy across states, with a population-weighted standard deviation

of $60,000 on a base of $254,000. The state with the lowest financial cost of bankruptcy is Kansas, at

$154,000, and the highest is Virginia, at $337,000. The difference between the 10th and 90th percentile

of the state-level distribution is similarly large, at $163,000. Moreover, high- and low-cost regions are

not exclusively located in any area of the United States.

    Appendix Figure A3 plots the financial cost of bankruptcy in each state against the relative gen-

erosity of the homestead, vehicle, savings, and wildcard exemptions in each state. We also plot the

line of best fit weighted by state population. The variation in the financial cost of bankruptcy across

states is almost entirely explained by the state homestead exemptions laws, with a correlation of -0.94

between the overall financial cost of bankruptcy, and homestead exemption ranks. In contrast, the

correlation between the financial cost of bankruptcy and vehicle exemptions is only -0.10, while the

correlations with savings and wildcard exemptions are only -0.07 and 0.04, respectively.

    We observe a similar pattern in Appendix Table A1, which lists the financial cost of bankruptcy

separately for seizable home equity and other seizable financial assets for each state. The variation in

                                                      15
the financial cost of bankruptcy for home equity is approximately ten times larger than the variation

in the financial costs for any other asset, with a population-weighted standard deviation of $ 58,999

on a base of $97,388 for seizable home equity, but only $6,473 on a base of $159,841 for other seizable

financial assets. The difference between the 10th and 90th percentile of the state-level distribution

is similarly large for seizable home equity at $160,172, compared to only $11,149 for other seizable

financial assets.13


Empirical Specification and Identifying Assumptions. For a given outcome, Y, our difference-in-

differences regression specification takes the form:

                                     2013                                  2013
                 Yit = αi + λt +      ∑       β u 1(Yeart = u) B̂s(i) +    ∑        γu 1(Yeart = u) Xi + eit           (1)
                                    u=2001                                u=2001
                                    u6=2007                               u6=2007


where αi are county fixed effects, λt are year-quarter fixed effects, B̂s(i) is our normalized measure of

the generosity of bankruptcy protections for county i in state s, and Xi are potential time-invariant

characteristics of county i such as the housing supply elasticity measure from Saiz (2010). The esti-

mated effects of B̂s(i) and Xi are allowed to be time-varying, with β u denoting the year-by-year impact

of the bankruptcy protections each year, and γu denoting the potential time-varying impact of other

variables that might confound our estimates of the effects of the bankruptcy protections.14

     In this specification, the β u coefficients can be interpreted as the relative impact of the bankruptcy

protections in each year. We omit 2007, β 2007 , so that the other β u ’s can be interpreted as relative to

this pre-crisis baseline period. Our estimates of β u from 2008 to 2010 will therefore capture the relative

short-run impact of the bankruptcy protections during the Great Recession, while the estimates of β u

from 2011 to 2013 will capture the relative long-run impact of the protections during the recovery.

As discussed in greater detail below, our estimates do not necessarily measure the aggregate impact

of the bankruptcy protections during the crisis and recovery periods, as they difference out general

equilibrium effects.

     The identifying assumption for our difference-in-differences specification is that, in the absence

of the Great Recession, the outcomes in states with more and less generous protections would have
  13 Retirement savings and financial assets (e.g., stock holdings) make up the vast majority of the other financial assets

category. The median level of vehicle equity, for example, is less than $10,000 in most states.
  14 We estimate Equation (1) using county-level data, not state-level data, as this allows us to use county-level controls

that improve the precision of our estimates. We use state population weights in all regressions, however, meaning that our
county-level estimates are approximately equal to the state-level estimates, but with lower residual variance.




                                                             16
evolved in parallel. This parallel trends assumption implies that there are no other reasons why the

Great Recession would impact more and less generous states differently.

    To better understand what our identification assumption entails, Appendix Table A2 examines the

state-level correlation between our bankruptcy protection measure and other variables that may have

caused differential employment responses during the Great Recession. Panel A reports results for

baseline employment outcomes, Panel B for baseline credit outcomes, and Panel C for baseline state

characteristics, including Democratic vote shares, maximum unemployment benefits, demographics,

sensitivity to the business cycle, per capita incomes, house prices, homeownership rates, housing

supply elasticities, non-recourse laws, and predicted exposure to the financial crisis. Column 1 reports

results using variables measured in 2001, the first year in our sample period. Column 2 reports results

using variables measured in 2007, the year just before the onset of the financial crisis. In each panel and

column, we report estimates from OLS regressions of the listed variable on our bankruptcy protection

measure, weighted by state population, with robust standard errors. Statistically or economically

significant estimates from these regressions do not necessarily imply a violation of our identifying

assumption, as the county fixed effects αi in our main specification will control for any time-invariant

differences across geographic areas. What is critical is that any characteristics that differ across more

and less generous states do not have a confounding time-varying effect on states’ outcomes during

the Great Recession. For example, our identifying assumption would be violated if states with more

generous bankruptcy protections also had more generous UI benefits, and those more generous UI

benefits had an independent impact on employment during the financial crisis.

    Appendix Table A2 reveals no statistically or economically significant differences in the level of

employment between areas with more and less generous bankruptcy protections. There are also no

significant differences in credit outcomes between areas with more and less generous protections, with

the exception of 2007 bankruptcy filings, which are 0.04 percentage points lower in areas with more

generous bankruptcy protections. We also find remarkably few differences in the state-level charac-

teristics in more and less generous areas. There are, for example, no differences in Democratic vote

shares or the generosity of unemployment insurance between more and less generous areas, charac-

teristics that partially capture states that are more likely to have responded to the Great Recession

through automatic stabilizers or debt forgiveness (e.g., Di Maggio and Kermani 2017; Hsu, Matsa and

Melzer 2018). We similarly observe no income or demographic differences between more and less

generous areas, as well as no difference in the sensitivity of a states’ employment with the national


                                                    17
employment cycle.15 However, we do find a positive correlation between our bankruptcy measure

and predicted exposure to local employment shocks during the Great Recession, measured using a

shift-share approach at the three-digit NAICS industry level (e.g., Yagan 2017).16 We also find that

areas with more generous protections have lower homeownership rates, although we find no differ-

ences in house prices, the housing supply elasticities discussed in Saiz (2010), or the non-recourse

mortgage laws discussed in Ghent and Kudlyak (2011).

    Based on these correlations, we can identify two potential confounding factors that may have

led to differential employment responses during the Great Recession. First, areas with more gener-

ous bankruptcy protections were potentially less exposed to local unemployment shocks during the

financial crisis, at least as measured by our shift-share measure. Second, areas with more generous

bankruptcy protections had fewer homeowners, exactly the types of individuals who suffered the

largest wealth shock during the crisis.

    We partially test our identifying assumptions to assess whether the above factors (or others) are

potential sources of bias. We do so in two complementary ways. First, we examine whether em-

ployment and credit outcomes evolve in parallel in states with more and less generous bankruptcy

protections before the financial crisis. As discussed below, our non-parametric specifications show

that outcomes for states with more and less generous bankruptcy protections move in close parallel

during the pre-crisis period. These results give us confidence that our “control group” of less generous

states is valid and that provides us with an accurate counterfactual for what would have happened to

the “treatment group” of more generous states, despite the differences documented above.

    Second, we examine whether our coefficient estimates change when we add controls for potential

confounding variables interacted with time fixed effects. The added control variables interacted with

time effects estimate the direct impact of these alternative economic channels during the Great Reces-

sion. If our point estimates remain consistent across specifications, then we are more confident that

these potential confounding variables are not driving our main estimates. We present these robustness

results in three complementary ways. First, we add controls for the supply elasticity of housing inter-

acted with time fixed effects, and the pre-crisis share of homeowners in a county interacted with time
  15 We calculate the sensitivity of a states’ employment with the national employment cycle, or “market beta,” using the

time series correlation between each state’s employment growth and national employment growth from 1961 to 2001 and
1961 to 2007.
  16 Following Yagan (2017), we calculate exposure to local employment shocks using a shift-share approach and County

Business Patterns data. Each area’s shift-share shock is equal to the predicted 2006-2010 percentage change in that area’s
employment based on a combination of local industry composition and leave-one-out nationwide changes in employment
by three-digit NAICS industry categories.



                                                           18
fixed effects. This first set of controls tests for the potential confounding effect of the boom-bust cycle,

as well as the differences in homeownership rates found in Appendix Table A2.17 Second, we add

controls for demographic characteristics of the state as measured in 2007 interacted with year-quarter

fixed effects, and the predicted exposure to local unemployment shocks during the Great Recession

interacted with year-quarter fixed effects. This second set of controls tests whether the correlation be-

tween our bankruptcy protection measure and the predicted exposure to local unemployment shocks

during the Great Recession in Appendix Table A2 is biasing our results. Finally, we rerun this last

specification excluding the “sand states,” or Arizona, California, Nevada and New Mexico. These

states were particularly affected by the housing crisis and subsequent economic collapse, and hence

we want to ensure that our results are not driven by this particular subset of states.


                                                      II. Results

In this section, we examine the relative short- and long-run effects of consumer bankruptcy protections

across states using our difference-in-differences research design. We first analyze the relative effects

of bankruptcy protections on employment, before turning to its relative effects on debt write-downs.

We conclude by discussing the relative effects of bankruptcy protections on other credit outcomes and

presenting additional robustness checks.


                                                   A. Employment

Panel A of Table 2 reports estimates of the impact of bankruptcy protections on employment from

our parametric difference-in-differences specification that pools the effect of a one standard deviation

increase in the generosity of bankruptcy protections for 2007q4-2010q4. Column 1 reports the cross-

county average and standard deviation of the change in the dependent variable from 2007q4-2010q4,

the short-run crisis period, or 2010q4-2013q4, the long-run recovery period. Columns 2-5 report co-

efficients on the reduced form effect of a one standard deviation decrease in the log financial cost of

filing for bankruptcy protection from 2007q4-2010q4. Column 2 reports estimates with only county

and year-quarter fixed effects. Column 3 adds controls for the Saiz supply elasticity and share of the

population who own a home for each county, both interacted with year-quarter fixed effects. Column

4 adds controls for the share of Democratic voters in 2004, the maximum unemployment insurance

benefit, the share of college-educated individuals in a county, the share of the population that is under
  17 Controlling for an intermediate variable such as house price growth may create selection bias, as areas that do econom-
ically better due to bankruptcy debt relief may recover faster, and experience differential house price appreciation.



                                                            19
the age of 45, the average debt-to-income ratio for the state in 2007, and the predicted exposure to local

unemployment shocks during the Great Recession, all interacted with year-quarter fixed effects. Col-

umn 5 repeats the same specification excluding the “sand states” of Arizona, California, Nevada, and

New Mexico. All regressions are weighted by county population as of 2007 and the standard errors

are clustered at the state level to account for within-state correlation between the treatment variable

and unobservable shocks (Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan 2004; Abadie et al. 2017).

    We find that states with more generous bankruptcy protections had significantly smaller declines

in local non-tradable employment during the financial crisis compared to states with less generous

protections. Controlling for only county and year-quarter fixed effects, we find that a one standard

deviation increase in our bankruptcy protection measure increases non-tradable employment by 0.499

percentage points, or 9.6 percent of the overall decline in non-tradable employment during this pe-

riod (column 2). In our preferred specification that includes time-invariant housing controls interacted

with year-quarter fixed effects, we find that a one standard deviation increase in our bankruptcy pro-

tection measure increases non-tradable employment by 0.399 percentage points, or 7.7 percent of the

overall decline in non-tradable employment (column 3). The point estimates remain large and statis-

tically significant when we add controls for state demographics and policies (column 4) or exclude

the “sand states” (column 5). All of the results suggest that the more generous bankruptcy protections

had an economically and statistically significant impact on non-tradable employment during the Great

Recession, consistent with the consumer bankruptcy system acting as an automatic stabilizer.

    In sharp contrast, we find an economically and statistically insignificant effect of the more gen-

erous bankruptcy protections on tradable employment. In our preferred specification that includes

time-invariant housing controls interacted with year-quarter fixed effects, we find that a one standard

deviation increase in bankruptcy protections increases tradable employment by only 0.086 percentage

points from 2008q1-2010q4, or 1.0 percent of the overall decline in tradable employment during this

period (column 3). We find similar results adding controls for state demographics and policies (col-

umn 4) or excluding the “sand states” (column 5), with none of the estimates suggesting economically

significant effects of the bankruptcy system on tradable employment. We also find an economically

and statistically insignificant effect on total employment during the crisis, as non-tradable employ-

ment makes up only about 23 percent of overall employment.

    Figure 2 plots the estimated effect of the more generous bankruptcy protections from the non-

parametric difference-in-differences shown in Equation (1) with log non-tradable employment, log


                                                   20
tradable employment, and log total employment as dependent variables. We include time-invariant

housing controls interacted with year-quarter fixed effects and cluster standard errors at the state level.

The plots show no systematic relationship between the more generous bankruptcy protections and

employment outcomes before the financial crisis, providing support for our parallel trends identifying

assumption, and more generally corroborating our results on the timing and size of the effect.

     Figure 2 also allows us to examine the relative long-run impact of the protections during the

recovery. The effects on non-tradable employment are persistent throughout the recovery period, with

a roughly 0.85 percent difference between the more and less generous states in 2011, 2012, and 2013.

Non-tradable employment increased by an average of 5.3 percentage points over this time period,

meaning that effects in percentage terms are similar in both the crisis and recovery periods. Panel

B of Table 2 reports parametric difference-in-differences estimates for the recovery period, revealing

that a one standard deviation increase in bankruptcy generosity increases non-tradable employment

by 0.842 percentage points from 2011 to 2013, or 15.9 percent of the overall increase in non-tradable

employment during this period (column 3). These persistent effects are difficult to justify in standard

models of aggregate demand, which imply that the effect of transitory demand shocks should die out

over time. We return to this issue in Section IV.G.18

     Both Figure 2 and Table 2 suggest little impact of the bankruptcy protections on tradable employ-

ment during the recovery period, consistent with our findings for the short run. In our preferred

specification that includes time-invariant housing controls interacted with year-quarter fixed effects,

we find that, over this recovery period, a one standard deviation increase in the bankruptcy protec-

tion measure actually decreases tradable employment by 0.075 percentage points, or 2.0 percent of the

overall change in tradable employment during this period (column 3). We also find an economically

and statistically insignificant effect on total employment during this time period, again because of the

small share of non-tradable employment.

                                               B. Debt Write-Downs

We measure debt write-downs using the charge-offs that occur when seriously derogatory debts are

removed from individuals’ credit reports. Charge-offs do not include medical debt held by hospitals

(e.g., Mahoney 2015), mortgage debt on second homes with negative equity (e.g., Ganong and Noel

2018), and payday loans (e.g., Dobbie and Skiba 2013), meaning that we will understate the impact
  18 Thelong-lasting effects of the bankruptcy protections on non-tradable employment throughout the recovery period are
broadly consistent Verner and Gyongyosi (2018), who find persistent effects of foreign currency debt exposure on employ-
ment in Hungary.


                                                          21
of bankruptcy protections to the extent that these debts are also written off due to the more generous

protections. We return to this issue below when calculating the relative debt relief multiplier.

    Table 3 reports estimates of the impact of bankruptcy protections on annual debt write-downs

from our parametric difference-in-differences specification that pools the effect of a one standard devi-

ation increase in the generosity of bankruptcy protections for 2007q4-2010q4 and 2010q4-2013q4. Fig-

ure 3 plots the estimated effect of the more generous bankruptcy protections from the non-parametric

difference-in-differences shown in Equation (1).

    Consistent with the employment results in Table 2, states with more generous bankruptcy pro-

tections had significantly larger increases in debt write-downs during the financial crisis compared

to states with less generous bankruptcy protections. In our preferred specification that includes time-

invariant housing controls interacted with year-quarter fixed effects, we find that a one standard devi-

ation increase in our bankruptcy protection measure increases annual debt write-downs from 2008q1-

2010q4 by $54.50, or 43.7 percent of the overall increase in debt write-downs during this time period

(column 3). The point estimates remain large and statistically significant when we add controls for

state demographics and policies (column 4) or exclude the “sand states” (column 5), with all of the re-

sults suggesting that the more generous bankruptcy protections had an economically and statistically

significant impact on debt write-downs during the Great Recession. We also find much larger effects

for homeowners, at $80.46, compared to renters, at $22.58, consistent with the idea that the homestead

exemptions were a particularly important source of debt forgiveness during the financial crisis and

the most important source of variation in our bankruptcy protection measure (see Appendix Figure

A3).

    Figure 3 shows no pre-trends in debt write-downs before the financial crisis, with a sharp increase

in debt write-downs in 2008, consistent with the employment results. The effect of the bankruptcy

protections on write-downs declines during the recovery period, however, with an estimated effect

of only $33.69 for the full sample during this time period. These results are consistent with the

bankruptcy system providing significant debt forgiveness to borrowers during the financial crisis,

with a much more limited impact during the recovery period.


                       C. Additional Credit Outcomes and Robustness Checks

Additional Credit Outcomes. Appendix Table A3 reports estimates of the impact of bankruptcy pro-

tections on other credit market outcomes in both the short- and long-run. There are no clear theoretical



                                                   22
predictions for other credit outcomes, including bankruptcy filing rates, due to the offsetting effects of

the greater availability of debt forgiveness and the improved local economic conditions documented

above. In fact, we find little impact of the more generous bankruptcy protections on bankruptcy filing

rates in either the crisis or recovery period. There is also no discernible impact on credit card limits

in either time period, with insignificant effects on credit card debt during the crisis and modest neg-

ative effects during the recovery period. We also find a modest impact of more generous bankruptcy

protections on mortgage debt in some, but not all, specifications in both time periods. Taken together,

these results suggest there may have been a minor contraction in borrowing limits due to the increase

in debt write-downs, but that any contraction was small compared to the nationwide fall in borrowing

observed during the financial crisis.

     The only credit outcome significantly impacted by the more generous bankruptcy protections

during the financial crisis is foreclosure rates, which increase by 0.257 percentage points from 2008q1-

2010q4 and 0.401 percentage points from 2011q1-2013q4 in our preferred specification that includes

time-invariant housing controls interacted with year-quarter fixed effects. The increase in foreclosure

rates may be due to strategic incentives to enter foreclosure on one’s secondary home because of the

benefit of preserving one’s primary assets against creditors.19


Additional Robustness Checks. Appendix Tables A5 and A6 present results using state homestead

exemptions in 1991, the earliest year for which information on exemption laws is available for all

50 states and well before either the financial crisis or the pre-crisis increase in house prices and em-

ployment. We find consistently positive results for non-tradable employment across all specifications,

but the estimates are smaller in magnitude and statistically insignificant in some specifications, likely

because the additional noise in our bankruptcy protection measure attenuates the estimates down-

ward. We also find positive and statistically significant results for debt write-downs, although the

estimates are again smaller than our main results. We interpret these results as supporting our conclu-

sion that more generous bankruptcy protections increase non-tradable employment and debt write-

downs, even when using noisier historical proxies of bankruptcy protection.
  19 It is also possible that the increase in foreclosure rates is driven by a confounding variable, such as a differential change

in house prices in more and less generous areas. We explore this possibility in Appendix Table A4, where we report estimates
of the impact of bankruptcy protections on log house prices. We find that areas with more generous bankruptcy protections
experienced a larger fall in house prices in both the crisis period, and in the recovery, but this fall is only statistically
significant once we control for state-level policies and the shift-share shock (columns 4 and 5). These declines in house
prices in the presence of higher employment numbers are potentially a consequence of the foreclosure effects documented
above, and are likely due to the strategic incentive to enter foreclosure on one’s second home.




                                                               23
                 III. Recovering Aggregate Effects from Reduced-Form Estimates

We interpret the differences-in-differences estimates in the previous section as the relative effect of an

increase in ex-post debt relief across states, holding fixed any common general equilibrium effects.

In this section, we develop a simple general equilibrium framework to relate these differences-in-

differences estimates to the macroeconomic causal effect of interest, the aggregate effect of ex-post

debt relief on employment. We then calculate “regional debt relief multipliers” in our context using the

ratio of our difference-in-differences estimates for employment and debt write-downs, as suggested

by our framework.

                        A. Macro Treatments and Difference-in-Differences Estimates

Consider a general equilibrium model with two symmetric regions i ∈ { H, F }, Home and Foreign.

Suppose that the model is approximately linear in aggregate variables such as debt relief and total

factor productivity (TFP).20 Consider a macroeconomic treatment ∆i,t applied to region i at time t. In

our application, ∆i,t will be debt relief, but ∆i,t could also refer to local government spending as in the

local fiscal multipliers literature, for example. Assume that this treatment affects macroeconomic vari-

ables only contemporaneously. That is, assume that the treatment features no aggregate anticipation

or persistence.21 With this structure, a given outcome (such as log employment) Yi,t in region i at time

t can be represented, to a first-order approximation, as:


                                         Yi,t = αi + λt + M H ∆i,t + M F ∆−i,t                                           (2)


where ∆i,t denotes treatment in region i per person in region i. Equation (2) expresses the outcome Yi,t

as the sum of a region fixed effect αi representing the time-invariant steady state level of the outcome,

a time fixed effect λt representing any common shocks such as nationwide variation in preferences or

TFP, and the causal aggregate effect of the treatment on region i, which is the response to the treat-

ment in both the home and foreign region M H ∆i,t + M F ∆−i,t . The home multiplier M H represents the

causal effect of home treatment ∆i,t on home outcome Yi,t , including any general equilibrium effects.

Similarly, the foreign multiplier M F represents the causal effect of foreign treatment ∆−i,t on home out-
  20 Most  solution methods log-linearize the model to first order and therefore assume this explicitly.
  21 This is true of government spending changes in standard Neoclassical models, and will be approximately true of debt
relief in our model below. The general first-order equation for potential outcomes, taking into account anticipation and
persistence, is Yi,t = γi + λt + ∑∞                     ∞
                                  s=−∞ M H,s ∆i,t+s + ∑s=−∞ M F,s ∆−i,t+s . Limited anticipation and persistence allow us to
simplify this equation using M H,s = M F,s = 0 for s 6= 0. This hypothesis is not necessary for our results, but allows us to
simplify the discussion by focusing on the impact effect of the debt relief shock and focusing on the two contemporaneous
multipliers M H and M F .


                                                             24
come Yi,t . The model’s symmetry between regions implies that M H and M F do not depend on i.22 As

we now show, the spillover term M F ∆−i,t leads to the disconnect between cross-sectional estimates

provided by a difference-in-differences design and the causal effect of interest from a macroeconomic

perspective.

    Since the regions are symmetric, aggregate treatment per person is equal to ∆t ≡       1
                                                                                           2   ∑i ∆i,t . We can
therefore rewrite Equation (2) as:


                                     Yi,t = αi + λt + 2M F ∆t +(M H − M F )∆i,t                             (3)
                                                 |    {z    }
                                                         λ̃t


Equation (3) implies that, given exogenous variation in treatment across states, a regression of out-

come Yi,t on region fixed effect, time fixed effect and regional treatment ∆i,t recovers a regression

coefficient:

                                            β ∆i,t →Yi,t = Mrel = M H − M F                                 (4)

Another option to recover Mrel is to take the ratio of two difference-in-differences estimates. Specifi-

cally, let t = 0 be a base period. Equation (2) shows that:

                                (YH,t − YH,0 ) − (YF,t − YF,0 )
                                                                   = Mrel = M H − M F                       (5)
                               (∆ H,t − ∆ H,0 ) − (∆ F,t − ∆ F,0 )

Equations (4) and (5) show that these two common empirical specifications recover the difference be-

tween two causal effects M H and M F . The reason is as follows. In an integrated economy, local

macroeconomic changes such as treatment at home ∆ H,t simultaneously “treats” all regions. However,

Equation (4) shows that a cross-sectional regression differences out the effect M F of the treatment in

the “control” (foreign) region. When M F > 0, the relative multiplier Mrel understates the effect of

the treatment on the local region M H , because the local treatment also increases the other region’s

outcome. When M F < 0, the regional multiplier Mrel instead overstates the causal effect of interest

because the treatment lowers outcomes in the other region. For our application to debt relief in the

model below, M F will take on either sign depending on parameter values.

    While the relative multipliers M H and M F may be of interest for regional policy evaluation, the

macroeconomic effect of interest is typically the aggregate multiplier, or the causal effect of the aggregate
  22 Symmetry   also implies that αi does not depend on i.




                                                               25
treatment on the aggregate outcome. This aggregate multiplier is simply equal to:

                                             1
                                             2   ∑i (M H ∆i,t + M F ∆−i,t )
                                  M agg =                                   = MH + MF                                          (6)
                                                           ∆t

Any macroeconomic treatment ∆t tends to affect all regions, even if it affects some regions more than

others. Equation (6) shows that the average effect across regions reflects the sum of its local and its

spillover effect. This point is general and does not depend on our assumption that there are only

two regions.23 Except in the special case of no spillovers M F = 0, the aggregate multiplier M agg

is different from the relative multiplier Mrel in Equation (5). Nevertheless, Mrel is useful because it

contains information about M H that is in turn relevant for M agg .

     For empirical papers interested in aggregate macroeconomic outcomes, the results above pro-

vide caution in interpreting cross-regional elasticities. Cases where Mrel is positive may reflect a

situation where the overall aggregate effect is small, or negative, and vice versa. Traditional back-

of-the-envelope calculations that identify M agg with Mrel are implicitly assuming M F = 0, that is,

zero general equilibrium spillovers. This may be appropriate in particular situations. For example,

in our structural model below, we will find that M F = 0 for non-tradable employment under a par-

ticular specification of monetary policy, while we will always find M F > 0 for tradable employment

(see Figure A4). This suggests that regional tradable employment elasticities tend to be an underes-

timate of aggregate tradable employment elasticities because the spillovers are stronger for tradable

employment.

     Motivated by these results, we proceed as follows. We first calculate the relative multiplier Mrel

implicit in our difference-in-differences estimates for both tradable and non-tradable employment.

We then develop a model of the causal effect of debt relief and show that it verifies approximately

the equation for potential outcomes in Equation (2). Next, we calibrate our model and validate this

calibration by comparing the relative debt relief multipliers M NT,rel and MT,rel in the theory and the

data. Finally, we use the aggregate multiplier M agg from our calibrated model to recover the aggregate

effect of debt relief during the Great Recession.

     We are not the first to point out the disconnect between regional and aggregate elasticities. Our
  23 Inthe more general case with n symmetric regions, the potential outcomes Equation (2) is replaced with Yit = αi + λt +
M H ∆it + M F n− 1                                                           1
                   1 ∑ j6=i ∆ jt . Equation (4) is replaced by Mrel = M H − n−1 M F , and Equation (6) is still M agg = M H + M F .
In the limit as n → ∞, as in Galí and Monacelli (2005) and Farhi and Werning (2016a) for example, the relative multiplier
Mrel is equal to M H , as any given region is too small to affect any one other, but the aggregate multiplier differs from Mrel
by M F , the effect of simultaneously treating all regions on any given region.




                                                                26
approach builds most closely on recent work on local fiscal multipliers by Nakamura and Steinsson

(2014) and the large literature that followed (see Chodorow-Reich Forthcoming and Nakamura and

Steinsson 2018 for summaries of recent work). The typical approach in this literature is to calculate

a relative multiplier from cross-sectional variation, and then use a structural model to discuss the

relationship to the aggregate multiplier. We build on this literature by applying these concepts to the

case of debt relief, by showing formally why the relative and aggregate effects differ by the spillover

effect in the control region M F , and by making use of both tradable and non-tradable employment

outcomes as “identified moments.”

     The issue of aggregation from regional to aggregate elasticities has been taken up in other work,

including Adao, Arkolakis and Esposito (2019), Beraja, Hurst and Ospina (2016), Guren et al. (2018),

and Sarto (2018). The typical approach in these papers is to impose more structure than we do. One

advantage of our approach is its transparency, as we can directly compute M H , M F , Mrel , and M agg

in any given calibration and then compare these numbers to our empirical specification.

                              B. Calculating the Relative Debt Relief Multiplier

We can now use our difference-in-differences estimates to calculate the relative debt relief multipli-

ers Mrel for both non-tradable and tradable employment. As defined above, the relative debt relief

multipliers identify the percentage increase in employment from each percentage point increase in

debt write-downs. We measure the debt write-downs as a share of aggregate consumption in order to

give our multipliers more easily interpretable units. Equation (5) suggests that these relative debt re-

lief multipliers can be estimated as the simple ratio of our difference-in-differences estimates for each

employment sector and debt write-downs, scaled by consumption.24

     There are two potential problems with simply taking the ratio of our difference-in-differences es-

timates, however. The first is that this simple approach assumes that all of the debt forgiveness created

by the consumer bankruptcy system is captured by our debt write-down measure. Yet, there are many

important types of debt forgiveness that are not included in our debt write-down measure, including

medical debt charged off by hospitals (e.g., Mahoney 2015), the debt on second homes with negative

equity charged off by mortgage lenders (e.g., Ganong and Noel 2018), and the debt charged off by

most payday lenders (e.g., Dobbie and Skiba 2013). We therefore inflate our difference-in-differences

estimate for debt write-downs to account for the incomplete nature of our write-down measure. We
  24 Inthe model below, we assume that debt write-downs are a one-time transfer to borrowers. In practice, however, the
economic benefits of debt write-downs may occur over multiple time periods. We therefore calculate the multipliers over a
three-year time horizon, rather than a shorter time horizon such as only one year.


                                                           27
calculate the fraction of forgiven debt included in our debt write-down measure using a sample of

Chapter 7 bankruptcy filings, where we find that our write-down measure captures approximately

77.5 percent of the debt forgiven in the typical Chapter 7 filing.25

     The second potential problem with simply taking the ratio of our difference-in-differences esti-

mates is that this assumes that the effect of bankruptcy protections acts solely through the channel

of debt relief, and not through some alternative channel. Our debt relief multiplier will therefore be

biased if, for example, bankruptcy protections have an independent effect on employment by increas-

ing the incentive to work by eliminating or reducing wage garnishment orders (e.g., Dobbie and Song

2015; Donaldson, Piacentino and Thakor Forthcoming). We are unable to estimate the magnitude

of these independent effects using our data, and, as a result, unable to account for this issue when

calculating our debt relief multiplier.

     Formally, we define the relative debt relief multiplier, following Equation (5), as:

                                          ∆ log(Employments )
                           Ms,rel =                           ,                 s ∈ {T, NT},                            (7)
                                       Write-Downs Consumption

where ∆ log(Employment)s is the change in employment for sector s over a given period of time,

and Write-Downs is economy-wide change in debt scaled by aggregate consumption for the same

time period. The relative debt relief employment multiplier Ms therefore measures the percentage

increase in employment from each percentage point increase in debt write-downs in consumption

units.

     We calculate the cross-state debt relief multipliers using our preferred specification from column

3 of Tables 2 and 3. Following the adjustment for the fraction of forgiven debt included in our debt

write-down measure discussed above, we find:


                                         M NT,rel = 1.81,         MT,rel = 0.39.                                         (8)


     These cross-state debt relief multipliers suggest economically significant relative effects of debt

write-downs on employment in non-tradable sectors, but economically small relative effects on em-

ployment in tradable sectors. We now turn to our a general equilibrium model of debt relief that will
  25 We  estimate the fraction of forgiven debt included in our debt write-down using the random sample of Chapter 7
bankruptcy filings described in Dobbie, Goldsmith-Pinkham and Yang (2015). To do this, we first identify the composition
of different debts that were discharged in Chapter 7. We then calculate the share of that total debt that is accounted for by
credit card and auto debt: 77.5 percent.




                                                             28
allow us to map these relative debt relief multipliers into aggregate multipliers.26

                                                             IV. Model

Our model combines elements from recent New Keynesian models of currency unions with incom-

plete markets that have been used to study fiscal and transfer multipliers (see for example Farhi and

Werning 2016a, Nakamura and Steinsson 2014, and Chodorow-Reich Forthcoming). We expand upon

this standard framework in two natural directions given our context. First, our model includes hetero-

geneity in the marginal propensity to consume out of liquid wealth for savers and borrowers, which

allows ex-post debt relief to have real effects. Second, our model includes both traded and non-traded

goods, which allows us to examine the causal effect of debt relief on traded and non-traded employ-

ment separately, facilitating the mapping between our empirical difference-in-differences estimates

and the model.

                                                        A. Model Setup

Our model is a two-agent, two-region, two-good (“TANK3 ”) currency union model. The model fea-

tures a home H and foreign F region, each producing traded T and non-traded NT goods, and each

inhabited by a representative borrower B and a representative saver S. To ensure symmetry, we as-

sume that the home region and the foreign region are of equal size, or 21 each. In each region, borrowers

make up the fraction ϕ B of the population, and savers the faction ϕS = 1 − ϕ B . Households h ∈ { B, S}

share the same utility function over consumption and hours worked (up to a factor that normalizes

their total hours), but differ in their discount factor βh , with β B < βS . They also face an exogenous

credit constraint, which is binding for borrowers in steady state. Goods are produced under monop-

olistic competition. We index goods by type { T, NT }, production location i ∈ { H, F }, producer j, and

time t.


Households. All households within a region consume traded and non-traded goods, receive em-

ployment and dividend income, and can borrow and save in nominal risk-free bonds. Households

maximize utility:
                                                      ∞
                                                  "                                             #
                                                                     t                   
                                              E       ∑          βh        uh Ci,t
                                                                               h      h
                                                                                   , Ni,t
                                                      t =0

  26 We can also construct cross-state debt relief multipliers using an instrumental variables (IV) approach, where we instru-

ment for debt write-downs using our measure of bankruptcy protections. However, this instrumental variables approach
assumes that all of the debt forgiveness created by the consumer bankruptcy system is captured by our debt write-down
measure, an assumption we believe to be invalid in this setting. We therefore prefer our simple scaling approach to a formal
IV.


                                                                           29
where βh is the discount factor of household type h ∈ { B, S}, Ci,t
                                                                h is aggregate consumption of house-

                                               h is that household’s labor supply. For our baseline spec-
hold type h living in region i at time t, and Ni,t
                                                                                                                                            C 1− σ          1+ ψ
ification, we assume standard separable preferences of the form uh (C, N ) =                                                                1− σ      − χh N1+ψ , where ψ
is the inverse Frisch elasticity of labor supply and σ the inverse elasticity of intertemporal substitution

in consumption. Consumption C is itself an aggregate of the consumption of traded and non-traded

goods:
                                                                                                                                 η −η 1
                                                                          1        η −1                1                  η −1
                                C (CT , CNT ) = α (CT )                   η          η    + (1 − α) (CNT )
                                                                                                       η                    η




where α represents the expenditure share on traded goods at a unit relative price and η is the elasticity

of substitution between tradable and non-tradable goods. In turn, traded and non-traded goods are

made up of an aggregate of intermediate goods:

                                Z       1                e−e 1         e−e 1                      Z       1                 e−e 1          e−e 1
                      h                           h                                        h                            h
                     CT,i   =                    CT,i,j             dj                    CNT,i   =                    CNT,i,j              dj
                                     0                                                                     0


       h
where CT,i,j is household h’s demand for the traded good produced in location i by firm j (similarly
     h
for CNT,i,j ), and e is the elasticity of substitution between goods.

    We assume that non-traded goods are all produced locally, but traded goods can be imported from

the other region. Tradable goods j ∈ 0, 12 are produced in the home region, and goods j ∈ 21 , 1 are
                                                                                              

produced in the foreign region. Since the home region also has size 12 , there is no home bias in tradable

spending.

    There is free trade across the two regions, so the price of traded goods is the same in both loca-

tions. We write PT,j for the common price of tradable intermediate good j, and PNT,i,j for the price of

intermediate good j in region i. The nominal price indices for tradable and non-tradable goods are

defined as:
                                Z       1
                                                                         1−1 e                   Z       1
                                                                                                                                             1−1 e
                                                         1− e                                                                1− e
                       PT =                      PT,j            dj                   PNT,i =                      PNT,i,j             dj
                                     0                                                                 0

and the consumer price index in region i is given by:

                                                      h                           i 1−1 η
                                                         1− η
                                                  Pi = αPT + (1 − α) ( PNT,i )1−η


    Workers are immobile, so the nominal hourly wage may differ in the two regions. We write Wi for

the nominal wage in region i.27
 27 Appendix   Table A7 validates this assumption by showing that the in-migration response across states with different


                                                                                    30
    The budget constraint of consumer h, in region i at time t is given by:

                                                                           h
                                                                          Bi,t
                                       h
                                 Pi,t Ci,t   +    h
                                                 Bi,t −1   − ∆i,t
                                                              h
                                                                    =                    h
                                                                                 + Wi,t Ni,t + Di,t
                                                                        1 + It
                         
       h = C Ch , Ch
where Ci,t                                                                                 h
              T,i,t NT,i,t is aggregate consumption for consumer h in region i at time t, Bi,t is her

nominal debt level, It the nation-wide nominal interest rate, and Di,t are total nominal profits of firms

in region i. The government does not impose any taxes or transfers, except for those needed to impose

the consumer debt write-downs ∆i,t
                               h , as detailed below. Consumers face a borrowing constraint, such


that their real debt (in units of the traded good price index) is constrained to stay below a constant

level b at all times:
                                                            h
                                                           Bi,t ≤ bPT,t      ∀h, i


Firms. Firms produce goods under monopolistic competition using local labor as their only input.

Firm j produces tradable good j using the production function:

                                                                                  γ
                                                     YT,j,t = A T,t NT,j,t


where A T denotes productivity in the traded good sector—which is common across firms and regions—

and γ denotes the extent of diminishing returns to production. Similarly, non-tradable firms in both

the home and foreign regions produce non-tradable goods using the production function:

                                                                           γ
                                   YNT,i,j,t = A NT,t NNT,i,j,t                        i ∈ { H, F }


where A NT denotes the common productivity in the non-traded good sector.

    Prices for both traded and non-traded goods are set in a Calvo fashion, with each firm getting a

chance to reset their price with a probability 1 − θ that is iid across firms and over time. When θ = 0,

prices are fully flexible. The degree of price rigidity θ is the same for both traded and non-traded

goods.


Monetary Policy. For our baseline specification, we assume that monetary policy is such that there

is a constant nominal interest rate of It :

                                                                 It = I                               (9)
exemptions was very limited in our short-run period.



                                                                    31
where I is the steady-state nominal interest rate in our model. Since our focus will be on the effects

of debt relief shocks, this baseline specification implies that monetary policy is unresponsive to the

effect of these shocks, mimicking a situation where debt relief takes place at the zero lower bound.28

We refer to this policy as ZLB policy.

       We will also consider the effect of debt relief in a non-crisis period. In this non-crisis period,

we assume that the monetary authority responds to consumer price inflation in both regions with an

equal weight φπ . In this Taylor rule policy scenario, the central bank sets the nominal interest rate such

that:
                                                                        φπ             φπ
                                                                PH,t             PF,t
                                      1 + It = 1 + I                                                                      (10)
                                                                PH,t−1           PF,t−1
           PH,t                                                             PF,t
where     PH,t−1   is home consumer price inflation at time t,             PF,t−1   is foreign CPI inflation, and φπ is the

degree of responsiveness of monetary policy to inflation.

       To ensure the determinacy of outcomes in response to transitory debt relief shocks, both in the

ZLB policy case given by Equation (9), and in the Taylor rule policy case given by Equation (10) when

φπ is sufficiently low, we assume that the central bank ensures that the economy returns to steady

state at a time T that is far enough in the future that the effects of these debt relief shocks have died

out.


Equilibrium. Equilibrium in our model is defined in a standard way.29 Market clearing requires

that, at any point in time, the labor market clears locally, so that aggregate employment in region i is

both equal to aggregate supply by all agents and to aggregate demand by all local firms (the sum of

traded goods employment NT,i and non-traded goods employment NNT,i ),


                               Ni,t ≡ ϕ B Ni,t
                                           B
                                               + ϕS Ni,t
                                                     S
                                                         = NT,i,t + NNT,i,t            i ∈ { H, F }


The non-traded goods market must clear locally, so that: CNT,i,j,t = YNT,i,j,t in each region i and for

each non-traded firm j, and the traded goods and the asset market must clear nationwide. This implies
  28 While the steady-state nominal interest rate I is always strictly positive in our model, it is easy to conceive of “Great
Recession” shocks, such as shocks to productivity or discount factors, that would push the economy to It = 0. Since the
model is approximately linear, these shocks would not interact with the effects of debt relief conditional on ZLB policy. Our
assumption helps us isolate the effect of debt relief at the ZLB without explicitly modeling these Great Recession shocks.
  29 See Appendix B for the full set of equations describing the equilibrium solution, as well as a description of our solution

method.




                                                                32
in particular that all borrowers’ debts are also savers’ assets:

                                 ϕB B        B      ϕS S        S
                                   ( BH,t + BF,t )+   ( BH,t + BF,t ) = 0.
                                 2                  2

In the zero-inflation steady state of our model, borrowers in both regions are at their credit constraint:


                                                     BiB = bPT   ∀i

                                                                           −1
and the nominal and real interest rate are both equal to I = βS                  − 1.


Debt Relief. We model the debt relief shock as follows. At time 0, it is unexpectedly announced

that home borrowers will receive a sequence of transfers ∆ BH,t and that foreign borrowers will receive

a sequence of transfers ∆ BF,t . The home borrowers can use these transfers to pay down their debts,

and, since they are constrained, they will do so fully in equilibrium, provided that the transfers are

small enough. This sequence of transfers captures the ex-post nature of the debt relief shock that we

are modeling, in that it reduces borrowers’ debts without affecting borrowing rates or ex-ante credit

supply.
                                          ϕB
                                                                 
    Each period, total transfers ∆t ≡     2        ∆ BH,t + ∆ BF,t are paid for by a lump-sum tax on savers in one

or both regions, such that:
                                 ϕS S                      ϕS S
                                   ∆ = − f ∆t                ∆ = −(1 − f )∆t                                  (11)
                                 2 H,t                     2 F,t

The parameter f ∈ [0, 1] in (11) indexes the regional incidence of payment for the debt relief in our

model. Consider, for example, the case where ∆ BF,t = 0, so that debt relief only takes place in the

home region H. Then, if f = 1, savers at home pay entirely for local debt relief, generating the

largest domestic offset. In that case, the aggregate demand effect of debt relief comes entirely from the

difference in marginal propensities to consume between borrowers and savers in the home region. If

f < 1, debt relief also implies regional redistribution, or a net asset transfer from the foreign region
                                     1
to the home region. The case f =     2   implies that the burden of debt relief in the home region is borne

equally by savers in both regions.


                                               B. Model Calibration

In line with our objective of maintaining a transparent mapping between model and data, our base-

line calibration uses standard parameter values from the literature. In later sections, we discuss the


                                                           33
robustness of our results to other parameter values.

     Table 4 summarizes our baseline calibration, with all parameters at the quarterly frequency. We

set the fraction of borrowers in each region to 0.5, reflecting the approximate share of households

carrying a positive credit card balance in our data.

     We set βS = 0.983 so that the steady-state annual real interest rate is 7 percent per year, corre-

sponding to the average interest rate paid by households in 2007Q4 according to national account

estimates.30 For borrowers, we consider a baseline of β B = 0.92. Provided that β B < βS , our model

produces identical outcomes for small shocks. (β B becomes relevant when we study large shocks, as
                                                                                                     C 1− σ         1+ ψ
we discuss in Section IV.F.) In our baseline of separable preferences, uh (C, N ) =                  1− σ     − χh N1+ψ , we
assume that the long-run income and substitution effects on labor supply cancel out, so σ = 1, and set

the Frisch elasticity of labor supply to a standard macroeconomic value of ψ−1 = 1.

     We set 1 − α = 0.236, since our measure of non-tradable sectors, following Mian and Sufi (2014b),

represents 23.6 percent of employment. We follow the standard practice of setting an elasticity of sub-

stitution within tradable and non-tradable goods equal to 10 to match a steady-state level of markups

of 11 percent, and set the elasticity of substitution between T and NT to a relatively high value of 2.
                                                                    e
We set γ = 0.66 to match a steady-state labor share of            e −1 γ   = 0.6, as in NIPA data for the period.
     We consider two assumptions for price rigidity. In our baseline, prices are sticky and θ = 0.8,

implying an average price duration of 5 quarters. This level of price stickiness is on the high end

of the empirical estimates, but we show in Section IV.C that only a high degree of price rigidity can

rationalize our empirical relative multiplier estimates. We also consider an alternative calibration with

fully flexible prices (θ = 0). We will argue that our empirical relative multipliers soundly reject this

specification.

     We set b/C = 1 so that aggregate credit card debt equals 12.5 percent of annual PCE, its U.S.

value in 2008.31 We normalize the steady-state hours of borrowers and savers to 1, implying that

borrowers and savers have the same income before interest payments. In the steady state equilibrium,

borrowers are at their borrowing limits and spend 1.7 percent of their income on interest payments.

We set average PCE at C = $32, 000, its U.S. value in 2007Q4. We solve for a symmetric steady state
  30 According to the BEA, mortgage interest payments were $682bn and other consumer credit payments were $265bn at

an annualized rate in 2007Q3. According to the Flow of Funds, in that quarter there was $10.5trn outstanding in mortgage
credit and $2.5trn in consumer credit. The average annual interest rate paid by households was therefore 6.9 percent in that
quarter.
  31 In our data, the average credit card balance is $4000 per person. This implies a balance of $4000 = $8000 per borrower,
                                                                                                  ϕB
which is 100 percent of quarterly PCE.




                                                            34
in which all relative prices are 1. We obtain the values of A T , A NT , χS and χ B that achieve these

steady-state targets, as described in Appendix B.B.


                        C. Impulse Responses and the Degree of Price Rigidity

We first study impulse responses to debt relief shocks. Recall from Section III that we are interested

in recovering M H and M F for both the tradable and non-tradable sectors. To do so, we assume that

the only shock that hits the model is a home debt relief shock of ∆ H = 1 percent of home PCE, with

∆ F = 0. This shock corresponds to a one-time reduction of the level of debt of every borrower in

the home region by 2 percent, or $160. By definition, the percentage point impact to this shock in the

home and foreign region correspond to our multipliers of interest, M H and M F , respectively.

    Figure 4 presents the impulse response of the model to this one-time debt relief shock in the

home region. The effects of the debt relief shock are not very persistent, with very limited impact on

aggregate outcomes beyond the first quarter. This lack of persistence validates our focus on “the” debt

relief multiplier, and shows why our model fits the assumptions used to derive Equation (2) in Section

III. See Auclert, Rognlie and Straub (2018) for additional discussion on why TANK models generate

limited endogenous persistence.

    In our baseline calibration, non-tradable employment rises by more than one percent in the home

region in the short run, but only slightly increases in the foreign region over the same time period:


                        M NT,H = 1.56,        M NT,F = 0.33,       M NT,rel = 1.23                     (12)


In contrast, tradable employment increases by around one percent in both the home and foreign re-

gions in the short run in our baseline calibration:


                           MT,H = 0.89,     MT,F = 0.99,        MT,rel = −0.10                         (13)


These relative debt relief multipliers are close to, but slightly below, our empirical debt relief multipli-

ers reported in Equation (8).

    Our model’s success in matching the empirical debt relief multipliers of both tradable and non-

tradable employment relies on the interaction between its three main features: heterogeneity in marginal

propensities to consume between borrowers and savers, nominal rigidities, and trade linkages across

regions. First, debt relief redistributes wealth from savers in both the home and foreign regions, who


                                                      35
have low MPCs, to borrowers in the home region, who have high MPCs. This redistribution from

savers to borrowers stimulates consumption in the home region, increasing aggregate demand for

both non-tradable goods locally and for tradable goods in both regions. Second, given relatively sticky

prices, this additional spending stimulates production and therefore incomes at home, leading to ad-

ditional spending on both traded and non-traded goods in the home region (i.e., positive M NT,H and

MT,H ). Finally, given trade linkages, the rise in labor demand from traded goods firms raises trad-
able employment in the foreign region as well (i.e., a positive MT,F ). Interestingly, the positive MT,F

also increases incomes and therefore overall spending in the foreign region, leading to an increase in

non-tradable employment in the foreign region as well (i.e., a positive M NT,F ).32

    An important lesson from Equation (13) is that even though the observed relative tradable em-

ployment multiplier MT,rel is close to zero, this relative multiplier masks a large and positive response

of tradable employment in both regions. In our model, MT,rel is slightly negative because the increase

in home wages makes goods produced in the home region relatively more expensive. These “terms of

trade” effects induce some substitution of consumers away from home goods towards foreign goods,

so that foreign traded employment increases by more than home traded employment. However, these

effects are relatively muted given our assumed degree of price stickiness, and the economy largely ad-

justs to debt relief via an increase in income in both regions.

    Our ability to match both the tradable and non-tradable employment multipliers is, in fact, spe-

cific to our calibration of high price rigidity. Appendix Figure A5 shows the impulse responses un-

der flexible prices, θ = 0. In this calibration, aggregate home employment goes down in the short-

run. Upon receiving debt relief, borrowers increase consumption but also immediately reduce hours

worked (a wealth effect, large under standard separable preferences).33 Since non-traded goods can

only be produced locally while traded goods can be imported, the overall effect is a moderate rise in

local non-tradable employment and a large increase in imports, intermediated by an increase in the

price of home tradable goods. Overall, under flexible prices, M NT,rel is close to 0 while MT,rel is very

negative (i.e., less than −0.6).

    In this sense, the non-tradable and the tradable relative employment multipliers are both useful

moments to identify the degree of macroeconomic price stickiness. Figure 5 illustrates this point by
  32 See Chodorow-Reich Forthcoming, House, Proebsting and Tesar (2017), Dupor et al. (2019), Chodorow-Reich et al. (2018)

and Chodorow-Reich, Nenov and Simsek (2019) for other currency union models in which tradable demand spillovers are
important determinants of the aggregate multiplier. These papers also find that M F tends to be positive at the zero lower
bound, i.e. that the relative multiplier tends to be a lower bound for the aggregate multiplier.
  33 The wealth effect from debt relief is also visible in our sticky price calibration when comparing employment rates of

borrowers and savers. Hours rise mostly for savers, with hours for borrowers remaining relatively flat.


                                                           36
plotting the relative multipliers for both non-tradable and tradable employment as a function of the

degree of price rigidity θ. Both M NT,rel and MT,rel increase with θ, and get closer to their empirical

counterparts as θ grows larger. If anything, our empirical estimates would lead us to infer completely

fixed prices for this period, θ = 1 (see Mian and Sufi 2014b for a related argument.)34

     We conclude this subsection by considering what models could achieve an even better fit to our

empirical relative debt relief multipliers. While our baseline model does a reasonable job, there are two

versions of our model that are able to hit the empirical relative non-tradable multiplier exactly right,

though both have drawbacks in other dimensions.35 The first version increases the aggregate degree

of home bias by reducing the tradable share of consumption α. Appendix Figure A6 shows that, as α

is reduced, the home multiplier rises and the foreign multiplier falls, increasing M NT,rel . More home

bias reduces the amount of foreign demand “leakage,” increasing the local multiplier. Holding the

other parameters constant, we obtain M NT,rel = 1.81 for α = 0.09, an implausible degree of home bias

for the United States, leading us to prefer our baseline to this alternative for policy evaluation.

     The second version of our model that more closely fits the relative non-tradable multiplier in the

data replaces our baseline specification of preferences with GHH preferences (Greenwood, Hercowitz

and Huffman 1988), with period utility function uh (C, N ) = log C − χh N 2 . In Appendix Figure A7,
                                                                           

we repeat Figure 5 with this alternative specification. When θ = 0.67, we are able to exactly match the

relative non-tradable employment multiplier of M NT,rel = 1.81. However, in this parametrization, the

implied home and foreign multipliers are very large for both non-tradable and tradable goods. That

is, at the zero lower bound, M NT,H = 6.94 and M NT,F = 5.12, while MT ' 6 for both. As discussed

in Auclert and Rognlie (2017), these large aggregate multipliers are due to the interaction between

nominal price rigidities and the strong complementarity between consumption and labor supply that

GHH preferences generate. These effects seem implausibly strong, again leading us to prefer our

baseline to this alternative for policy evaluation.
  34 Another   way of validating our assumption of high price rigidity is to directly look at inflation as an outcome in our
empirical research design. Appendix Table A8 does this using inflation measures come from the Bureau of Labor Statistics
(BLS) and shows that the response of both non-tradable and tradable CPI to the bankruptcy exemptions was small and
insignificant.
   35 We focus on the relative non-tradable employment multiplier. The relative tradable employment multiplier is always

slightly negative in our model because we do not have any home bias in tradable spending and relative price movements
always reduce home competitiveness in producing tradable goods. To generate a positive relative tradable multiplier our
model would need to feature enough home bias in tradable consumption, in addition to the home bias in non-tradable
consumption.




                                                            37
                              D. Using the Model to Recover the Aggregate Effect

We can now use our model to recover an estimate of the aggregate effect of debt relief during the Great

Recession, M agg . Observe from Equations (12) and (13) that, in our model, the aggregate multiplier is

the same for tradable and non-tradable employment, and it is equal to M agg = MT,agg = M NT,agg =

1.88. Therefore, to obtain an estimate of the employment effect of debt relief, we need an estimate

of the aggregate unsecured debt relief that took place over the Great Recession. Multiplying this

number by M agg then delivers our average counterfactual employment effect for both tradable and

non-tradable employment.

     We construct an estimate of the aggregate level of debt relief over time from our credit report data.

Debt write-downs varied with the business cycle in the period prior to the Great Recession, with an

average of slightly above 1.9 percent of 2007 PCE between 2001Q1-2007Q4.36 Debt write-downs then

increased dramatically to reach 2.7 percent of 2007 PCE at their peak in 2009Q3. As in Section II.7, we

then scale this number by 1/0.77 to reflect our best estimate of the aggregate debt relief that took place

over this period.

     Clearly, some debt relief takes place even in normal times. For our counterfactual, we are inter-

ested in the contribution of the excess debt relief that took place during the recession. We estimate

excess debt relief by subtracting the 2007Q4 level of debt write-downs from the levels observed after

that date. This procedure delivers the green line in Panel A of Figure 6. We then feed in this path of

excess debt relief into the model, assuming that, as in our model, these are expected transfers from

savers to borrowers that do not distort credit market interest rates. Through the model, we recover

our aggregate employment counterfactual for non-tradable employment (Panel B, green line) and

tradable employment (Panel C, green line). At the peak in 2009Q3, this exercise delivers an aggregate

employment effect of 1 × 1.88 = 1.88 percent, or roughly 2.6 million jobs.

     Figure 6 also reports the outcomes in two representative high-exemption (“home”) and low-

exemption (“foreign”) regions. We assume that the average debt relief across the high- and the low-

exemption regions is equal to the average debt relief in the data (the green line), and that the difference

between the high- and the low-exemption region is equal to our estimated effect from a one-standard

deviation change in our exemption measure from Figure 3. This exercise makes clear that our empiri-

cal variation picks up the difference between two large numbers. Comparing the relative outcome in
  36 Recall that our charge-off measure from the credit report data does not include recoveries, and hence will be higher than

the net charge-off rate.



                                                             38
the model (solid black line) vs the data (dashed black line) gives a sense of our model’s success.

                                         E. The Role of Monetary Policy

Our counterfactuals so far have been based on our assumption of zero lower bound policy. As a com-

parison between our baseline impulse responses (Figure 4) and our flexible-price impulse responses

(Figure A5) shows, the response of monetary policy is critical when estimating the aggregate effect

of debt relief. Absent a change in prices or monetary policy, debt relief induces an aggregate wealth

effect. Under the zero lower bound, monetary policy does not respond to the increase in inflation from

the pressure of aggregate demand. By contrast, under flexible prices, monetary policy increases nom-

inal interest rates by almost 40 basis points, prompting savers in both regions to dramatically reduce

their consumption and offset the rise in borrower consumption at home.

     While such a tightening of monetary policy is implausible in crisis times like the Great Reces-

sion, it may not be implausible in non-crisis times, during which we would expect the central bank to

counter any inflationary shock such as a debt relief shock. Appendix Figure A4 evaluates the effect

of alternative degrees of monetary tightening, indexed by the degree of responsiveness of the central

bank to inflation (the Taylor rule coefficient φπ ), in our baseline calibration. The case φπ = 0 corre-

sponds to our baseline of the zero lower bound. As Nakamura and Steinsson (2014) have pointed out,

the relative multiplier differences out the effect of monetary policy across the two regions. Hence, no

matter how much monetary policy tightens, the relative multipliers MT,rel and M NT,rel remain un-

changed.37 However, the larger the response of monetary policy, the lower the effect on non-tradable

and tradable employment in both regions. But our insight that there are positive spillover effects

on the foreign region, so that M NT,F > 0 and MT,F > 0, remains valid under many plausible val-

ues of φπ . Zero spillovers for non-tradable employment, M NT,F = 0, is only reached for φπ = 6.5,

corresponding to a relatively large monetary tightening of 15 basis points. This particular parame-

terization of the model is interesting because it exhibits a case where Mrel = M agg for non-tradable

employment, or, in other words, a case where it is correct to extrapolate directly from relative to ag-

gregate multipliers. Even in this special case, M F is still very positive for tradable employment, so

that Mrel  M agg for the tradable sector. Intuitively, tradable employment comes with much larger

spillover effects across regions, so while it may be possible to extrapolate from relative non-tradable

employment multipliers to the aggregate, the same is generally not possible for tradable employment.
  37 Since this is a currency union model where relative prices across regions also matter, the limit with the Taylor rule
coefficient φπ → ∞ does not correspond to the flexible price limit, where relative multipliers are different, as Figure 5
shows.


                                                           39
                                           F. Additional Counterfactuals

We use the model to conduct two additional counterfactuals. The first is the extent to which our results

change with the size of the debt relief provided to borrowers. For example, would the employment

effects have been twice as large if the amount of debt relief during the Great Recession had also been

twice as large? Figure 7 plots the debt relief multipliers, both absolute and relative, as a fraction of the

size of the debt relief shock. The impact multiplier is largest when the shock ∆ is small relative to PCE.

This is because small transfers are spent immediately by constrained consumers. When the transfer

gets sufficiently large, borrowers save a fraction of it, lowering the impact multiplier and spreading

the aggregate effect of debt relief over multiple periods. The lower their discount factor β B , the larger

the transfer needs to be before this happens. In our baseline calibration with an annual β B = 0.92, this

nonlinearity takes place once transfers reach 3 percent of PCE.38 This exercise provides an important

cautionary tale for debt relief programs as aggregate demand management, since they show that those

programs are most effective at boosting current demand when they are relatively small in magnitude.

     The final counterfactual we consider is the how our results change with depending on who fi-

nances the debt relief. If the agents that are financing the debt relief are themselves highly constrained,

for example, the aggregate effect of debt relief may be smaller or even contractionary. We address this

question in two ways. First, within our model, we assess what happens as we vary the burden of debt

relief financing f between home and foreign savers. If home savers pay for home debt relief, aggre-

gate effectiveness might be more limited than if foreign savers paid for it. Appendix Figure A8 shows

that while this is qualitatively right, lowering f towards zero does not significantly reduce either the

relative or the home multiplier significantly. The intuition is that saver MPCs are always low, so the

amount of regional offset is low no matter where savers are located. Second, we can speculate on what

would happen in an alternative model in which savers also had high MPCs but were located in the

foreign region. Such a model would generate positive relative multipliers but a zero aggregate multi-

plier (see for example Hausman, Rhode and Wieland 2019). A model along these lines would generate

much smaller relative multipliers, and be inconsistent with our empirical results. We conclude that,

while the MPCs of agents financing debt relief are important for the aggregate effectiveness of debt

relief policy, our results are only consistent with low MPCs for savers over the period.
  38 This result can be understood by considering the shape of the consumption of borrowers, which we derive explicitly for

a continuous-time version of the model in Appendix B. As in Achdou et al. (2017), the consumption function of borrowers
behaves likes a square-root function of debt relief when debt relief is sufficiently small. This concave consumption function
translates into a concave aggregate employment effect as a function of debt relief size, or a diminishing multiplier.



                                                             40
                                              G. Persistence

We conclude this section by considering the issue of persistence. Figure 2 shows that the non-tradable

employment effects are highly persistent in the data, and, in fact, increase over time. These results

are consistent with the highly persistent responses to local unemployment shocks documented in

Yagan (2017), but imply that the long-run debt relief multipliers are even larger than the short-run

multipliers. Simple models in which debt relief constitutes a transitory demand shock, including our

model, are unable to generate these kinds of highly persistent responses. Neoclassical adjustment

mechanisms, such as a change in relative prices or movements of capital and labor across regions,

tend to make these transitory demand effects disappear in the medium-run, also contrasting with our

empirical findings. In principle, mechanisms relying on an endogenous response of innovation to

demand shocks (Benigno and Fornaro 2018), or on a slow human capital decay following aggregate

unemployment (Jarosch 2015) may be able to quantitatively explain our findings, however. We leave

this question to future research.


                                             V. Conclusion

We use cross-state variation in bankruptcy exemptions and a general equilibrium model to show that

the ex-post debt forgiveness provided by the consumer bankruptcy system stabilized macroeconomic

activity during the Great Recession. We find that states with more generous bankruptcy exemptions

had larger consumer debt write-downs and smaller declines in local non-tradable employment com-

pared to less generous states during this time period. In contrast, we estimate a small and statistically

insignificant effect of more generous bankruptcy exemptions on local tradable employment during

the Great Recession, and all outcomes prior to the Great Recession. The implied relative debt relief

multiplier from our estimates suggest that each additional percent of PCE spent on reducing local

borrowers’ debt results in a 1.81 percent relative increase in non-tradable employment and a 0.39 per-

cent relative increase in tradable employment. However, we show that these relative multipliers are

insufficient to identify the overall level effect of debt relief during this period.

    To recover an aggregate debt relief multiplier, we develop a general equilibrium currency union

model of consumer debt forgiveness featuring non-tradable and tradable goods. We find that substan-

tial nominal rigidities are required to rationalize our reduced form estimates. With monetary policy

at the zero lower bound, spillovers through traded good demand imply a large causal effect of debt

relief on employment in both high and low debt relief locations. Our model implies an aggregate debt


                                                     41
relief multiplier of 1.88, suggesting that the debt forgiveness provided during the Great Recession in-

creased aggregate employment by almost two percent at the end of 2009. Our multiplier is large in

part because debt relief is sufficiently small that consumers spend all of it immediately.

    The findings from this paper can help inform ongoing efforts to evaluate the welfare impact of

the consumer bankruptcy system. These evaluations typically use quantitative models to weigh the

trade-off between the ex-post consumption smoothing benefits provided by bankruptcy protection at

the individual level (e.g., Dobbie and Song 2015), with the ex-ante increased borrowing costs sug-

gested by economic theory (e.g., Athreya 2002, Li and Sarte 2006, Livshits, MacGee and Tertilt 2007,

Chatterjee and Gordon 2012) and documented empirically by Severino and Brown (2017). Our results

suggest that aggregate demand effects are important to evaluate the macroeconomic benefits of the

consumer bankruptcy system, so that the overall benefit may be broader than previously realized. We

therefore view the incorporation of our empirical estimates into a general equilibrium model of the

credit market incorporating ex-ante effects as an important area for future research.




                                                   42
                                             References
Abadie, Alberto, Susan Athey, Guido W. Imbens, and Jeffrey Wooldridge. 2017. “When Should You
  Adjust Standard Errors for Clustering?” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
  24003.

Achdou, Yves, Jiequn Han, Jean-Michel Lasry, Pierre-Louis Lions, and Benjamin Moll. 2017. “In-
  come and Wealth Distribution in Macroeconomics: A Continuous-Time Approach.” National Bu-
  reau of Economic Research Working Paper 23732.

Adao, Rodrigo, Costas Arkolakis, and Federico Esposito. 2019. “Spatial Linkages, Global Shocks,
  and Local Labor Markets: Theory and Evidence.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
  Paper 25544.

Adelino, Manuel, Antoinette Schoar, and Felipe Severino. 2018. “Dynamics of Housing Debt in the
  Recent Boom and Great Recession.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 32(1): 265–311.

Agarwal, Sumit, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Tomasz Pisko-
  rski, and Amit Seru. 2017. “Policy Intervention in Debt Renegotiation: Evidence from the Home
  Affordable Modification Program.” Journal of Political Economy, 125(3): 654–712.

Athreya, Kartik B. 2002. “Welfare Implications of the Bankruptcy Reform Act of 1999.” Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 49(8): 1567–1595.

Auclert, Adrien, and Kurt Mitman. 2018. “Consumer Bankruptcy as Aggregate Demand Manage-
  ment.” Manuscript.

Auclert, Adrien, and Matthew Rognlie. 2017. “A Note on Multipliers in NK Models with GHH Pref-
  erences.” Manuscript.

Auclert, Adrien, Matthew Rognlie, and Ludwig Straub. 2018. “The Intertemporal Keynesian Cross.”
  National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 25020.

Avery, Robert B, Paul S Calem, Glenn B Canner, and Raphael W Bostic. 2003. “An Overview of
  Consumer Data and Credit Reporting.” Federal Reserve Bulletin, 89: 47.

Benigno, Gianluca, and Luca Fornaro. 2018. “Stagnation Traps.” Review of Economic Studies,
  85(3): 1425–1470.

Beraja, Martin, Erik Hurst, and Juan Ospina. 2016. “The Aggregate Implications of Regional Business
  Cycles.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 21956.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. “How Much Should We Trust
  Differences-In-Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1): 249–275.

Board of Governors. 2018a. “Charge-Off and Delinquency Rates on Loans and Leases at Commercial
  Banks.” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. https://www.federalreserve.
  gov/releases/chargeoff/chgallsa.htm.


                                                  43
Board of Governors. 2018b. “Households and nonprofit organizations; consumer credit; liability,
  Level.” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Retrieved from FRED, Federal Reserve
  Bank of St. Louis. https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/HNOCCIQ027S.

Chatterjee, Satyajit, and Grey Gordon. 2012. “Dealing with Consumer Default: Bankruptcy vs Gar-
  nishment.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 59: S1–S16.

Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel. Forthcoming. “Geographic Cross-Sectional Fiscal Multipliers: What Have
  We Learned?” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.

Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, Gita Gopinath, Prachi Mishra, and Abhinav Narayanan. 2018. “Cash
  and the Economy: Evidence from India’s Demonetization.” National Bureau of Economic Research
  Working Paper 25370.

Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, Plamen T. Nenov, and Alp Simsek. 2019. “Stock Market Wealth and the
  Real Economy: A Local Labor Market Approach.” Manuscript.

Corbi, Raphael B., Elias Papaioannou, and Paolo Surico. Forthcoming. “Regional Transfer Multipli-
  ers.” Review of Economic Studies.

Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber. 1996. “Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent Changes
  in the Medicaid Eligibility of Pregnant Women.” Journal of Political Economy, 104(6): 1263–1296.

Dávila, Eduardo. 2016. “Using Elasticities to Derive Optimal Bankruptcy Exemptions.” European Sys-
  temic Risk Board Working Paper.

Department of Labor. 2018. “Unemployment Insurance Chartbook.” Department of Labor.

Di Maggio, Marco, and Amir Kermani. 2017. “Unemployment Insurance as an Automatic Stabilizer:
  The Financial Channel.”

Dobbie, Will, and Jae Song. 2015. “Debt Relief and Debtor Outcomes: Measuring the Effects of Con-
  sumer Bankruptcy Protection.” American Economic Review, 105(3): 1272–1311.

Dobbie, Will, and Paige Marta Skiba. 2013. “Information Asymmetries in Consumer Credit Markets:
  Evidence from Payday Lending.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5(4): 256–82.

Dobbie, Will, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, and Crystal Yang. 2015. “Consumer Bankruptcy and Finan-
  cial Health.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 21032.

Donaldson, Jason Roderick, Giorgia Piacentino, and Anjan V Thakor. Forthcoming. “Household
  Debt and Unemployment.” Journal of Finance.

Dupor, Bill, Marios Karabarbounis, Marianna Kudlyak, and M. Saif Mehkari. 2019. “Regional Con-
  sumption Responses and the Aggregate Fiscal Multiplier.” Federal Reserve of San Francisco Work-
  ing Paper 3131248.

Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Paul Krugman. 2012. “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap: A
  Fisher-Minsky-Koo Approach.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3): 1469–1513.

                                                  44
Farhi, Emmanuel, and Iván Werning. 2016a. “Chapter 31 - Fiscal Multipliers: Liquidity Traps and
  Currency Unions.” In Handbook of Macroeconomics. Vol. 2, , ed. Harald Uhlig and John B. Taylor,
  2417–2492. Elsevier.

Farhi, Emmanuel, and Iván Werning. 2016b. “A Theory of Macroprudential Policies in the Presence
  of Nominal Rigidities.” Econometrica, 84(5): 1645–1704.

Fay, Scott, Erik Hurst, and Michelle J White. 2002. “The Household Bankruptcy Decision.” American
  Economic Review, 92(3): 706–718.

Foote, Christopher L, Lara Loewenstein, and Paul S Willen. 2016. “Cross-Sectional Patterns of Mort-
  gage Debt during the Housing Boom: Evidence and Implications.” National Bureau of Economic
  Research Working Paper 22985.

Galí, Jordi, and Tommaso Monacelli. 2005. “Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Volatility in a Small
  Open Economy.” Review of Economic Studies, 72(3): 707–734.

Ganong, Peter, and Pascal Noel. 2018. “Liquidity vs. Wealth in Household Debt Obligations: Evi-
  dence from Housing Policy in the Great Recession.” National Bureau of Economic Research Work-
  ing Paper 24964.

Ghent, Andra C, and Marianna Kudlyak. 2011. “Recourse and Residential Mortgage Default: Evi-
  dence from US States.” Review of Financial Studies, 24(9): 3139–3186.

Goodman, Paul. 1993. “The Emergence of Homestead Exemption in the United States: Accommoda-
  tion and Resistance to the Market Revolution, 1840–1880.” Journal of American History, 80(2): 470–498.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Gregory W. Huffman. 1988. “Investment, Capacity Utiliza-
  tion, and the Real Business Cycle.” American Economic Review, 78(3): 402–417.

Gropp, Reint, John Karl Scholz, and Michelle J White. 1997. “Personal Bankruptcy and Credit Sup-
  ply and Demand.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(1): 217–251.

Gross, Tal, Matthew J. Notowidigdo, and Jialan Wang. 2016. “The Marginal Propensity to Consumer
  Over the Business Cycle.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 22518.

Guerrieri, Luca, and Matteo Iacoviello. 2015. “Occbin: A Toolkit for Solving Dynamic Models with
  Occasionally Binding Constraints Easily.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 70: 22–38.

Guerrieri, Veronica, and Guido Lorenzoni. 2017. “Credit Crises, Precautionary Savings, and the Liq-
  uidity Trap.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(3): 1427–1467.

Guren, Adam M., Alisdair McKay, Emi Nakamura, and Jón Steinsson. 2018. “What Do We Learn
  From Cross-Sectional Empirical Estimates in Macroeconomics?” Manuscript.

Hall, Robert E. 2011. “The Long Slump.” American Economic Review, 101(2): 431–469.

Hausman, Joshua K., Paul W. Rhode, and Johannes F. Wieland. 2019. “Recovery from the Great
  Depression: The Farm Channel in Spring 1933.” American Economic Review, 109(2): 427–472.

                                                  45
House, Christopher L, Christian Proebsting, and Linda L Tesar. 2017. “Austerity in the Aftermath of
  the Great Recession.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 23147.

Hsu, Joanne W, David A Matsa, and Brian T Melzer. 2018. “Unemployment Insurance as a Housing
  Market Stabilizer.” American Economic Review, 108(1): 49–81.

Jarosch, Gregor. 2015. “Searching for Job Security and the Consequences of Job Loss.” Manuscript.

Kekre, Rohan. 2018. “Unemployment Insurance in Macroeconomic Stabilization.” Manuscript.

Korinek, Anton, and Alp Simsek. 2016. “Liquidity Trap and Excessive Leverage.” American Economic
  Review, 106(3): 699–738.

Lee, Donghoon, and Wilbert Van der Klaauw. 2010. “An Introduction to the FRBNY Consumer Credit
  Panel.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report.

Livshits, Igor, James MacGee, and Michele Tertilt. 2007. “Consumer Bankruptcy: A Fresh Start.”
  American Economic Review, 97(1): 402–418.

Li, Wenli, and Pierre-Daniel Sarte. 2006. “US Consumer Bankruptcy Choice: The Importance of Gen-
  eral Equilibrium Effects.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 53(3): 613–631.

Mahoney, Neale. 2015. “Bankruptcy as Implicit Health Insurance.” American Economic Review,
  105(2): 710–746.

Martin, Philippe, and Thomas Philippon. 2017. “Inspecting the Mechanism: Leverage and the Great
  Recession in the Eurozone.” American Economic Review, 107(7): 1904–37.

McKay, Alisdair, and Ricardo Reis. 2016. “Optimal Automatic Stabilizers.” National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research Working Paper 22359.

Mian, Atif, Amir Sufi, and Emil Verner. 2017. “How Do Credit Supply Shocks Affect the Real Econ-
  omy? Evidence from the United States in the 1980s.” National Bureau of Economic Research Work-
  ing Paper 23802.

Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2014a. House of Debt: How They (and You) Caused the Great Recession, and
  How We Can Prevent It from Happening Again. Chicago; London: University Of Chicago Press.

Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2014b. “What Explains the 2007–2009 Drop in Employment?” Econometrica,
  82(6): 2197–2223.

Mian, Atif, Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi. 2013. “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the
  Economic Slump.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(4): 1687–1726.

Midrigan, Virgiliu, and Thomas Philippon. 2018. “Household Leverage and the Recession.” National
  Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 16965.

Nakamura, Emi, and Jón Steinsson. 2014. “Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evidence from US
  Regions.” American Economic Review, 104(3): 753–792.

                                                  46
Nakamura, Emi, and Jón Steinsson. 2018. “Identification in Macroeconomics.” Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 32(3): 59–86.

Piskorski, Tomasz, and Amit Seru. 2018. “Debt Relief and Slow Recovery: A Decade after Lehman.”
  National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 25403.

Saiz, Albert. 2010. “The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  125(3): 1253–1296.

Sarto, Andres. 2018. “Recovering Macro Elasticities from Regional Data.” Manuscript.

Severino, Felipe, and Meta Brown. 2017. “Personal Bankruptcy Protection and Household Debt.”
  SSRN Working Paper 2447687.

Skeel, David A. 2001. Debt’s Dominion: A History of Bankruptcy Law in America. Princeton University
  Press.

Suárez Serrato, Juan Carlos, and Philippe Wingender. 2016. “Estimating Local Fiscal Multipliers.”
  National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 22425.

Tai, Mingzhu. 2017. “House Prices and the Allocation of Consumer Credit.” Manuscript.

U.S. Courts. 2017. “Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act (BAPCPA) Report.”
  http://www.uscourts.gov/statistics-reports/bapcpa-report-2017.

U.S. Treasury. 2018. “Making Home Affordable Program Performance Report - Fourth Quar-
  ter 2017.” https://www.treasury.gov/initiatives/financial-stability/reports/
  Documents/4Q17MHAReportFinal.pdf.

Verner, Emil, and Gyozo Gyongyosi. 2018. “Household Debt Revaluation and the Real Economy:
  Evidence from a Foreign Currency Debt Crisis.” SSRN Working Paper 3241309.

Whittaker, Julie M., and Katelin P. Isaacs. 2016. “Unemployment Insurance: Programs and Bene-
  fits.” Congressional Research Service CRS Report RL33362. https://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/
  RL33362.pdf.

Wilshusen, Stephanie. 2011. “Meeting the Demand for Debt Relief.” Payment Cards Center, Federal
  Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Discussion Paper 11-04.

Yagan, Danny. 2017. “Employment Hysteresis from the Great Recession.” National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research Working Paper 23844.




                                                47
                                          Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

                                                 Avg Change from          Avg Change from          Avg Change from
                                                  2001q1-2007q4            2007q4-2010q4            2010q4-2013q4
    Panel A: Employment Outcomes                          (1)                      (2)                       (3)
       Non-Tradable Emp. (∆ p.p.)                        1.194                   -5.178                    5.300
       Tradable + Other Emp. (∆ p.p.)                   -3.376                   -7.988                    3.740
       Total Emp. (∆ p.p.)                              -2.570                   -7.406                    4.056
    Panel B: Credit Outcomes
      Annual Charge-offs (∆ $)                          -3.918                   124.775                 -241.672
      Bankrupty Rate (∆ p.p.)                            0.158                    0.107                   -0.091
      Foreclosure Rate (∆ p.p.)                          0.145                    0.906                    0.057
      Credit Card Limits (∆ $)                        2,790.922                -2,539.916                954.736
      Credit Card Debt (∆ $)                           182.507                  -132.620                 -276.685
      Mortgage Debt (∆ $000)                           26.124                     1.839                   -3.977
    Panel C: Inflation Outcomes
      Non-Tradable CPI (∆ p.p.)                         21.836                    4.985                    6.417
      Tradable CPI (∆ p.p.)                             10.908                    3.167                    6.503
      Total CPI (∆ p.p.)                                17.646                    4.292                    6.462
    Panel D: Housing Outcomes
      House Price (∆ p.p.)                              40.958                   -21.846                  10.669
Note: This table reports summary statistics. Each column reports the difference in the outcome over the period, averaged
over all counties in the sample using population weights. Panel A reports the difference in log employment per working-age
person, or the percent change in the share employed of the working-age population. Employment data is from the Quarterly
Census of Employment and Wages. Non-tradable industries are defined as the retail and restaurant sectors following Mian
and Sufi (2014b). Tradable and Other industries are also defined following Mian and Sufi (2014b). Panel B reports the
average change across counties for various credit outcomes using data from Equifax. Annual charge-offs reports the average
difference in dollars in the amount of derogatory debt discharged by credit card and auto lenders per person. Bankruptcy
and foreclosure rates report the difference in the percent of people who file for foreclosure and bankruptcy per county.
Credit card limits and debt report the difference in dollars per person and mortgage debt reports the difference in mortgage
debt in thousands of dollars per person. All credit outcomes are smoothed according to a moving average which includes
t − 2 through t + 1. Panel C reports the difference in log consumer price index over the period, or the percent change in
inflation. Price index data is from the BLS Consumer Price Index measured at the Metropolitan Statistical Area level matched
to counties. Non-tradable CPI is based on prices for services and tradable CPI refers to commodity prices, following Mian,
Sufi and Verner (2017). Panel D reports the difference in log house prices, or the percent change in house prices. House price
data comes from CoreLogic.




                                                             48
             Table 2: Reduced Form Effects of Bankruptcy Protections on Employment

                                                Avg Change                    Effect of Bankruptcy Protections
      Panel A: 2008q1-2010q4                           (1)              (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)
         Log Non-Tradable Emp.                       -5.178            0.499∗∗∗       0.399∗∗       0.422∗∗∗  0.435∗∗∗
                                                    (6.737)           (0.183)        (0.166)       (0.100)   (0.104)
         Log Tradable + Other Emp.                   -7.988            0.162          0.086        −0.125    −0.048
                                                    (8.263)           (0.366)        (0.330)       (0.221)   (0.211)
         Log Total Emp.                              -7.406            0.231          0.156        −0.005     0.061
                                                    (6.919)           (0.311)        (0.272)       (0.176)   (0.170)
      Panel B: 2011q1-2013q4
         Log Non-Tradable Emp.                       5.300             1.096∗∗∗  0.842∗∗∗  0.941∗∗∗  0.945∗∗∗
                                                    (5.896)           (0.228)   (0.268)   (0.241)   (0.241)
         Log Tradable + Other Emp.                   3.740            −0.103    −0.075    −0.249    −0.209
                                                    (8.224)           (0.455)   (0.404)   (0.275)   (0.273)
         Log Total Emp.                              4.056             0.139     0.130     0.018     0.054
                                                    (6.712)           (0.337)   (0.308)   (0.212)   (0.211)
      Number of Observations                                          161,720        161,720        161,720        155,324
      County F.E.                                                        Y              Y              Y              Y
      Year-Quarter F.E.                                                  Y              Y              Y              Y
      Housing Controls × YQ F.E.                                        N               Y              Y              Y
      Additional Controls × YQ F.E.                                     N              N               Y              Y
      Exclude Sand States                                               N              N              N               Y
Note: This table reports estimates of the reduced form effect of cross-state bankruptcy protections on log employment
outcomes scaled by working-age population (age 18-65). The first row of each panel reports results for log non-tradable
employment, defined as the retail and restaurant sectors. The second row reports results for log tradable and other em-
ployment, where tradable employment is defined as industries with sufficiently large imports and exports from the United
States, and other employment is defined as all other industries excluding the construction sector Mian and Sufi (2014b). The
third row reports results for log total employment. Column 1 reports the cross-county average and standard deviation of
the change in the dependent variable from 2007q4-2010q4 or 2010q4-2013q4. Columns 2-5 report coefficients on the average
effect of a one standard deviation decrease in the log financial cost of filing for bankruptcy protection, pooled over the pe-
riods 2008q1-2010q4 in Panel A and and 2011q1-2013q4 in Panel B. All estimates should be interpreted as the relative effect
compared to 2007q4. Column 2 reports estimates with county and year-quarter fixed effects. Column 3 repeats the regres-
sion, adding the Saiz supply elasticity and share of the population who own a home in 2007q4 for each county, interacted
with year-quarter fixed effects. For counties without the Saiz supply elasticity measure, the measure is set to zero, and an
additional dummy for missing supply elasticity is interacted with year-quarter fixed effects. Column 4 repeats the same
regression, but with a set of location controls interacted with year-quarter fixed effects: the share of Democratic voters in
2004, the maximum unemployment insurance benefit, the share of college-educated individuals in a county, the share of the
population that is under the age of 45, the average debt-to-income ratio for the state in 2007, and the predicted exposure
to local unemployment shocks during the Great Recession. Finally, Column 5 repeats Column 4, but excludes the “sand
states,” or Arizona, California, Nevada, and New Mexico. All regressions are weighted by county population as of 2007 and
cluster the standard errors at the state level. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. See the text for additional details
on the specification and the Table 1 notes for additional details on the outcome measures and sample.




                                                                 49
        Table 3: Reduced Form Effects of Bankruptcy Protections on Debt Write-Downs

                                                Avg Change                   Effect of Bankruptcy Protections
   Panel A: 2008q1-2010q4                             (1)              (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)
       Charge-Offs in Full Sample                  124.775          50.385         54.503∗∗       38.177∗∗∗ 33.578∗∗∗
                                                  (199.676)        (35.896)       (22.779)        (9.016)    (9.530)
       Charge-Offs for Homeowners                  242.352          77.499         80.459∗∗       55.587∗∗∗ 53.032∗∗∗
                                                  (360.046)        (61.751)       (39.185)       (13.294)   (16.064)
       Charge-Offs for Renters                     -11.849          24.626∗        22.579∗∗       15.272∗    10.799∗∗∗
                                                  (104.352)        (14.019)       (10.733)        (8.916)    (3.258)
   Panel B: 2011q1-2013q4
     Charge-Offs in Full Sample                    -241.672         31.714         33.691∗        22.861∗∗∗ 22.137∗∗∗
                                                  (174.642)        (27.598)       (18.338)        (6.916)    (7.408)
       Charge-Offs for Homeowners                  -400.601         47.585         49.411         29.151∗∗∗ 29.348∗∗
                                                  (290.675)        (51.431)       (32.105)       (10.418)   (11.763)
       Charge-Offs for Renters                      -91.944          9.889          9.325          8.088∗     7.311∗
                                                  (139.866)         (7.273)        (6.480)        (4.157)    (3.896)
   Number of Observations                                           161,720        161,720        161,720        155,324
   County F.E.                                                         Y              Y              Y              Y
   Year-Quarter F.E.                                                   Y              Y              Y              Y
   Housing Controls × YQ F.E.                                         N               Y              Y              Y
   Additional Controls × YQ F.E.                                      N              N               Y              Y
   Exclude Sand States                                                N              N              N               Y
Note: This table reports estimates of the reduced form effect of cross-state bankruptcy protections on consumer debt charge-
offs. The first row of each panel reports results for the full sample. The second row reports results for homeowners, defined
as mortgage borrowers in 2007. The third row reports results for renters, defined as all non-mortgage borrowers in 2007.
Column 1 reports the cross-county average and standard deviation of the change in the dependent variable from 2007q4-
2010q4 or 2010q4-2013q4. Columns 2-5 report coefficients on the average effect of a one standard deviation decrease in the
log financial cost of filing for bankruptcy protection, pooled over the periods 2008q1-2010q4 in Panel A and and 2011q1-
2013q4 in Panel B. All estimates should be interpreted as the relative effect compared to 2007q4. Column 2 reports estimates
with county and year-quarter fixed effects. Column 3 repeats the regression, adding the Saiz supply elasticity and share of
the population who own a home in 2007q4 for each county, interacted with year-quarter fixed effects. For counties without
the Saiz supply elasticity measure, the measure is set to zero, and an additional dummy for missing supply elasticity is
interacted with year-quarter fixed effects. Column 4 repeats the same regression, but with a set of location controls interacted
with year-quarter fixed effects: the share of Democratic voters in 2004, the maximum unemployment insurance benefit, the
share of college-educated individuals in a county, the share of the population that is under the age of 45, the average debt-
to-income ratio for the state in 2007, and the predicted exposure to local unemployment shocks during the Great Recession.
Finally, Column 5 repeats Column 4, but excludes the “sand states,” or Arizona, California, Nevada, and New Mexico. All
regressions are weighted by county population as of 2007 and cluster the standard errors at the state level. Standard errors
are clustered at the state level. See the text for additional details on the specification and the Table 1 notes for additional
details on the outcome measures and sample.




                                                              50
                           Table 4: Model Parameters and Baseline Calibration

                Parameter (Quarterly Frequency)                     Value                        Target
     ϕB        Fraction of borrowers in each region                   0.5            Share with credit card balance
     βS                Saver discount factor                        0.983               7% annual interest rate
     βB              Borrower discount factor                        0.92              Arbitrary level below βS
  u(C, N )                Utility function                     log(C ) − χh N 2         Standard specification
   1−α                  Non-tradable share                          0.236             Data (Mian and Sufi 2014b)
     η              Subst. between T and NT                            2                    Standard value
     e            Subst. within T and within NT                       10                    Standard value
     γ           Exponent on labor in production                     0.66                     Data (NIPA)
     θ          Fraction of firms with fixed price                    0.8            Duration of price rigidity = 5Q
    b/C            Debt limit (% of annual PCE)                    16.67%               Avg Debt/PCE=8.33%
      f               Incidence of debt relief                        0.5            Equal incidence across regions
Note: This table displays parameter calibration values for the model in Section IV. See the text for additional details on the
definition of each parameter and the target values.




                                                             51
                 Figure 1: Employment and Debt Relief during the Great Recession

 Employment to                                                                                            Program Payout
Population Ratio                                                                                          Scaled by PCE
   82                                                                                                                    1.5



   80
                                                                                                                         1

   78

                                                                                                                         .5
   76



   74                                                                                                                    0
        2000                   2004                      2008                     2012                     2016

                   Employment to Pop. Ratio           Consumer Net Chargeoffs            Formal Bankruptcy Debt Relief
                   Unemployment Insurance             HAMP Debt Relief


Note: This figure plots the employment-to-population ratio over time on the left y-axis, and payout measures as a percent-
age of PCE for four different debt relief programs on the right y-axis. Employment to population ratio is the 12-month
average employment-to-population ratio for the working age population of individuals aged 25-54, as measured by the
CPS in December of each year. Consumer net charge-offs is net consumer charge-offs on non-housing debt, as measured
by the product of net charge-off rates from commercial banks on all non-real estate consumer loans (Board of Governors,
2018a) and consumer loans liabilities measured using the flow of funds (Board of Governors, 2018b). Formal bankruptcy
debt relief is the annual level of unsecured debt scheduled for discharge for Chapter 7 bankruptcy filers reported in the
BAPCPA reports (U.S. Courts, 2017). We report the face value of both net charge-offs and the amount of unsecured credit
discharged in Chapter 7. Unemployment insurance is the annual program outlays from unemployment insurance reported
by the Department of Labor (Department of Labor, 2018). HAMP debt relief combines the reported debt relief of the Home
Affordable Modification Program (HAMP), the Principal Reduction Alternative (PRA) and the Home Affordable Foreclo-
sure Alternatives (HAFA). To construct annual numbers, we take changes in the reported cumulative debt relief for each
program reported in the Program Performance Reports (U.S. Treasury, 2018). For 2009-2012, where only HAMP numbers
are reported, we proportionally allocate the other programs to the same share as HAMP. We thank Kurt Mitman for pointing
out the time series relationship with UI payouts.




                                                           52
                  Figure 2: Reduced Form Effects of Bankruptcy Protections on Employment

                                                     Panel A: Log Non-Tradable Employment

                   2

                  1.5

                   1

                   .5

                   0

                  -.5

                   -1

              -1.5

                   -2
                        2001            2003                 2005        2007                  2009                2011              2013
                                                                      Year-Quarter

   Panel B: Log Tradable and Other Employment                                             Panel C: Log Total Employment
      2                                                                       2

    1.5                                                                     1.5

      1                                                                       1

      .5                                                                      .5

      0                                                                       0

     -.5                                                                     -.5

     -1                                                                      -1

    -1.5                                                                    -1.5

     -2                                                                      -2
           2001         2003   2005      2007         2009   2011   2013           2001     2003      2005      2007        2009   2011     2013
                                      Year-Quarter                                                           Year-Quarter


Note: This figure plots reduced form estimates of the effect of cross-state bankruptcy protections on employment outcomes.
Panel A reports results for log non-tradable employment, defined as the retail and restaurant sectors. Panel B reports results
for log tradable and other employment, where tradable employment is defined as industries with sufficiently large imports
and exports from the United States, and other employment is defined as all other industries excluding the construction sector
Mian and Sufi (2014b). Panel C reports results for log total employment. We report the coefficients from a panel regression of
each log employment measure scaled by working-age population on the log financial cost of filing for bankruptcy protection
interacted with year fixed effects. All specifications are weighted by county population as of 2007 and include county and
year-quarter fixed effects, as well as the Saiz supply elasticity and share of the population who own a home in 2007q1 for
each county interacted with year-quarter fixed effects. For counties without the Saiz supply elasticity measure, the measure
is set to zero, and an additional dummy for missing supply elasticity is interacted with year-quarter fixed effects. The
estimated effect is normalized to zero in 2007, meaning all estimates are relative to 2007. The dashed lines are 95 percent
confidence intervals from standard errors clustered at the state level. See the text for additional details on the specification
and the Table 1 notes for additional details on the outcome measures and sample.
                                                                       53
Figure 3: Reduced Form Effects of Bankruptcy Protections on Per-Period Debt Write-Downs
                                                 Panel A: Charge-Offs in Full Sample

                 200



                 150



                 100



                  50



                   0



                 -50
                        2001            2003            2005        2007             2009            2011                2013
                                                                 Year-Quarter

     Panel B: Charge-Offs for Homeowners Only                                  Panel C: Charge-Offs for Renters Only
   200                                                                 200



   150                                                                 150



   100                                                                 100



    50                                                                 50



     0                                                                   0



    -50                                                                -50
          2001   2003      2005      2007        2009   2011   2013          2001   2003    2005      2007        2009     2011   2013
                                  Year-Quarter                                                     Year-Quarter


Note: This figure plots reduced form estimates of the effect of cross-state bankruptcy protections on annual charge-offs.
Panel A reports results for the full sample. Panel B reports results for homeowners, defined as mortgage borrowers in 2007.
Panel C reports results for renters, defined as all non-mortgage borrowers in 2007. We report the coefficients from a panel
regression of charge-offs on the log financial cost of filing for bankruptcy protection interacted with year fixed effects. All
specifications are weighted by county population as of 2007 and include county and year-quarter fixed effects, as well as
the Saiz supply elasticity and share of the population who own a home in 2007q1 for each county interacted with year-
quarter fixed effects. For counties without the Saiz supply elasticity measure, the measure is set to zero, and an additional
dummy for missing supply elasticity is interacted with year-quarter fixed effects. The estimated effect is normalized to
zero in 2007, meaning all estimates are relative to 2007. The dashed lines are 95 percent confidence intervals from standard
errors clustered at the state level. Coefficients are multiplied by four to scale average quarterly charge-off amounts to annual
charge-offs. See the text for additional details on the specification and the Table 1 notes for additional details on the outcome
measures and sample.



                                                                  54
                                  Figure 4: Impulse Response to a Debt Relief Shock under Sticky Prices



                                                                                            Panel A: Consumption
                                 Overall                             Non-Tradable                        Tradable                  Borrower                          Saver
                                                                                                                                                       0.003
                        1                                       1                              1                              2                        0.002
                      0.8                                     0.8                            0.8
               Per cent




                                                                                                                            1.5                        0.001
                      0.6                                     0.6                            0.6                                                           0
                                                              0.4                                                             1
                      0.4                                                                    0.4                                                      −0.001
                      0.2                                     0.2                            0.2                            0.5                       −0.002
                        0                                       0                              0                              0                       −0.003
                         0   1    2   3    4   5                 0    1    2   3   4   5        0    1    2   3     4   5      0   1    2   3   4   5       0   1    2   3   4   5

                                                                                            Panel B: Employment
                                 Overall                             Non-Tradable                        Tradable                  Borrower                          Saver
                        1                                     1.6                              1                            0.6                            2
                                                              1.4                            0.8                            0.5
                      0.8                                     1.2
               Per cent




                                                                1                                                           0.4                          1.5
                      0.6                                                                    0.6
                                                              0.8                                                           0.3                            1
                      0.4                                     0.6                            0.4                            0.2
                      0.2                                     0.4                            0.2                            0.1                          0.5
                                                              0.2
                        0                                       0                              0                              0                            0
                         0   1    2   3    4   5                 0    1    2   3   4   5        0    1    2   3     4   5      0   1    2   3   4   5       0   1    2   3   4   5


                                                                                           Panel C: Other Outcomes
                             Interest rate                      Non-Tradable Price                  Tradable Price                      Wage                    Dividends
                0.06                                                                        0.02                              2                            0
                                                           0.02
Basis points




                                   Real/H                                                                                                               −0.5
                                                                                           0.015
                                                   Per cent




                0.04               Real/F                 0.015                                                             1.5
                                   Nominal                                                                                                               −1
                0.02                                       0.01                             0.01                              1                         −1.5
                   0                                      0.005                            0.005                            0.5                          −2
               −0.02                                                                                                                                    −2.5
                                                              0                                0                              0                          −3
                    0        1    2 3 4        5               0      1    2 3 4       5        0    1    2 3 4         5      0   1    2 3 4       5       0   1    2 3 4       5
                                 Quarters                                 Quarters                       Quarters                      Quarters                     Quarters

                                                                                                    Home      Foreign


Note: This figure plots the effect in our model of a debt relief shock that reduces borrower debts in the high exemptions
regions by 1 percent of PCE on aggregate outcomes under the assumption that prices are sticky (θ = 0.8). The blue line
represents outcomes in the home region (“high-exemption”), and the red line is outcomes in the foreign region (“low-
exemption”). Panel A plots consumption outcomes, where the first column plots aggregate consumption, the second and
third columns plot non-tradable and tradable consumption, and the fourth and fifth columns plot borrower and saver
consumption. Panel B plots employment outcomes, where the first column plots aggregate employment, the second and
third columns plot non-tradable and tradable employment, and the fourth and fifth columns plot borrower and saver em-
ployment. Panel C plots price outcomes, where the first column plots nominal and real interest rates, the second and third
columns plot non-tradable and tradable prices, the fourth column plots nominal wages, and the fifth column plots aggregate
dividends from firms.




                                                                                                    55
                       Figure 5: Debt Relief Multiplier as a Function of the Degree of Price Rigidity θ


                                      Panel A: Non-Tradable Employment                    Panel B: Tradable Employment
                                                                                     1
                                1.5                                                0.8
       Debt relief multiplier




                                                                                   0.6
                                 1                                                 0.4
                                                                                   0.2
                                0.5                                                  0
                                                                                  −0.2
                                                                                  −0.4
                                 0
                                                                                  −0.6
                                                                                  −0.8
                                       0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9               0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
                                           Degree of price rigidity θ                        Degree of price rigidity θ

                                      Home multiplier (M H )      Foreign multiplier (M F )      Relative multiplier (Mrel )


Note: This figure plots the home, foreign and relative debt relief multipliers in our model for non-tradable and tradable
employment as a function of the degree of price rigidity. The blue line is the response of log employment in the home region
(“high-exemption”) to a reduction in home borrowers’ debts of 1 percent of PCE. The red line is the response of log em-
ployment in the foreign region (“low-exemption”) to the same shock. The black line is the difference between the responses
in the home and the foreign region (“relative multiplier”), which corresponds to the debt relief multiplier identified by our
difference-in-differences research design. To draw this figure, we assume that monetary policy follows a Taylor rule with
a coefficient φπ = 0.8 that is sufficient to guarantee determinacy. This lowers the home and foreign multipliers slightly
for θ = 0.8, and ensures that the outcome converges to flexible prices as θ → 0. As we show in Section IV.E, the relative
multipliers are independent of monetary policy, so they are identical to those resulting from assuming the zero lower bound
throughout.




                                                                             56
                            Figure 6: Model Predictions for the Path of Employment During the Recession

                              Panel A: Charge-Offs                   Panel B: Non-Tradable Employment              Panel C: Tradable Employment
                      2.5                                            2.5                                         2.5
 % of Quarterly PCE




                       2                                              2                                           2
                                                        % from s.s




                                                                                                    % from s.s
                      1.5                                            1.5                                         1.5
                       1                                              1                                           1
                      0.5                                            0.5                                         0.5
                       0                                              0                                           0

                        0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11                      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11                   0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
                                Quarters                                       Quarters                                    Quarters

                                                 Home                Foreign   Aggregate   Model relative              Data relative


Note: This figure plots the effect of debt relief in our model on the path of non-tradable and tradable employment in high-
and low-exemption regions during and after the financial crisis. Panel A plots our assumptions for the path of debt relief in
the home (“high-exemption”) and foreign (“low-exemption”) regions. We assume that average charge-offs across the home
and the foreign region equal the observed path of charge-offs in the data starting in 2007q4. We also assume that charge-offs
in the home region equal charge-offs in the foreign region plus the empirically estimated effect of a one standard deviation
increase in bankruptcy protections in the data. Panels B and C shows the model-implied paths of non-tradable and tradable
employment in both regions after 2007q4, i.e. the counterfactual effect of financial crisis chargeoffs on employment implied
by our model. The solid black line represents the model-implied difference between the outcomes in the home and foreign
regions, which corresponds to the model-predicted difference-in-differences effect of a one standard deviation increase in
bankruptcy protections in the data. The dotted black line represents the empirically estimated difference-in-differences
effect of a one standard deviation increase in bankruptcy protections in the data.




                                                                                 57
                                     Figure 7: Debt Relief Multiplier as a Function of the Size of Debt Relief


                                     Panel A: Non-Tradable Employment                Panel B: Tradable Employment
                               1.6                                               1
                               1.4
      Debt relief multiplier




                                                                               0.8
                               1.2
                                 1                                             0.6
                               0.8
                                                                               0.4
                               0.6
                               0.4                                             0.2
                               0.2                                               0
                                 0
                                                                              −0.2
                                       1   2 3 4 5 6 7 8             9 10            1   2 3 4 5 6 7 8             9 10
                                            Debt Relief (% of PCE)                        Debt Relief (% of PCE)

                                      Home multiplier (M H )    Foreign multiplier (M F )   Relative multiplier (Mrel )


Note: This figure plots the debt relief multiplier in our model for non-tradable and tradable employment in high- and
low-exemption regions as a function of the size of the debt relief shock. The blue line is the debt relief multiplier in the
home region (“high-exemption”), the red line is the debt relief multiplier in the foreign region (“low-exemption”), and the
black line represents the difference between the multipliers in the home and the foreign regions. The effect of debt relief on
employment is linear initially, but later declines with the size of the debt relief due to borrowers becoming less constrained
and spreading their spending out over additional periods.




                                                                         58
                             Appendix A. Additional Results


                 Appendix Table A1: Bankruptcy Exemptions by State

                    Chapter 7 Bankruptcy Exemptions in 2007      Financial Cost of Bankruptcy
 State           Homestead     Vehicle    Savings     Wildcard   Home Equity     Other Assets
Alaska             67,500      3,750       1,750          0        113,742           159,444
Alabama           10,000          0          0         3,000       160,173           162,586
Arkansas         Unlimited     1,200         0           500           0             182,904
Arizona           150,000      5,000        150           0         66,855           152,309
California         75,000      2,550       4,050          0         86,855           152,515
Colorado           90,000      3,000         0            0         99,353           160,923
Connecticut       150,000      1,500         0         1,000        66,356           161,572
Delaware           50,000         0          0           500       126,679           163,453
Florida          Unlimited     1,000         0         1,000           0             158,622
Georgia            20,000      3,500         0           600       153,329           160,939
Hawaii             30,000      2,575         0            0        133,183           161,519
Iowa             Unlimited     7,000         0           100           0             157,972
Idaho              50,000      3,000         0           800       126,750           160,401
Illinois           30,000      2,400         0          4,000      143,346           160,583
Indiana            30,000         0         300         8,000      145,012           161,844
Kansas           Unlimited     20,000        0            0            0             153,636
Kentucky           10,000       2,500        0          1,000      160,056           160,170
Louisiana          25,000         0          0            0        147,256           164,026
Massachusetts     500,000        700       1,200          0          4,323           160,463
Maryland              0           0          0         11,000      166,668           159,593
Maine              70,000       5,000        0           400       111,979           159,852
Michigan           31,900       2,950        0            0        137,110           161,934
Minnesota         200,000       3,800        0            0         48,263           159,709
Missouri           15,000       3,000        0          1,250      156,118           160,760
Mississippi        75,000         0          0         10,000      108,814           162,834
Montana           200,000       2,500        0            0         47,869           161,567
North Carolina     37,000       3,500        0           500       139,270           161,600
North Dakota       80,000       1,200        0          5,000      105,199           170,776
Nebraska           12,500         0          0          2,500      157,593           162,728
New Hampshire     200,000       4,000        0          1,000       47,904           160,220
New Jersey            0           0          0          1,000      131,025           162,298
New Mexico         60,000       4,000        0           500       119,369           160,310
Nevada            350,000      15,000        0            0         16,683           155,892
New York          100,000       2,400      2,500          0         88,370           156,339
Ohio               10,000       1,000       400          400       163,915           162,217
Oklahoma         Unlimited      3,000        0            0            0             161,414
Oregon             39,600       2,150      7,500         400       134,560           182,680
Pennsylvania          0           0          0           300       136,446           163,664
Rhode Island      300,000      10,000        0            0         24,032           156,892
South Carolina     10,000       1,200      1,000          0        160,519           162,895
South Dakota     Unlimited        0          0          6,000          0             165,850
Tennessee           7,500         0          0          4,000      164,097           162,346
Texas            Unlimited        0          0         30,000          0             153,806
Utah               40,000       2,500        0            0        134,532           161,927
Virginia           10,000       2,000        0            0        158,357           183,046
Vermont           150,000       2,500       700          400        66,713           160,856
Washington         40,000       2,500        0          2,000      132,896           151,869
Wisconsin          40,000       1,200      1,000          0        135,426           162,018


                                             59
West Virginia               50,000           2,400           0              800             126,737               161,485
Wyoming                     20,000           2,400           0               0              150,847               161,709

Note: This table reports Chapter 7 asset exemptions and average financial cost of bankruptcy by state in 2007. The home-
stead and vehicle exemptions refer to the maximum equity in a residential home or vehicle exempt in bankruptcy. Savings
refers to the amount of cash and bank account assets exempt, while wildcard exemptions can generally be applied to any
other assets, or increase the exemption amount of other categories. The last two columns report the average financial cost
of bankruptcy by state based on state-specific exemptions and a national sample of households’ wealth. The first of the last
two columns reports the average home equity at risk in each state, using home equity amounts from a national sample of
2007 home equity estimates from Equifax and Zillow. The second of the last two columns reports the average amount of
assets at risk for all other assets except housing in each state, using 2005 and 2007 PSID surveys excluding the state at hand.
Both columns exclude individuals in the random sample from that state.




                                                              60
             Appendix Table A2: Correlates with State Bankruptcy Protection Measure

                                                                                     Levels in       Levels in
                                                                                       2001            2007
                             Panel A: Employment Outcomes                                (1)             (2)
                                Log Non-Tradable Employment                            0.014           0.013
                                                                                      (0.012)         (0.009)
                                Log Tradable + Other Employment                       −0.006          −0.010
                                                                                      (0.019)         (0.020)
                                Log Total Employment                                  −0.002          −0.005
                                                                                      (0.016)         (0.016)
                             Panel B: Credit Outcomes
                                Bankrupty Rate (p.p.)                                −0.020          −0.041∗∗
                                                                                      (0.016)         (0.016)
                                Foreclosure Rate (p.p.)                                0.033         −0.075
                                                                                      (0.039)         (0.060)
                                Credit Card Limits ($)                               −2.281         −82.992
                                                                                    (351.177)       (489.225)
                                Credit Card Debt ($)                                  52.226          49.320
                                                                                     (49.649)        (45.253)
                                Mortgage Debt ($000)                                 −0.891            0.130
                                                                                      (1.774)         (4.141)
                                Debt-to-Income Ratio                                   0.005           0.058
                                                                                      (0.049)         (0.138)
                             Panel C: State Characteristics
                                Democratic Vote Share (p.p.)                         −0.638         −0.694
                                                                                      (1.522)        (1.944)
                                Max. Unemp. Benefit ($)                              219.405       133.546
                                                                                    (501.763)     (727.673)
                                Population <45 (p.p.)                                  0.102          0.386
                                                                                      (0.890)        (0.887)
                                College Educated (p.p.)                                0.271          0.124
                                                                                      (0.625)        (0.701)
                                Employment Sensitivity to Business Cycle             −0.055         −0.033
                                                                                      (0.046)        (0.042)
                                Annual Income per Capita ($)                         221.372       576.162
                                                                                    (635.750)     (887.380)
                                Log Average House Price                                1.258          4.943
                                                                                      (0.948)        (4.973)
                                Homeownership Share                                  −1.283∗∗       −1.410∗∗
                                                                                      (0.556)        (0.584)
                                Elasticity of Housing Supply                                  0.042
                                                                                             (0.140)
                                Recourse Indicator                                            0.029
                                                                                             (0.063)
                                Predicted Employment Shock                                  0.628∗∗∗
                                                                                             (0.211)

Note: This table reports results of OLS regressions of various outcomes on cross-state bankruptcy protections, B̂s . All county-level outcomes
are aggregated to the state level using population weights. Each row and column refer to a separate regression. Outcomes in Panel A and B
are described in the notes of Table 1 and Section I. The remaining variables are pulled from additional sources. Debt-to-Income Ratio is from
Mian and Sufi (2014b), and measures the county-level total debt divided by income. Democratic Vote Share is the presidential vote counts
in 2000 and US House of Representatives vote counts by state in 2006, excluding special elections. Maximum Unemployment Benefit is the
maximum UI benefit in 2001 and 2007 by state, as measured in Hsu, Matsa and Melzer (2018). Population < 45 measures the population
share below the age of 45 in 2007 and College Educated measure to the percent of population over 25 with a bachelors degree or higher
in 2007. Both measures come from the ACS. The Employment Sensitivity to Business Cycle is the coefficient relating national employment
growth to state employment growth from 1961-2001 and 1961-2007. Annual Income per Capita measures the average state-level income
per capita and is from the CPS in 2007. Log Average House Price is the log of the Corelogic House Price index. Homeownership Share is
the share of individuals in an area that are measured as homeowners, using the Equifax data. We mark mortgage holders are homeowners.
Elasticity of Housing Supply is time-invariant and comes from Saiz (2010). The Recourse Indicator, from Ghent and Kudlyak (2011), refers to
whether or not state law allows for lenders to seek recourse in the case of defaulted underwater mortgages and is treated as time invariant
in the sample. Predicted Employment Shock is the predicted exposure to local unemployment shocks during the Great Recession from
Yagan (2017). All regressions are run at the state-level using robust standard errors, and weighted by state population as of 2007. See the
text for additional details on the specification and the Table 1 notes for additional details on the outcome measures and sample.


                                                                     61
Appendix Table A3: Effects of Bankruptcy Protections on Other Consumer Debt Outcomes

                                        Avg Change                     Effect of Bankruptcy Protections
     Panel A: 2008q1-2010q4                   (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)
        Bankrupty Rate (p.p.)                0.107          −0.005            −0.002     −0.001     −0.003
                                            (0.118)         (0.009)           (0.007)    (0.005)    (0.004)
        Credit Card Limits ($)           -2,539.916        −16.026           −38.402    −26.223    −23.311
                                          (958.845)        (36.031)          (33.407)   (20.852)   (17.796)
        Credit Card Debt ($)               -132.620         30.515            31.516     10.059      8.360
                                          (270.095)        (39.938)          (22.202)   (11.120)   (12.754)
        Mortgage Debt ($000)                 1.839          −0.034            −0.051     −0.363∗∗   −0.356∗
                                            (5.044)         (0.285)           (0.265)    (0.179)    (0.200)
        Foreclosure Rate (p.p.)              0.906           0.249∗            0.257∗∗∗   0.223∗∗∗   0.216∗∗∗
                                            (1.080)         (0.145)           (0.095)    (0.031)    (0.039)
     Panel B: 2011q1-2013q4
        Bankrupty Rate (p.p.)               -0.091            0.001           0.004            0.005       0.003
                                            (0.094)          (0.015)         (0.008)          (0.006)     (0.006)
        Credit Card Limits ($)             954.736         −30.221         −105.276          −68.180     −46.853
                                         (1,007.336)       (159.535)       (124.984)         (42.363)    (43.125)
        Credit Card Debt ($)               -276.685        −21.966          −32.189∗         −52.191∗∗∗ −48.584∗∗∗
                                          (303.066)         (23.782)        (17.003)         (12.374)    (12.030)
        Mortgage Debt ($000)                -3.977          −0.918           −1.164           −1.193∗∗∗ −1.103∗∗
                                            (5.331)          (0.970)         (0.759)          (0.444)     (0.485)
        Foreclosure Rate (p.p.)              0.057            0.379           0.401∗∗          0.337 ∗∗∗   0.316∗∗∗
                                            (0.318)          (0.243)         (0.159)          (0.055)     (0.064)
     Number of Observations                                  161,720          161,720          161,720         155,324
     County F.E.                                                Y                Y                Y               Y
     Year-Quarter F.E.                                          Y                Y                Y               Y
     Housing Controls × YQ F.E.                                N                 Y                Y               Y
     Additional Controls × YQ F.E.                             N                N                 Y               Y
     Exclude Sand States                                       N                N                N                Y
Note: This table reports estimates of the effect of cross-state bankruptcy protections on consumer debt outcomes. Column
1 reports the cross-county average and standard deviation of the change in the dependent variable from 2007q4-2010q4 or
2010q4-2013q4. Columns 2-5 report coefficients on the average effect of a one standard deviation decrease in the log financial
cost of filing for bankruptcy protection, pooled over the periods 2008q1-2010q4 in Panel A and and 2011q1-2013q4 in Panel
B. All estimates should be interpreted as the relative effect compared to 2007q4. Column 2 reports estimates with county and
year-quarter fixed effects. Column 3 repeats the regression, adding the Saiz supply elasticity and share of the population
who own a home in 2007q4 for each county, interacted with year-quarter fixed effects. For counties without the Saiz supply
elasticity measure, the measure is set to zero, and an additional dummy for missing supply elasticity is interacted with year-
quarter fixed effects. Column 4 repeats the same regression, but with a set of location controls interacted with year-quarter
fixed effects: the share of Democratic voters in 2004, the maximum unemployment insurance benefit, the share of college-
educated individuals in a county, the share of the population that is under the age of 45, the average debt-to-income ratio
for the state in 2007, and the predicted exposure to local unemployment shocks during the Great Recession. Finally, Column
5 repeats Column 4, but excludes the “sand states,” or Arizona, California, Nevada, and New Mexico. All regressions are
weighted by county population as of 2007 and cluster the standard errors at the state level. Standard errors are clustered
at the state level. See the text for additional details on the specification and the Table 1 notes for additional details on the
sample.




                                                              62
       Appendix Table A4: Effects of Bankruptcy Protections on Log House Price Index

                                          Avg Change                   Effect of Bankruptcy Protections
          Panel A: 2008q1-2010q4                (1)              (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)
             Log House Price                  -21.846        −3.147         −3.114        −3.184∗∗∗ −2.968∗∗∗
                                             (14.963)        (3.003)        (2.224)       (0.854)   (0.898)
          Panel B: 2011q1-2013q4
             Log House Price                  10.669         −1.357         −1.310        −1.962         −1.547
                                             (12.554)        (3.990)        (3.096)       (1.341)        (1.339)
          Number of Observations                              122,736        122,736        122,736       114,544
          County F.E.                                            Y              Y              Y             Y
          Year-Quarter F.E.                                      Y              Y              Y             Y
          Housing Controls × YQ F.E.                            N               Y              Y             Y
          Additional Controls × YQ F.E.                         N              N               Y             Y
          Exclude Sand States                                   N              N              N              Y
Note: This table reports estimates of the effect of cross-state bankruptcy protections on log house prices from CoreLogic.
Column 1 reports the cross-county average and standard deviation of the change in the dependent variable from 2007q4-
2010q4 or 2010q4-2013q4. Columns 2-5 report coefficients on the average effect of a one standard deviation decrease in the
log financial cost of filing for bankruptcy protection, pooled over the periods 2008q1-2010q4 in Panel A and and 2011q1-
2013q4 in Panel B. All estimates should be interpreted as the relative effect compared to 2007q4. Column 2 reports estimates
with county and year-quarter fixed effects. Column 3 repeats the regression, adding the Saiz supply elasticity and share of
the population who own a home in 2007q4 for each county, interacted with year-quarter fixed effects. For counties without
the Saiz supply elasticity measure, the measure is set to zero, and an additional dummy for missing supply elasticity is
interacted with year-quarter fixed effects. Column 4 repeats the same regression, but with a set of location controls interacted
with year-quarter fixed effects: the share of Democratic voters in 2004, the maximum unemployment insurance benefit, the
share of college-educated individuals in a county, the share of the population that is under the age of 45, the average debt-
to-income ratio for the state in 2007, and the predicted exposure to local unemployment shocks during the Great Recession.
Finally, Column 5 repeats Column 4, but excludes the “sand states,” or Arizona, California, Nevada, and New Mexico. All
regressions are weighted by county population as of 2007 and cluster the standard errors at the state level. Standard errors
are clustered at the state level. See the text for additional details on the specification and the Table 1 notes for additional
details on the outcome measures and sample.




                                                              63
           Appendix Table A5: Effects of 1991 Homestead Exemption on Employment

                                               Avg Change                    Effect of Bankruptcy Protections
     Panel A: 2008q1-2010q4                           (1)              (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)
         Log Non-Tradable Emp.                      -5.178           0.111         0.077           0.230∗        0.245∗
                                                   (6.737)          (0.164)       (0.151)        (0.118)        (0.123)
         Log Tradable + Other Emp.                  -7.988          −0.207        −0.251         −0.244∗        −0.243∗
                                                   (8.263)          (0.168)       (0.157)        (0.144)        (0.144)
         Log Total Emp.                             -7.406          −0.147        −0.188         −0.156         −0.152
                                                   (6.919)          (0.150)       (0.139)        (0.118)        (0.119)
     Panel B: 2011q1-2013q4
         Log Non-Tradable Emp.                      5.300            0.247         0.167          0.477∗∗∗  0.506∗∗∗
                                                   (5.896)          (0.227)       (0.232)        (0.134)   (0.138)
         Log Tradable + Other Emp.                  3.740           −0.223        −0.237         −0.180    −0.161
                                                   (8.224)          (0.196)       (0.186)        (0.148)   (0.141)
         Log Total Emp.                             4.056           −0.131        −0.152         −0.052    −0.031
                                                   (6.712)          (0.166)       (0.167)        (0.120)   (0.115)
     Number of Observations                                         161,720        161,720        161,720        155,324
     County F.E.                                                       Y              Y              Y              Y
     Year-Quarter F.E.                                                 Y              Y              Y              Y
     Housing Controls × YQ F.E.                                       N               Y              Y              Y
     Additional Controls × YQ F.E.                                    N              N               Y              Y
     Exclude Sand States                                              N              N              N               Y
Note: This table reports estimates of the effect of historical homestead protections on log employment outcomes scaled
by working-age population (age 18-65). See Appendix Table A1 for details on the historical exemptions. The first row of
each panel reports results for log non-tradable employment, defined as the retail and restaurant sectors. The second row
reports results for log tradable and other employment, where tradable employment is defined as industries with sufficiently
large imports and exports from the United States, and other employment is defined as all other industries excluding the
construction sector Mian and Sufi (2014b). The third row reports results for log total employment. Column 1 reports the
cross-county average and standard deviation of the change in the dependent variable from 2007q4-2010q4 or 2010q4-2013q4.
Columns 2-5 report coefficients on the average effect of a one standard deviation decrease in the log financial cost of filing for
bankruptcy protection, pooled over the periods 2008q1-2010q4 in Panel A and and 2011q1-2013q4 in Panel B. All estimates
should be interpreted as the relative effect compared to 2007q4. Column 2 reports estimates with county and year-quarter
fixed effects. Column 3 repeats the regression, adding the Saiz supply elasticity and share of the population who own a
home in 2007q4 for each county, interacted with year-quarter fixed effects. For counties without the Saiz supply elasticity
measure, the measure is set to zero, and an additional dummy for missing supply elasticity is interacted with year-quarter
fixed effects. Column 4 repeats the same regression, but with a set of location controls interacted with year-quarter fixed
effects: the share of Democratic voters in 2004, the maximum unemployment insurance benefit, the share of college-educated
individuals in a county, the share of the population that is under the age of 45, the average debt-to-income ratio for the state
in 2007, and the predicted exposure to local unemployment shocks during the Great Recession. Finally, Column 5 repeats
Column 4, but excludes the “sand states,” or Arizona, California, Nevada, and New Mexico. All regressions are weighted
by county population as of 2007 and cluster the standard errors at the state level. Standard errors are clustered at the state
level. See the text for additional details on the specification and the Table 1 notes for additional details on the outcome
measures and sample.




                                                               64
       Appendix Table A6: Effects of 1991 Homestead Exemption on Debt Write-Downs

                                                   Avg Change                 Effect of Bankruptcy Protections
     Panel A: 2008q1-2010q4                              (1)               (2)            (3)             (4)           (5)
        Charge-Offs in Full Sample                    124.775          10.422          12.940         12.459∗∗∗      9.892∗∗
                                                     (199.676)        (12.015)         (8.363)        (3.528)       (3.794)
        Charge-Offs for Homeowners                    242.352          15.561          18.856         18.932∗∗∗     16.427∗∗
                                                     (360.046)        (20.788)        (14.499)        (5.138)       (6.287)
        Charge-Offs for Renters                       -11.849           5.371           5.105∗         3.889         2.118
                                                     (104.352)         (3.959)         (2.871)        (3.129)       (1.833)
     Panel B: 2011q1-2013q4
        Charge-Offs in Full Sample                    -241.672          4.248           5.559          6.562∗∗       6.025∗
                                                     (174.642)         (9.428)         (7.130)        (3.175)       (3.000)
        Charge-Offs for Homeowners                    -400.601          4.421           6.928         10.465∗∗       9.386∗∗
                                                     (290.675)        (16.756)        (11.474)        (4.432)       (4.350)
        Charge-Offs for Renters                        -91.944          1.426           1.207          0.268         0.428
                                                     (139.866)         (2.728)         (2.547)        (2.049)       (1.729)
     Number of Observations                                             161,720        161,720        161,720        155,324
     County F.E.                                                           Y              Y              Y              Y
     Year-Quarter F.E.                                                     Y              Y              Y              Y
     Housing Controls × YQ F.E.                                           N               Y              Y              Y
     Additional Controls × YQ F.E.                                        N              N               Y              Y
     Exclude Sand States                                                  N              N              N               Y
Note: This table reports estimates of the effect of historical homestead protections on annual charge-offs. See Appendix
Table A1 for details on the historical exemptions. Column 1 reports the cross-county average and standard deviation of the
change in the dependent variable from 2007q4-2010q4 or 2010q4-2013q4. Columns 2-5 report coefficients on the average
effect of a one standard deviation decrease in the log financial cost of filing for bankruptcy protection, pooled over the
periods 2008q1-2010q4 in Panel A and and 2011q1-2013q4 in Panel B. All estimates should be interpreted as the relative
effect compared to 2007q4. Column 2 reports estimates with county and year-quarter fixed effects. Column 3 repeats
the regression, adding the Saiz supply elasticity and share of the population who own a home in 2007q4 for each county,
interacted with year-quarter fixed effects. For counties without the Saiz supply elasticity measure, the measure is set to zero,
and an additional dummy for missing supply elasticity is interacted with year-quarter fixed effects. Column 4 repeats the
same regression, but with a set of location controls interacted with year-quarter fixed effects: the share of Democratic voters
in 2004, the maximum unemployment insurance benefit, the share of college-educated individuals in a county, the share of
the population that is under the age of 45, the average debt-to-income ratio for the state in 2007, and the predicted exposure
to local unemployment shocks during the Great Recession. Finally, Column 5 repeats Column 4, but excludes the “sand
states,” or Arizona, California, Nevada, and New Mexico. All regressions are weighted by county population as of 2007 and
cluster the standard errors at the state level. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. See the text for additional details
on the specification and the Table 1 notes for additional details on the outcome measures and sample.




                                                                 65
            Appendix Table A7: Effects of Bankruptcy Protections on Log In-Migration

                                              Avg Change               Effect of Bankruptcy Protections
             Panel A: 2008q1-2010q4                 (1)               (2)          (3)            (4)           (5)
                Log In-Migration                 -11.134           1.453         1.495         2.273∗∗       2.465∗∗∗
                                                 (9.390)          (1.053)       (0.991)       (0.866)       (0.886)
             Panel B: 2011q1-2013q4
                Log In-Migration                   4.941           1.334         1.437         2.489∗∗       2.623∗∗
                                                  (7.230)         (1.649)       (1.355)       (1.219)       (1.212)
             Number of Observations                               111,960       111,960        111,960       107,532
             County F.E.                                             Y             Y              Y             Y
             Year-Quarter F.E.                                       Y             Y              Y             Y
             Housing Controls × YQ F.E.                             N              Y              Y             Y
             Additional Controls × YQ F.E.                          N             N               Y             Y
             Exclude Sand States                                    N             N              N              Y
Note: This table reports estimates of the effect of cross-state bankruptcy protections on the log of the share of state population
who moved from outside the state in the last year. Migration data comes from the American Community Survey (ACS).
In-migration is defined as the share of current state residents who lived in a different state or country one year ago. We use
data from 2004-2013 due to availability constraints. Column 1 reports the cross-county average and standard deviation of
the change in the dependent variable from 2007q4-2010q4 or 2010q4-2013q4. Columns 2-5 report coefficients on the average
effect of a one standard deviation decrease in the log financial cost of filing for bankruptcy protection, pooled over the
periods 2008q1-2010q4 in Panel A and and 2011q1-2013q4 in Panel B. All estimates should be interpreted as the relative
effect compared to 2007q4. Column 2 reports estimates with county and year-quarter fixed effects. Column 3 repeats
the regression, adding the Saiz supply elasticity and share of the population who own a home in 2007q4 for each county,
interacted with year-quarter fixed effects. For counties without the Saiz supply elasticity measure, the measure is set to zero,
and an additional dummy for missing supply elasticity is interacted with year-quarter fixed effects. Column 4 repeats the
same regression, but with a set of location controls interacted with year-quarter fixed effects: the share of Democratic voters
in 2004, the maximum unemployment insurance benefit, the share of college-educated individuals in a county, the share of
the population that is under the age of 45, the average debt-to-income ratio for the state in 2007, and the predicted exposure
to local unemployment shocks during the Great Recession. Finally, Column 5 repeats Column 4, but excludes the “sand
states,” or Arizona, California, Nevada, and New Mexico. All regressions are weighted by county population as of 2007 and
cluster the standard errors at the state level. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. See the text for additional details
on the specification.




                                                                 66
                 Appendix Table A8: Effects of Bankruptcy Protections on Inflation

                                          Avg Change                   Effect of Bankruptcy Protections
          Panel A: 2008q1-2010q4                (1)              (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)
             Non-Tradable CPI                  4.985          0.257          0.241        −0.046         −0.047
                                              (1.810)        (0.251)        (0.265)       (0.311)        (0.353)
             Tradable CPI                      3.167         −0.077         −0.064        −0.159         −0.104
                                              (1.246)        (0.214)        (0.182)       (0.096)        (0.118)
             Total CPI                         4.292          0.095          0.093        −0.122         −0.096
                                              (1.270)        (0.133)        (0.138)       (0.185)        (0.207)
          Panel B: 2011q1-2013q4
             Non-Tradable CPI                  6.417           0.116          0.099       −0.399         −0.359
                                              (1.087)         (0.426)        (0.452)      (0.607)        (0.693)
             Tradable CPI                      6.503           0.052          0.029       −0.037          0.077
                                              (1.052)         (0.334)        (0.376)      (0.213)        (0.229)
             Total CPI                         6.462           0.070          0.056       −0.230         −0.159
                                              (0.806)         (0.236)        (0.251)      (0.357)        (0.398)
          Number of Observations                               11,804         11,804        11,804         11,388
          County F.E.                                            Y              Y             Y              Y
          Year-Quarter F.E.                                      Y              Y             Y              Y
          Housing Controls × YQ F.E.                             N              Y             Y              Y
          Additional Controls × YQ F.E.                          N              N             Y              Y
          Exclude Sand States                                    N              N             N              Y
Note: This table reports estimates of the effect of cross-state bankruptcy protections on log regional consumer price index.
The first row of each panel reports results for the non-tradable price index, which is defined using the Services index. The
second row reports results for tradable price index, which is defined using the commodities index. The third row reports
results for the overall price index. Our definitions for the price indices follow Mian, Sufi and Verner (2017). Column 1 reports
the cross-county average and standard deviation of the change in the dependent variable from 2007q4-2010q4 or 2010q4-
2013q4. Columns 2-5 report coefficients on the average effect of a one standard deviation decrease in the log financial cost
of filing for bankruptcy protection, pooled over the periods 2008q1-2010q4 in Panel A and and 2011q1-2013q4 in Panel B.
All estimates should be interpreted as the relative effect compared to 2007q4. Column 2 reports estimates with county and
year-quarter fixed effects. Column 3 repeats the regression, adding the Saiz supply elasticity and share of the population
who own a home in 2007q4 for each county, interacted with year-quarter fixed effects. For counties without the Saiz supply
elasticity measure, the measure is set to zero, and an additional dummy for missing supply elasticity is interacted with year-
quarter fixed effects. Column 4 repeats the same regression, but with a set of location controls interacted with year-quarter
fixed effects: the share of Democratic voters in 2004, the maximum unemployment insurance benefit, the share of college-
educated individuals in a county, the share of the population that is under the age of 45, the average debt-to-income ratio
for the state in 2007, and the predicted exposure to local unemployment shocks during the Great Recession. Finally, Column
5 repeats Column 4, but excludes the “sand states,” or Arizona, California, Nevada, and New Mexico. All regressions are
weighted by county population as of 2007 and cluster the standard errors at the state level. Standard errors are clustered at
the state level. See the text for additional details on the specification.




                                                              67
                                                     Appendix Figure A1: Stability of Exemptions Over Time
                                     Panel A: 2007 Homestead Exemption vs. 1991 Homestead Exemption

                                                50                                                                                               Correlation = 0.88
                                                                                                                                                           OK
                                                                                                                                                           FL
                                                                                                                                                           IA
                                                                                                                                                           TX
                                                                                                                                                           KS
                                                                                                                                                           SD
                                                                                                                                                           AR

                                                                                                                                                 MA
                                                                                                                                            NV
                2007 Homestead Exemption Rank


                                                                                               RI
                                                40                                             NH                                      MT                  MN

                                                                                               CT                             VT                 AZ
                                                                                                         NY
                                                                                                                        CO
                                                                                                                                       ND
                                                30                                             ME
                                                                                                                   MS             CA
                                                                                                                             AK
                                                                                                                        NM
                                                          DE                                   WV                  ID

                                                                               UT                                  WA   WI
                                                20              NC
                                                                                                         OR
                                                                                               MI
                                                                                               IN
                                                                                               IL                  HI
                                                                                               LA
                                                                               GA                        WY
                                                                     MO
                                                10                             NE

                                                                               KY
                                                                               OH
                                                                               SC
                                                                               AL
                                                                               VA

                                                                TN
                                                          MD                                   NJ
                                                                                               PA
                                                0
                                                      0                    10                 20            30                         40                       50
                                                                                         1991 Homestead Exemption Rank

                                        Panel B: 2007 Homestead Exemption vs. 1920 Homestead Exemption

                                                                                                                                                 Correlation = 0.60
                                                40
                                                                                                                                       AR             TX
                                                                                    MA
                                                                                                                                                      NV
                                                           RI
                2007 Homestead Exemption Rank




                                                                          NH
                                                                                               CT                        VT                      AZ
                                                30                                             NY
                                                                                                                         CO
                                                                                                                                             MS       CA
                                                                          ME
                                                                                               NM
                                                           DE                                  WV                                                     ID

                                                20                                             WA                        UT
                                                                                               NC
                                                                                                              MI
                                                                               IN              IL
                                                                                                                         LA
                                                                                                                   GA                  WY
                                                                                                              MO
                                                10                                                                       NE

                                                                          VA                   KY
                                                                                               OH
                                                                                               SC                        AL

                                                                                               TN
                                                           MD        PA                        NJ

                                                0
                                                      0                             10               20              30                                         40
                                                                                         1920 Homestead Exemption Rank

Note: This figure shows the stability of the Chapter 7 bankruptcy exemptions over time. Panel A plots 2007 homestead
exemption ranks against 1991 homestead exemption ranks for all 50 states. Panel B plots 2007 homestead exemption ranks
against 1920 homestead exemption ranks, excluding states that did not exist in 1920 and states with acre-based homestead
exemptions. We use state populations in 2007 as weights and assign a value of $1,000,000 to states with unlimited 2007
homestead exemptions.




                                                                                                    68
          Appendix Figure A2: Geography of the Financial Cost of Bankruptcy Filing




                                                                                        313,000 −
                                                                                        296,000 − 313,000
                                                                                        282,000 − 296,000
                                                                                        236,000 − 282,000
                                                                                        180,000 − 236,000
                                                                                        150,000 − 180,000

Note: This map shows the geographic distribution of financial cost of filing for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2007. See the text
for additional details on the construction of this measure.




                                                            69
      Appendix Figure A3: Correlation of Exemptions and Financial Cost of Bankruptcy
                                                    Panel A: Homestead Exemption                                                                                           Panel B: Vehicle Exemption
                                                                                                   Correlation = -0.94                                                                                                           Correlation = -0.10
                                               50
                                                        MDTN VA                                                                                                   50          TN
                                                                                                                                                                              MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                  VA
           Financial Cost of Bankruptcy Rank




                                                                                                                              Financial Cost of Bankruptcy Rank
                                                             OH
                                                             SC                                                                                                                           OH SC
                                                             AL NE                                                                                                            AL
                                                                                                                                                                              NE
                                                             KY          OR                                                                                                                        OR   KY
                                               40                MO
                                                                  GA                                                                                              40                                                   MOGA
                                                                  WY
                                                                   LAIN                                                                                                       LA                     WY
                                                                     IL NC                                                                                                    IN                     IL
                                                        PA                                                                                                                    PA                                             NC
                                                                       MI WI                                                                                                                WI                   MI
                                               30                    HI    UT                                                                                     30                                         UT HI
                                                        NJ                    DE                                                                                              NJ
                                                                                                                                                                              DE
                                                                              WV                                                                                                                        WV
                                                                           WAIDNM                                                                                                                            WA        ID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NM
                                                                                 AK  ND                                                                                                     ND                                   AK ME
                                               20                                 ME
                                                                                   MSCO                                                                           20          MS                                       CO
                                                                                   CA NYCT                                                                                                        CT
                                                                                                                                                                                                        NY        CA
                                                                                        VT
                                                                                        AZ MT                                                                                                                VT                      AZ
                                                                                           NH                                                                                                                MT                    NH
                                                                                           MN                                                                                                                                     MN
                                               10                                           RINV AR                                                               10                        AR                                         RINV
                                                                                               MA SD
                                                                                                  OK
                                                                                                                                                                              SD     MA                                OK
                                                                                                  FL
                                                                                                  IA                                                                                  FL                                                 IA
                                                                                                  TX
                                                                                                  KS                                                                          TX                                                              KS
                                               0                                                                                                                  0
                                                    0         10        20        30          40              50                                                       0       10            20              30             40               50
                                                                   Homestead Exemption Rank                                                                                              Vehicle Exemption Rank


                                                        Panel C: Savings Exemption                                                                                     Panel D: Wildcard Exemption
                                               50                         VA                       Correlation = -0.07                                            50                VA                                           Correlation = 0.04
                                                                          TN
                                                                          MD                                                                                                                                                   TN            MD
           Financial Cost of Bankruptcy Rank




                                                                                                                              Financial Cost of Bankruptcy Rank




                                                                                                    OHSC                                                                            SC                  OH
                                                                          AL
                                                                          NE                                                                                                                                                  AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NE
                                                                          KY                                    OR                                                                                      OR             KY
                                               40                         MO
                                                                          GA                                                                                      40                                              GA        MO
                                                                          WY
                                                                          LA                                                                                                        WY
                                                                                                                                                                                    LA
                                                                          IL                       IN                                                                                                                               IL IN
                                                                          NC
                                                                          PA                                                                                                                       PA        NC
                                                                          MI                            WI                                                                          MI
                                                                                                                                                                                    WI
                                               30                         UT
                                                                          HI                                                                                      30                UT
                                                                                                                                                                                    HI
                                                                          NJ
                                                                          DE                                                                                                                                 DE WV NJ
                                                                          WV
                                                                          ID                                                                                                                                    ID
                                                                          WA
                                                                          NM                                                                                                                                 NM       WA
                                                                          ND                                 AK                                                                     AK                                   ND
                                               20                         ME
                                                                          MS                                                                                      20                                    ME                                 MS
                                                                          CO                                  NY                                                                    CO
                                                                                                                                                                                    NY
                                                                          CT                                   CA                                                                   CA                                 CT
                                                                          MT                   AZ VT                                                                                AZ
                                                                                                                                                                                    MT
                                                                                                                                                                                                        VT
                                                                          NH
                                                                          MN                                                                                                        MN                                 NH
                                               10                         AR
                                                                          RI                                                                                      10                RI                       AR
                                                                          NV
                                                                          SD                                                                                                        NV                                                  SD
                                                                          OK                              MA                                                                        MA
                                                                                                                                                                                    OK
                                                                          FL
                                                                          IA                                                                                                                      IA                   FL
                                                                          TX
                                                                          KS                                                                                                        KS                                                        TX
                                               0                                                                                                                  0
                                                    0         10        20        30          40              50                                                       0       10            20              30             40               50
                                                                    Savings Exemption Rank                                                                                               Wildcard Exemption Rank

Note: This figure shows the correlation of the financial cost of bankruptcy measure described in the text and the different
Chapter 7 bankruptcy exemptions. Each panel plots the state-specific rank for the financial cost of bankruptcy against
the state-specific rank for each Chapter 7 asset exemption category. We also plot the line of best fit, weighted by states’
population. See the text for additional details.




                                                                                                                         70
Appendix Figure A4: Debt Relief Multiplier as a Function of Monetary Policy Responsive-
ness


                                     Panel A: Non-Tradable Employment                Panel B: Tradable Employment
                               1.6                                              1
                               1.4
     Debt relief multiplier




                               1.2                                            0.8
                                 1                                            0.6
                               0.8
                               0.6                                            0.4
                               0.4                                            0.2
                               0.2
                                 0                                              0
                              −0.2                                           −0.2
                                       1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                           1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
                                     Taylor rule response to inflation φπ           Taylor rule response to inflation φπ

                                     Home multiplier (M H )    Foreign multiplier (M F )     Relative multiplier (Mrel )


Note: This figure plots the debt relief multiplier in our model for non-tradable and tradable employment in high- and low-
exemption regions as a function of the degree of responsiveness of monetary policy to inflation φπ . The blue line is the debt
relief multiplier in the home region (“high-exemption”), the red line is the debt relief multiplier in the foreign region (“low-
exemption”), and the black line represents the difference between the home and the foreign regions. Zero responsiveness
(φπ = 0) corresponds to the zero lower bound, where nominal interest rates are unchanged as debt relief changes. The level
effect of debt relief on employment is decreasing in φπ , while the relative multiplier is independent of the monetary policy
response, as in Nakamura and Steinsson (2014).




                                                                        71
                     Appendix Figure A5: Impulse Response to a Debt Relief Shock under Flexible Prices



                                                                                     Panel A: Consumption
                               Overall                         Non-Tradable                      Tradable                   Borrower                        Saver
        0.3                                     0.06                                 0.4                               1                           0
        0.2                                     0.04                                 0.2                             0.8                        −0.1
Per cent




        0.1                                     0.02                                                                 0.6
          0                                        0                                   0                             0.4                        −0.2
       −0.1                                    −0.02                                                                 0.2                        −0.3
       −0.2                                    −0.04                                −0.2                               0
       −0.3                                    −0.06                                −0.4                            −0.2                        −0.4
                                                                                                                    −0.4
           0               1    2   3    4   5      0           1   2   3   4   5       0    1    2   3     4   5       0   1   2   3   4   5       0   1   2   3   4   5

                                                                                     Panel B: Employment
                               Overall                         Non-Tradable                      Tradable                   Borrower                        Saver
                                                         0.1                         0.3                             0.2                         0.5
        0.2
                                                        0.05                         0.2                               0                         0.4
Per cent




        0.1                                                                          0.1                            −0.2
          0                              0                                             0                            −0.4                         0.3
                                                                                    −0.1                            −0.6                         0.2
       −0.1                          −0.05                                          −0.2                            −0.8                         0.1
       −0.2                           −0.1                                          −0.3                             −1                            0
           0               1 2 3 4 5      0 1 2 3 4 5                                   0    1    2   3     4   5       0   1   2   3   4   5       0   1   2   3   4   5


                                                                                    Panel C: Other Outcomes
                           Interest rate  Non-Tradable Price        Tradable Price                                              Wage                    Dividends
                     50                                                             0.15                                                         0.1
                                       0.15                    0.02
      Basis points




                     40        Real/H   0.1                                          0.1
                                                                                                                                                0.05
                                             Per cent




                     30        Real/F  0.05                    0.01                 0.05
                              Nominal     0                       0                    0                                                  0
                     20
                                      −0.05                  − 0.01                −0.05
                     10                −0.1                                                                                           −0.05
                                      −0.15                  −0.02                  −0.1
                      0                                                            −0.15                                               −0.1
                       0   1 2 3 4 5       0 1 2 3 4 5             0 1 2 3 4 5          0                                   1 2 3 4 5      0 1 2 3 4 5
                            Quarters          Quarters                 Quarters                                              Quarters         Quarters

                                                                                            Home      Foreign


Note: This figure plots the effect in our model of a debt relief shock that reduces borrower debts in the high exemptions
regions by 1 percent of PCE on aggregate outcomes under the assumption that prices are flexible (θ = 0) instead of sticky
(θ = 0.8) as in our baseline parameterization shown in Figure 4. The blue line represents outcomes in the home region
(“high-exemption”), and the red line is outcomes in the foreign region (“low-exemption”). Panel A plots consumption out-
comes, where the first column plots aggregate consumption, the second and third columns plot non-tradable and tradable
consumption, and the fourth and fifth columns plot borrower and saver consumption. Panel B plots employment outcomes,
where the first column again plots aggregate employment, the second and third columns plot non-tradable and tradable
employment, and the fourth and fifth columns plot borrower and saver employment. Panel C plots price outcomes, where
the first column plots nominal and real interest rates, the second and third columns plot non-tradable and tradable prices,
the fourth column plots nominal wages, and the fifth column plots aggregate dividends from firms.




                                                                                            72
             Appendix Figure A6: Debt Relief Multiplier as a Function of Openness to Trade


                                      Panel A: Non-Tradable Employment                   Panel B: Tradable Employment
                                                                                  1.4
                                 2                                                1.2
       Debt relief multiplier




                                                                                    1
                                1.5                                               0.8
                                                                                  0.6
                                 1                                                0.4
                                                                                  0.2
                                0.5                                                 0
                                                                                 −0.2
                                 0                                               −0.4
                                                                                 −0.6
                                      0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9               0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
                                       Tradable share of consumption α                   Tradable share of consumption α

                                      Home multiplier (M H )      Foreign multiplier (M F )      Relative multiplier (Mrel )


Note: This figure plots the debt relief multiplier in our model for non-tradable and tradable employment in the home and
the foreign regions as a function of the degree of openness to trade α. The blue line is the debt relief multiplier in the home
region (“high-exemption”), the red line is the debt relief multiplier in the foreign region (“low-exemption”), and the black
line represents the difference between the multipliers in the home and the foreign regions. More home bias reduces the
amount of foreign demand “leakage,” increasing the local non-tradable multiplier and lowering the foreign non-tradable
multiplier, so that the relative non-tradable multiplier rises.




                                                                            73
Appendix Figure A7: Debt Relief Multiplier as a Function of the Degree of Price Rigidity θ
for GHH preferences


                                     Panel A: Non-Tradable Employment                  Panel B: Tradable Employment
                                                                                 16
                                16
                                                                                 14
       Debt relief multiplier




                                14
                                                                                 12
                                12
                                10                                               10
                                 8                                                8
                                 6                                                6
                                 4                                                4
                                 2                                                2
                                 0                                                0
                                −2
                                      0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9             0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
                                          Degree of price rigidity θ                      Degree of price rigidity θ

                                     Home multiplier (M H )      Foreign multiplier (M F )    Relative multiplier (Mrel )


Note: This figure plots the home, foreign and relative debt relief multipliers in our model for non-tradable and trad-
                                                                                                                  h
able employment as a function of the degree of price rigidity, under the assumption of GHH preferences u (C, N ) =
log C − χh N 2 . The blue line is the response of log employment in the home region (“high-exemption”) to a reduction
in home borrowers’ debts of 1 percent of PCE. The red line is the response of log employment in the foreign region (“low-
exemption”) to the same shock. The black line is the difference between the responses in the home and the foreign region
(“relative multiplier”), which corresponds to the debt relief multiplier identified by our difference-in-differences research
design. To draw this figure, we assume that monetary policy follows a Taylor rule with a coefficient φπ = 0.8 that is suf-
ficient to guarantee determinacy. This guarantees that the outcome converges to flexible prices as θ → 0. As we show in
Section IV.E, the relative multipliers are independent of monetary policy. The GHH model is able to generate a relative
multiplier for non-tradable employment M NT,rel that is large as that observed in the data when θ is sufficiently large, but
that relative multiplier masks very large home and foreign multipliers for both non-tradable and tradable employment.




                                                                            74
Appendix Figure A8: Debt Relief Multiplier as a Function of the Degree of Local Financing


                                      Panel A: Non-Tradable Employment                Panel B: Tradable Employment

                                1.6                                              1
                                1.4
       Debt relief multiplier




                                                                               0.8
                                1.2
                                  1                                            0.6
                                0.8
                                                                               0.4
                                0.6
                                0.4                                            0.2
                                0.2                                              0
                                  0
                                                                              −0.2
                                  0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1         0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
                                  Fraction f of debt relief borne at home         Fraction f of debt relief borne at home

                                      Home multiplier (M H )   Foreign multiplier (M F )     Relative multiplier (Mrel )


Note: This figure shows the debt relief multiplier in our model for non-tradable and tradable employment in the home and
the foreign regions as a function of the fraction f of debt relief that is paid for by savers in the high exemption region. The
blue line is the debt relief multiplier in the home region (“high-exemption”), the red line is the debt relief multiplier in the
foreign region (“low-exemption”), and the black line represents the difference between the multipliers in the home and the
foreign regions. The incidence of debt relief has little impact on either the aggregate or relative debt relief multipliers.




                                                                         75
                                            Appendix B. Model Details
This appendix derives our model, details our calibration strategy and explains our solution method. Here, we
allow for a slightly more general version of the model in which:
                                                                                                      1
   1. The size of the home region can be an arbitrary number n ∈ (0, 1) (with n =                     2    in the main text).

   2. Borrowers and savers may own different shares in firms; we denote these shares by v B , vS (with v B =
      vS = 1 in the main text).

   3. Tradable and non-tradable goods firms may have different degrees of diminishing returns to production
      γT , γ NT (with γT = γ NT = γ in the main text).

                                                   A. Derivation of Equations
Households.    As described in Section IV, our general household problem is:

                                   ∞                       
                             max E ∑ ( βh )t uh Ci,t
                                                 h      h
                                                     , Ni,t
                                            t =0
                                                                          h
                                                                         Bi,t
                                             h      h         h                          h
                             s.t.      Pi,t Ci,t + Bi,t −1 − ∆i,t ≤              + Wi,t Ni,t + vh Di,t ,
                                                                        1 + It
                                        h
                                       Bi,t ≤ b̄PT,t

This yields standard first-order conditions: a labor supply decision:
                                                                            
                                                       Wi,t   uhN Ci,t
                                                                   h , Nh
                                                                         i,t
                                                            =                                                                 (B.1)
                                                       Pi,t   uCh Ch , N h
                                                                   i,t  i,t


and an intertemporal Euler equation:
                                                  
                                h Ch
                               uC            h
                                    i,t+1 , Ni,t+1   P       1                     
                             β                   = i,t+1                      h
                                                                  1 − (1 + It )µi,t                                             (B.2)
                                  h Ch , N h
                                 uC                   Pi,t 1 + It
                                        i,t  i,t

                                                                         h > 0 this constraint binds and:
where µi,t is the Lagrange multiplier on the borrowing constraint; when µi,t

                                                              h
                                                             Bi,t = b̄PT,t                                                      (B.3)

Static maximization of the allocation of consumption across goods also yields standard first-order conditions:
for both h ∈ {S, B},

                                 h
                                CT,H,j,t                   PT,j,t −e PT,t −η
                                                                         
                                     h
                                                   = α                                                                          (B.4)
                                    CH,t                   PT,t        PH,t
                               h
                              CNT,H,j,t                           PNT,H,j,t −e PNT,H,t −η
                                                                                   
                                     h
                                                   =   (1 − α )                                                                 (B.5)
                                    CH,t                          PNT,H,t       PH,t


                                     h
                                    CT,F,j,t               PT,j,t −e PT,t −η
                                                                         
                                      h
                                                   =   α                                                                        (B.6)
                                     CF,t                  PT,t        PF,t
                                h
                               CNT,F,j,t                          PNT,F,j,t −e PNT,F,t −η
                                                                                   
                                     h
                                                   =   (1 − α )                                                                 (B.7)
                                    CF,t                          PNT,F,t       PF,t


                                                                  76
                                                                                                         C 1− σ             1+ ψ
Separable preferences.                Under separable preferences, uh (C, N ) =                          1− σ     − χh N1+ψ , (B.1) reads:

                                                                         χh ( Ni,t
                                                                               h )ψ
                                                                                           Wi,t
                                                                            h )−σ
                                                                                       =                                                                    (B.8)
                                                                          (Ci,t            Pi,t

and (B.2) reads:
                                                           −σ
                                                     h
                                                    Ci,t +1     Pi,t+1 1                  h
                                                                                               
                                                  β  −σ =                  1 − (1 + It )µi,t                                                              (B.9)
                                                       h         Pi,t 1 + It
                                                     Ci,t

                                                                                                                 1+ ψ
                                                                                                                         1− σ
GHH preferences.                  Under GHH preferences, uh (C, N ) =                       1
                                                                                           1− σ       C − χh N1+ψ                , instead, (B.1) reads:

                                                                                           Wi,t
                                                                         χh ( Ni,t
                                                                               h ψ
                                                                                   ) =                                                                     (B.10)
                                                                                           Pi,t

and (B.2) reads:
                                                                 1+ ψ
                                                                         −σ
                                                            Nit+1
                                                 Ci,t+1 − χ 1+ ψ                 Pi,t+1 1                  h
                                                                                                                
                                        β                           −σ =                    1 − (1 + It )µi,t                                            (B.11)
                                                           Nit
                                                                1+ ϕ              Pi,t 1 + It
                                                  Ci,t − χ 1+  ϕ


Generic firm problem.                A generic firm has monopoly power; its maximization problem is:



                                                               max D (i ) ≡ p(i )y(i ) − Wn(i )
                                                                p (i )


where W is the local wage it faces, p(i ) is its price, n(i ) is its employment, y (i ) = An (i )γ is its production
function. The firm faces a demand constraint of the form:
                                                                                       1          1
                                                                         p(i ) = PY e y(i )− e

Under fully flexible prices each period, the firm sets n (i ) optimally to maximize static profits, this yields:

                                                           1     e−1           e −1 1
                                                        PY e γ         An (i )γ e           −W = 0
                                                                  e                  n (i )

                            1
                    y (i )    γ
where n(i ) =        A            ; hence:
                                                               W    e − 1 γ1 1       1− 1 − 1
                                                                 =γ      A Y ε y (i ) e γ
                                                               P      e
All firms in the same industry have the same price p(i ) = P and therefore produce the same amount, so y (i ) = Y
and every period:
                                             Wt       e − 1 γ1 1− γ1
                                                 =γ         At Yt                                          (B.12)
                                              Pt         e
Under sticky Calvo prices, a standard derivation yields a firm’s optimal reset price Pt∗ at time t, relative to its
industry’s price index Pt , as:




                                                                                  77
                                                                                 "                                                                    #
                                                                                        k                                   ε + ε (1− γ )      r
                                                                    ∑∞     k                                          Pt+k
                                                                                     βS         S                                      γ
                                      1 + ε (1− γ )                 k =0 θ E                  uC,t +k Yt+k            Pt                      MC t
                               Pt∗
                          
                                               γ            ε
                                                       =                                                                             ε −1                             (B.13)
                               Pt                          ε−1                                                           
                                                                            ∑∞     k                 k    S                   Pt+k
                                                                             k =0 θ E         ( βS )     uC,t +k Yt+k          Pt

                                                                                                                                                          k
where the firm discounts future real flows using the saver’s stochastic discount factor βS                                                                      S
                                                                                                                                                               uC,t +k since the
                                                                                                                 r
saver is always on his Euler equation, Yt is industry demand, and MC t are average real marginal costs at time
t, defined as:
                                                 r    Wt      1
                                              MC t ≡        1
                                                                                                        (B.14)
                                                      Pt        1− 1
                                                         γAtγ Yt γ
                                                                                                                                                                             Pt
note that in the limit of flexible prices, θ = 0, Pt = Pt∗ and we recover (B.12). Linearization for inflation Πt =                                                          Pt−1
around a steady-state with zero inflation results in the standard New Keynesian Phillips curve:

                                                                   (1 − θ ) 1 − θβS
                                                                                    
                                                           S                            1
                                              π̂t = β E [π̂t+1 ] +                      ε (1− γ )
                                                                                                  m̂crt
                                                                            θ         1+ γ

where:
                                                                                                 1−γ
                                                                       m̂crt = ŵt − p̂t +           ŷt
                                                                                                  γ
We now specify this generic problem to non-traded and traded goods firms in the home and the foreign region.

Non-tradable goods firm problem. A firm j in the non-tradable sector of region i ∈ { H, F } operates its tech-
nology subject to a demand constraint:
                                                                −e
                                                p NT,i,j,t
                                            
                                                                                                                                γNT
                                                                       CNT,i,t = y NT,i,j,t = A NT,t n NT,i,j,t                                                          (B.15)
                                                PNT,i,t

where                                                                                                   −η
                                                                                          PNT,i,t               h
                                                                CNT,i,t = (1 − α)                              Ci,t
                                                                                           Pi,t
is non-traded goods demand in region i, taken as exogenous by the firm. Write NNT,i,t for aggregate employ-
                                                                                               R1
ment in the non-tradable sector of region i at time t. Market clearing for each input NNT,i,t = j=0 n NT,i,j,t dj
implies:
                                                                              1
                                              p NT,i,j,t − γNT
                                         Z              e         
                                                                      CNT,i,t γNT
                               NNT,i,t =                       dj ·
                                           j   PNT,i,t                A NT,t
Hence, at the aggregate level, consumption and employment are related via:


                                                                                 A NT,t
                                                                CNT,i,t     =             ( NNT,i,t )γNT
                                                                                 4 NT,i,t
                                                               γNT
                       R 1  p NT,i,j,t − γNT
                                            e
where ∆ NT,i,t =        j =0     PNT,i,t                   dj          ≥ 1.
    This has the form of the generic problem described above. Under flexible prices ∆ NT,i,t = 1 and we obtain:

                                                              1    1− γ 1
                                        Wi,t          e − 1 γNT                    e−1         γ NT −1
                                               = γ NT      A NT,t YNT,i,tNT = γ NT     A NT,t NNT,i,t                                                                    (B.16)
                                       PNT,i,t          e                           e


                                                                                     78
Under sticky prices, the Phillips curves are:

                                                                                                                     1−γ
                                                                                                                                          
                               π̂ NT,i,t = βS E [π̂ NT,i,t+1 ] + κ NT                      ŵi,t − p̂ NT,i,t +           ŷ NT,i,t
                                                                                                                      γ

                (1−θ )(1−θβS )         1
where κ NT ≡           θ
                               
                                   ε (1− γ ) .
                                            
                                 1+ γ NT
                                               NT



Tradable goods firm problem.                    A firm j in the tradable sector of region i ∈ { H, F } operates its technology
subject to a demand constraint:
                                                       −e                −e
                                           p T,i,j,t
                                       
                                                                  PT,i,t                                                          γNT
                                                                                 CT,t = y T,i,j,t = A T,t n T,i,j,t                                 (B.17)
                                           PT,i,t                 PT,t

The difference with (B.15) is that goods demand is global, namely:
                                                                        −η                                            −η
                                                                  PT,t                                            PT,t
                                       CT,t = n · α                            CH,t + (1 − n) · α                                 CF,t
                                                                  PH,t                                            PF,t

    Write NT,i,t for aggregate employment in the tradable sector of region i at time t. Market clearing at home
                       Rn                       R1
and abroad, NT,H,t = j=0 n T,i,j dj and NT,F,t = j=n n T,i,j dj, implies:

                                                                                                            −e                 1
                                                                                                     PT,H,t                       γT
                                                          Z n 
                                                                p T,i,j,t − γT
                                                                          e
                                                                                                      PT,t          CT,t 
                                        NT,H,t =                                         dj 
                                                                                            
                                                                      PT,H,t                              A T,t
                                                                                                                         
                                                              j =0




                                                        PT,H,t −e
                                                              
                                                                                            A T,t
                                                                   CT,t            =              ( NT,H,t )γT
                                                         PT,t                              4T,H,t
                                                         PT,F,t −e
                                                              
                                                                                           A T,t
                                                                   CT,t            =              ( NT,F,t )γT
                                                          PT,t                             4T,F,t
                                                        γT                                "                        −    e        # γT
                      R n  PT,H,j,t − γeT
                                                                                                    
                                                                                               R1        PT,F,j,t        γT
where ∆ T,H,t =        j =0   PT,H,t              dj          ≥ 1 and ∆ T,H,t =                j=n         F
                                                                                                         PT,F,t
                                                                                                                              dj           ≥ 1.39
    This problem also has the form of the generic problem described above. Under flexible prices ∆ T,i,t = 1
and we obtain:
                              Wi,t       e − 1 γ1T 1− γ1T       e−1        γ T −1
                                    = γT      A T,t YT,i,t = γT     A T,t NT,i,t                       (B.18)
                             PT,i,t        e                     e
in particular, combining with (B.16), we obtain relative labor demand as:

                                                         PNT,i,t   γ   A T,t ( NNT,i,t )1−γNT
                                                                 = T
                                                          PT,i,t  γ NT A NT,t ( NT,i,t )1−γT

Under sticky prices, the Phillips curves are:

                                                                                                                  1−γ
                                                                                                                                      
                                       π̂ T,i,t = βS E [π̂ T,i,t+1 ] + κ T               ŵi,t − p̂ T,i,t +           ŷ T,i,t
                                                                                                                   γ
                                                                                          Rn      1− e
  39 Wehave defined the local tradable price indices as ( PT,H )1−e = n1 j=0 p j,T                        dj and ( PT,F )1−e                            =
   R1        1− e
 1
1−n j=n p j,T       dj so that the overall traded goods price index is PT1−e = n ( PT,H )1−e + (1 − n) ( PT,F )1−e .



                                                                                    79
               (1−θ )(1−θβS )         1
 where κ T ≡          θ
                              
                                  ε (1− γ ) .
                                           
                                1+ γ NT
                                           NT


                                                                       B. Steady state
 Our flexible-price steady state has 29 equations, as detailed below:

    1) Our numeraire is the price index for tradables, which we normalize to PT = 1

    2) The definition of the tradable price index PT implies:

                                                              "                    # 1−−1e
                                                                              PTF 1−e
                                                                            
                                                         PTH
                                                             = n + (1 − n )
                                                          PT                  PTH

       where recall that n denotes the size of the home region; in the main text n = 21 .

  3-4) Consumer price indices at home and foreign:

                                                                 h                                        i    1
                                                                     α ( PT )1−η + (1 − α) ( PNT,H )1−η
                                                                                                              1− η
                                                PH       =
                                                                 h                                        i    1
                                                                     α ( PT )1−η + (1 − α) ( PNT,F )1−η
                                                                                                              1− η
                                                PF       =

  5-8) Household intratemporal first-order conditions: in the case of separable preferences this is given by (B.8):
                                                                     σ     ψ                  WH
                                                                 χ B CH
                                                                      B     B
                                                                           NH                 =
                                                                                                  PH
                                                                     σ  ψ                     WF
                                                                 χ B CFB  NFB                 =
                                                                                                  PF

                                                                    σ     ψ                   WH
                                                                 χS CH
                                                                     S     S
                                                                          NH                  =
                                                                                                  PH
                                                                    σ  ψ                      WF
                                                                 χS CFS  NFS                  =
                                                                                                  PF

       in the case of GHH preferences, replace with (B.10) instead.

 9-10) Labor market clearing conditions at Home and in Foreign, exploiting ∆ T,i = ∆ NT,i = 1 at steady state:

                                                                                           1           1
                                  B    B        S    S                                 YT,H γT     YNT,H γNT
                              ϕ       NH   +ϕ       NH       =       NT,H + NNT,H =            +
                                                                                        AT          A NT
                                                                                         1           1
                                                                                      YT,F γT     YNT,F γNT
                              ϕ B NFB + ϕS NFS               =       NT,F + NNT,F =           +
                                                                                      AT          A NT

11-14) Goods market clearing conditions for tradables and non-tradables at Home and in Foreign:
                                                                                 −e
                                                                           PT,H
                                                    YT,H     =                          (nCT,H + (1 − n) CT,F )      (B.19)
                                                                            PT
                                                                                 −e
                                                                           PT,F
                                                    YT,F     =                          (nCT,H + (1 − n) CT,F )      (B.20)
                                                                            PT
                                                YNT,H        = CNT,H
                                                YNT,F        = CNT,F


                                                                                  80
15-18) Consumer demand at Home and in Foreign, (B.4)–(B.7):
                                                                           −η
                                                 CT,H                  PT
                                                            = α
                                                  CH                   PH
                                                                                       −η
                                             CNT,H                              PNT,H
                                                            = (1 − α )
                                              CH                                 PH

                                                                           −η
                                                 CT,F                  PT
                                                            = α
                                                  CF                   PF
                                                                                       −η
                                             CNT,F                              PNT,F
                                                            = (1 − α )
                                              CF                                 PF

19-20) Aggregate demand at Home and in Foreign:

                                                                  B                S
                                                 CH     =    ϕ B CH + (1 − ϕ B ) C H
                                                 CF     =    ϕ B CFB + (1 − ϕ B ) CFS

21-24) Tradable and non-tradable goods firms FOCs, at Home and in Foreign, (B.16) and (B.18):

                                                                    1
                                         WH               e−1      γ         −(
                                                                                1− γ )
                                                   =          γT A TT (YT,H ) γ
                                         PT,H              e
                                                                    1
                                          WF              e−1      γ         −(
                                                                                1− γ )
                                                   =          γT A TT (YT,F ) γ
                                          PT,F             e
                                                                       1
                                         WH               e−1                      (1− γ )
                                                                          (YNT,H )− γ
                                                                     γ NT
                                                   =          γ NT A NT
                                        PNT,H              e
                                                                       1
                                         WF               e−1                      (1− γ )
                                                                          (YNT,F )− γ
                                                                     γ NT
                                                   =          γ NT A NT
                                        PNT,F              e

25-26) Total firm dividends, at Home and in Foreign:

                             DH    = ( PT,H YT,H − WH NT,H ) + ( PNT,H YNT,H − WH NNT,H )
                              DF   = ( PT,F YT,F − WF NT,F ) + ( PNT,F YNT,F − WF NNT,F )

27-29) Three budget constraints for Home and Foreign borrower and Home saver:

                                             B              B                     I
                                         PH CH        = WH NH + vB DH −              bPH
                                                                               1+I
                                             S                   S                I
                                         PH CH        =     WH NH  + vS D H −        BS
                                                                               1+I H
                                                                                I
                                        + PF CFB      =     WF NFB + v B DF −       bPF
                                                                              1+I

       The Foreign saver’s budget constraint follows by Walras’s law.

 Calibration. Our primitives are n (country size), ϕ B (fraction of borrowers), v B (number of shares per bor-
 rower), the preference parameters α, σ, ψ, e, η, βS and β B , the production elasticities γT and γ NT , as well as a
                                                               B
 normalization for total PCE C, and the debt-to-PCE ratio PC     . Given these, we now solve for A T , A NT , χS and
 χ B to reach a symmetric steady state with zero inflation, so Π = 1 and R = 1 + I, where all relative prices equal
 to 1, and where hours worked for savers and borrowers in both regions are also both equal to 1.

                                                              81
    Given our normalization of PT = 1, our restriction of unit relative prices implies:

                                   PNT,H = PNT,F = PT,H = PT,F = PH = PF = 1

In the symmetric steady state, per capita consumption in each region is the same:

                                                       C H = CF = C

given (B.4)–(B.7), this implies:

                                            CT = αC           CNT = (1 − α) C

as well as:
                                            YT = αC           YNT = (1 − α) C                              (B.21)

Our normalization for hours implies:
                                              B    S
                                             NH = NH = NFB = NFS = 1

Given (B.16) and (B.18), this implies equalization of the value of the marginal product of labor within regions:

                                                      γ −1                    γ NT −1
                                      PT γT A T NT T         = PNT γ NT A NT NNT                           (B.22)

Together with:
                                                       NNT + NT = 1                                        (B.23)

this equation pins down relative employment in each sector as a function of the degree of decreasing returns
and technology.
     Next, production implies:
                                               γ                  γ NT
                                     YT = A T NT T YNT = A NT NNT

Combining with (B.21) and (B.22), we obtain:

                                                  γ                 1− γ       γ
                               α    A N T   γ   N    T
                                                        NT T  γ    N
                                  = T γTNT = NT 1T−γ     γ   = NT T
                              1−α  A NT NNT  γT N    NT N NT
                                                         NT
                                                               γ T NNT
                                                 NT

hence, given (B.23), tradable goods employment NT in either region solves:

                                            NT      α γT         NT
                                                =            =
                                            NNT   1 − α γ NT   1 − NT

Solving for NT and NNT , we obtain:
                                                               αγT
                                             NT =
                                                        (1 − α) γ NT + αγT
                                                            (1 − α) γ NT
                                             NNT =
                                                         (1 − α) γ NT + αγT
This delivers A T and A NT , as desired:

                                                  αC                       (1 − α ) C
                                           AT =    γ            A NT =         γ NT                        (B.24)
                                                  NT T                       NNT

Symmetry also implies that relative wages are equated across regions:

                                                       WH = WF = W


                                                               82
The labor share in the tradable sector and non-tradable sectors are, respectively:

                                          W NT  P e−1        e−1
                                               = T    γT α =     γT α
                                           PC    P e          e

                                          W NNT    e−1
                                                 =     γ NT (1 − α)
                                            PC      e
This implies that the level of the wage must be:

                                             e−1
                                       W=        (γT α + γ NT (1 − α)) C = ωC
                                              e
            e −1
where ω ≡     e    (γT α + γ NT (1 − α)), and that dividends are:

                                               D
                                                     = YT + YNT − W N
                                               P
                                                     = C − WN
                                                     = C (1 − ω )

Finally, budget constraints together with a binding borrowing constraint for borrowers, B B = b, imply:


                                             B                      I
                                            CH      = W + vB D −       b
                                                                   1+I
                                             S                      I
                                            CH      =   W + vS D −     BS
                                                                   1+I
                                                                    I
                                             CFS    =   W + vS D −     BS
                                                                   1+I

Market clearing for domestic debt implies:

                                                    b          BS
                                               ϕB     + 1 − ϕB      =0
                                                    C            C
so
                                                     BS      ϕB b
                                                        =−
                                                     C     1 − ϕB C

We finally obtain χ B and χS to our normalization for hours worked by setting:

                                         W                       ωC
                             χB   =      B  σ = h                                iσ                     (B.25)
                                       (C )        ω + v B (1 − ω ) − ( I − 1) Cb C
                                        W                            ωC
                             χS   =           σ = h                                     iσ              (B.26)
                                       (C S )                                    ϕB
                                                     ω + vS (1 − ω ) + ( I − 1) 1− ϕB Cb C

                                                                                         ϕB b
     Note that aggregate household debt, as a share of aggregate consumption, is          C .


                                                   C. Impulse responses
Our model admits two regimes depending on the set of constraints that binds. When all agents are uncon-
strained:

                                           B                        PH,t B
                                          uC,H,t = β B (1 + It )         u                                (B.27)
                                                                   PH,t+1 C,H,t+1


                                                            83
                                             S                        PH,t S
                                            uC,H,t = βS (1 + It )          u                            (B.28)
                                                                     PH,t+1 C,H,t+1

                                             B                        PF,t B
                                            uC,F,t = β B (1 + It )         u                            (B.29)
                                                                     PF,t+1 C,F,t+1

                                             S                        PF,t S
                                            uC,F,t = βS (1 + It )          u                            (B.30)
                                                                     PF,t+1 C,F,t+1
and all agents are on their budget constraints:

                                                                    h
                                                                   Bi,t
                                         h      h         h                        h
                                   Pi,t Ci,t + Bi,t −1 − ∆i,t =            + Wi,t Ni,t + vh Di,t
                                                                  1 + It

When home borrowers are constrained, (B.27) is replaced by:

                                                           B
                                                          BH,t = bPT,t

and similarly when foreign borrowers are constrained (B.29) is replaced by:

                                                            B
                                                           BF,t = bPT,t

                                                       D. Loglinearization
Assuming separable preferences, loglinearization of our model around the steady state defined above results in
the following equations holding at every time t:



                p TH − p T     = (1 − n)( p TH − p TF )
                        pH     = αp T + (1 − α) p NT,H
                         pF    = αp T + (1 − α) p NT,F
              σc BH + ψn BH    = wH − pH
               σc BF + ψn BF   = wF − pF
              σcSH + ψnSH      = wH − pH
               σcSF + ψnSF     = wF − pF
                                 NT,H         NNT,H
                        nH     =      y T,H +         y NT,H
                                  γT           γ NT
                                 NT,F         NNT,F
                         nF    =      y T,F +       y NT,F
                                  γT          γ NT
                        nH     =   ϕ B n BH + ϕS nSH
                         nF    =   ϕ B n BF + ϕS nSF
                      y T,H    = −e( p T,H − p T ) + nc T,H + (1 − n)c T,F
                       y T,F   = −e( p T,F − p T ) + nc T,H + (1 − n)c T,F
                    y NT,H     = c NT,H
                     y NT,F    = c NT,F
                c T,H − c H    = −η ( p T − p H )
                 c T,F − c F   = −η ( p T − p F )
              c NT,H − c H     = −η ( p NT,H − p H )
               c NT,F − c F    = −η ( p NT,F − p F )

                                                               84
                                          CB B         CS S
                              cH   =   ϕB    c H + ϕS      c
                                           C            C H
                                          CB B        CS S
                              cF   =   ϕB    c F + ϕS      c
                                           C           C F
                                       PT YT                   P Y                        WN
                              dH   =         ( p TH + y TH ) + NT NT ( p NTH + y NTH ) −      (w H + n H )
                                        D                        D                         D
                                       PT YT                  P Y                        WN
                              dF   =         ( p TF + y TF ) + NT NT ( p NTF + y NTF ) −     (w F + n F )
                                        D                       D                         D
This completes the static equations. In addition we have, when both borrowers are constrained (reference
regime):

                                                                       1
                                                cSHt       = cSHt+1 −    (it − π H,t+1 )
                                                                       σ
                                                                       1
                                                   cSFt    =   cSFt+1 − (it − π F,t+1 )
                                                                       σ
together with the budget constraints:

                                        BS                  BS S          WN               
                                                                                                  S D
                p Ht + cSHt        =             bSHt − it −      b      +       w Ht +  n S
                                                                                           Ht + v        d Ht
                                       RPC S                 PC S Ht−1 PC S                        PC S
                                        BS                  BS S         WN              
                                                                                                S D
                    p Ft + cSFt    =             bSFt − it −      b Ft−1 +      w Ft + n S
                                                                                         Ft + v       d Ft
                                       RPC S                 PC S          PC S                  PC S

and

                                        BB                  BB B           WN               
                                                                                                     B D
                p Ht + c BHt       =               B
                                                 b Ht − it −      b Ht−1   +      w Ht +  n B
                                                                                            Ht + v         d Ht
                                       RPC B                 PC S            PC B                     PC B
                                        BB                  BB B           WN                     D
                    p Ft + c BFt   =               B
                                                 b Ht − it −      b Ft − 1 +      w Ft + n B
                                                                                           Ft   + v B B d Ft
                                       RPC B                 PC S            PC B                    PC

When both borrowers are unconstrained, instead we have:

                                                                        1
                                                c BHt      = c BHt+1 −    (it − π H,t+1 )
                                                                        σ
                                                                        1
                                                   c BFt   =   c BFt+1 − (it − π F,t+1 )
                                                                        σ
The dynamics are completed by a description of the evolution of inflation in both regions:

                                            (1 − θ ) 1 − θβS
                                                             
                                                                                                     1−γ
                                                                                                                
                              S                                    1
            π̂ HT,t    = β E [π̂ HT,t+1 ] +                                    ŵ HT,t − p̂ HT,t +     ŷ HT,t
                                                     θ             ε (1− γ )                          γ
                                                                 1+ γ



                                            (1 − θ ) 1 − θβS
                                                             
                                                                                                     1−γ
                                                                                                                 
                                                                   1
        π̂ HNT,t = βS E [π̂ HNT,t+1 ] +                                      ŵ HNT,t − p̂ HNT,t +     ŷ HNT,t
                                                     θ             ε (1− γ )                          γ
                                                                 1+ γ

                                            (1 − θ ) 1 − θβS
                                                             
                                                                                                   1−γ
                                                                                                              
                              S                                    1
             π̂ FT,t   = β E [π̂ FT,t+1 ] +                                  ŵ FT,t − p̂ FT,t +     ŷ FT,t
                                                     θ             ε (1− γ )                        γ
                                                                 1+ γ

                                          (1 − θ ) 1 − θβS
                                                           
                                                                                                   1−γ
                                                                                                               
                          S                                      1
         π̂ FNT,t   = β E [π̂ FNT,t+1 ] +                                  ŵ FNT,t − p̂ FNT,t +     ŷ FNT,t
                                                   θ             ε (1− γ )                          γ
                                                               1+ γ




                                                                     85
together with the monetary policy rule: either
                                                                   it = 0

at the ZLB, or:
                                                          it = φπ (π H,t + π F,t )

when monetary policy follows at Taylor rule.

                                                          E. Solution Method
Since our model has occasionally binding borrowing constraints, we solve it using the Dynare “OccBin” package
developed by Matteo Iacoviello and Luca Guerrieri (Guerrieri and Iacoviello 2015).
    Whenever the model is in the indeterminacy region (with low φπ , as in our main case of the zero lower
bound), we resolve this indeterminacy by assuming that the economy returns to steady state by the end of
horizon τ of our impulse responses. Practically, since there is a single dimension of indeterminacy, this involves
parametrizing the expectation error in one of the Phillips curves with one “sunspot” shock. We set

                                               π̂ HT,t+1 = Et [π̂ HT,t+1 ] + et+1

and simulate the model twice. We first obtain the full set of impulse responses to a debt relief shock assuming
that the initial expectational error in inflation is e0 = 0 (call this I0 , where I0 ( X, t) is the impulse response of
variable X at time t). We then obtain the full set of impulse responses to a zero debt relief shock, assuming
that the expectational error in inflation is e0 = 1 (call this I1 ). We then find the scalar λ such that the impulse
response of inflation is exactly zero at date τ, ie I0 (π HT , τ ) + λI1 (π HT , τ ) = 0. Our impulse responses to all
shocks are then simply I0 + λI1 . We verify that this delivers continuity at the boundary of indeterminacy (see
for example figure A4).

                                                   F. MPCs Out of Debt Relief
Here we show why the consumption function out of debt relief is concave and highlight the determinants of
MPCs out of debt relief. The analysis is complementary to Achdou et al. (2017), who provide an alternative and
very elegant derivation, and extend it to a case where borrowers face idiosyncratic income risk.
    For this section, we work in continuous time. An impatient agent faces the real interest rate r and has
discount rate ρ < r
                                                            Z
                                               max              e−ρt {u (ct ) − v (nt )} dt

                                                   s.t.     b˙t = rbt + wnt + y − ct                            (B.31)
                                                            bt ≥ − d

                  c1− σ −1                  1+ ψ
where u (c) =       1− σ     and v (n) = χ n1+ψ . Her wage w, nonlabor income y and the real interest rate r are all
constants.

Steady state. In a steady-state the constraint binds: the agent is at his borrowing limit b = −d. Consumption
is equal to income from labor and nonlabor income net of interest payments:

                                                            c = wn + y − rd                                     (B.32)

The steady-state levels of consumption c and labor supply n solve (B.32) jointly with the optimality condition
for labor vs consumption:
                                                         w
                                                 cσ nψ =                                                (B.33)
                                                         χ

                                                                     86
write this solution (c∗ , n∗ ).

Debt relief. Debt relief for this agent means restarting her at level b0 = −d0 , in other words, forgiving the
amount D = d0 − d. The agent will plan to return to the constraint at time T. In the meantime, her consumption
solves the Euler equation:

                                                           c˙t               1
                                                                     =         (r − ρ )
                                                           ct                σ

implying
                                                                              1
                                                              c t = c0 e − σ ( ρ −r ) t                              (B.34)

Along the way, the intratemporal condition:
                                                                         ψ
                                                                     cσt nt = w                                      (B.35)

holds at all times, implying in particular:
                                                                              1
                                                                                  ( ρ −r ) t
                                                              n t = n0 e ψ                                           (B.36)

Hence consumption decays exponentially and labor supply increases exponentially back towards their respec-
tive steady-state levels. Moreover, by continuity
                                                                         1
                                                        c T = c0 e − σ ( ρ −r ) T = c ∗

which relates the time it takes to hit the constraint to the initial level of consumption c0 :

                                                        1                c 
                                                          (ρ − r ) T = ln ∗0                                         (B.37)
                                                        σ                 c
and similarly
                                                          1                n 
                                                      −     (ρ − r ) T = ln ∗0
                                                          ψ                 n
The integrated version of the budget constraint (B.31) between t = 0 and t = T (where their asset level is back
at the constraint bT = −d) reads:
                                         Z T                  Z T                       Z T
                                  d0 +         ct e−rt dt =          ye−rt dt +                wnt e−rt dt + de−rT
                                          0                      0                        0

Define
                                                          1                             1
                                                   a≡       (ρ − r )          b≡          (ρ − r )
                                                          σ                             ψ
Using (B.34) and (B.36)
                              c0                 y           wn0              
                      d0 +         1 − e−(r+ a)T =    1 − e−rT +       1 − e−(r−b)T + de−rT                          (B.38)
                             r+a                   r             r−b

recognizing that de−rT = d −       rd
                                         1 − e−rT we obtain
                                                 
                                    r

                       c0                y − rd            wn0              
                            1 − e−(r+ a)T −         1 − e−rT −       1 − e−(r−b)T = d − d0
                      r+a                    r                 r−b
                  ψ
noting that c0σ n0 = w, this gives us a second relation between c0 and T. Solving for both gives us the full
solution to our dynamic optimization problem.




                                                                         87
Approximation.             We first solve out for c0 and n0 as functions of T,

                        c∗ e aT               y − rd           wn∗ e−bT              
                                  1 − e−(r+a)T −         1 − e−rT −           1 − e−(r−b)T = d − d0
                        r+a                       r                 r−b

and use the steady state budget constraint y − rd = c∗ − wn∗ to rewrite this as:
                                                                "                                      #
               
                    e aT                  1                               e−bT 
                                                               ∗ 1
                                                                                                    
           ∗                   −(r + a) T          −rT                    −rT              −(r −b) T
       c                   1−e             −   1−e        + wn        1−e      −       1−e               = d − d0
                   r+a                       r                    r              r−b

Note that, to a second-order approximation,

 e aT                                                               a2 T 2                             (a + r) T2             rT 2
                      1                                                                                                 
        1 − e−(r+ a)T −   1 − e−rT               =          1 + aT +        + O T3                   T−            +O T 3
                                                                                                                          − T−
r+a                     r                                              2                                    2                   2
                                                           aT 2     
                                                 =              + O T3
                                                            2
and symmetrically for labor supply by substituting a = −b. We obtain:

                                                                T2     
                                           ( ac∗ + bwn∗ )          + O T 3 = d − d0 ≡ D
                                                                2
In other words

                                                                          wn∗
                                                                                        
                                            1        1           1                                   D
                                                       (ρ − r ) + (ρ − r ) ∗                  T2 '
                                            2        σ           ψ         c                         c∗
so that the solution for T is:                             s
                                                                                          −1
                                                                             1 wn∗
                                                                     
                                                                2        1                      D
                                                 T'                        +                                                 (B.39)
                                                               ρ−r       σ ψ c∗                 c∗
    and hence we obtain two approximations for the consumption effect of a given amount of debt relief D =
d − d0 . Our first approximation is in logs:
                                                                                     r
                                                     c 
                                                       0      1                              ρ−r D
                                                ln           = (ρ − r ) T '              2                                   (B.40)
                                                      c∗      σ                               σ∗ c∗

with effective risk aversion
                                                                       σ wn∗
                                                                            
                                                            σ∗ ≡ σ 1 +
                                                                       ψ c∗
We can also obtain a (less accurate) expression in percentage terms:

                                                            c0 − c ∗
                                                                         r
                                                                                  ρ−r D
                                                                     '        2                                              (B.41)
                                                               c∗                  σ∗ c∗

Equations (B.40) and (B.41) show that the log change in borrower consumption (or its approximation as a per-
                   ∗
cent change c0 c−∗c ) is proportional to the square root of the ratio of debt relief to consumption cD∗ . As is intuitive,
the more impatient the borrower is relative to the risk-free rate and the higher the effective elasticity of intertem-
poral substitution σ1∗ , the higher the slope of this relationship.
     In addition, the labor supply response is negative and proportional to square root of the ratio of debt relief
to labor income:                                                   s
                                         n0 − n ∗      n 
                                                           0           ρ−r D
                                                  ' ln ∗ ' − 2 ∗                                                   (B.42)
                                            n∗           n              ψ wn∗




                                                                         88
where we similarly have defined effective ψ as

                                                           ψ c∗
                                                                
                                                ψ∗ ≡ ψ 1 +
                                                           σ wn∗

which is larger, the larger the Frisch elasticity ψ−1 .

MPCs out of debt relief in discrete time. In discrete time, debt relief D leads borrowers to go back to their
borrowing constraints in a number of discrete periods T, instead of a continuous T approximated by (B.39).
When D is low enough, the continuous-time T is small and the discrete T equals 1. In this case, the discrete time
MPC and the MPN solve
                                           MPC = wMPN + 1

as well as (differentiating B.35)
                                                           wn ψ
                                               wMPN = −         MPC
                                                            c σ
so that, for small enough, the MPC out of debt relief is simply

                                                                1
                                                   MPC =
                                                                wn ψ
                                                           1+    c σ

This number is constant for D sufficiently small that T = 1, explaining the flat part of figure 7. Equation (B.39)
shows that the lenght of this flat part, as a function of D, depends on several of our parameter values, chiefly
the borrower discount factor ρ relative to the interest rate r.




                                                          89
