                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   HOW DO WE CHOOSE OUR IDENTITY? A REVEALED PREFERENCE APPROACH
                      USING FOOD CONSUMPTION

                                            David Atkin
                                          Eve Colson-Sihra
                                            Moses Shayo

                                        Working Paper 25693
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w25693


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2019




We thank Ben Deaner, Omer Karaduman, and Sumit Shinde for excellent research assistance.
David Atkin thanks the Stanford Economics Department and SIEPR for their hospitality while
writing this paper. Moses Shayo thanks the I-Core Program at the Israel Science Foundation
(grant no. 1821/12) and the Falk Institute for financial support. We thank Roland Benabou, Jon
Eguia, Armin Falk, David Genesove, Marco Gonzalez-Navarro, Matthew Gentzkow, Ori Heffetz,
Supreet Kaur, David Laitin, Edward Lazear, ShabanaMitra, SharunMukand, Salvatore Nunnari,
Ran Shorrer, Katia Zhuravskaya, the editors and four anonymous referees, and many seminar
participants for valuable comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by David Atkin, Eve Colson-Sihra, and Moses Shayo. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
How Do We Choose Our Identity? A Revealed Preference Approach Using Food Consumption
David Atkin, Eve Colson-Sihra, and Moses Shayo
NBER Working Paper No. 25693
March 2019, Revised June 2020
JEL No. D12,D74,D91,O1,Z1

                                          ABSTRACT

Are identities fungible? How do people come to identify with specific groups? This paper
proposes a revealed preference approach, using food consumption to uncover ethnic and religious
identity choices in India. We first show that consumption of identity goods (e.g. beef and pork)
responds to forces suggested by social-identity research: group status and group salience, with the
latter proxied by inter-group conflict. Moreover, identity choices respond to the cost of following
the group’s prescribed behaviors. We propose and estimate a modified demand system to
quantify the identity changes that followed India’s 1991 economic reforms. Notably, our
estimated identity changes correlate with changes in vote shares for ethnic and religious parties.
While social-identity research has focused on status and salience, our results suggest that
economic costs also play an important role.


David Atkin
MIT Department of Economics
The Morris and Sophie Chang Building, E52-550
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
atkin@mit.edu


Eve Colson-Sihra
Department of Economics
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Jerusalem 91905, Israel
eve.cs@mail.huji.ac.il

Moses Shayo
Department of Economics
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Jerusalem 91905, Israel
mshayo@huji.ac.il



A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25693
 1       Introduction
This paper asks whether people’s social identities are fungible, and if they are, how do people
come to identify with specific groups? In their seminal paper, Akerlof and Kranton (2000) de-
tail how identities affect a host of outcomes of interest to economists, including human capital
acquisition, labor market participation and poverty. The important role identity plays is also
salient in the current political environment. Both commentators and scholars have linked the ef-
fects of globalization, immigration and rising inequality to a shift away from a now lower-status
working class identity towards a nationalist one across both Europe and the US (Shayo 2009).
Such identity shifts have also been linked to changes in trade policies and opposition to global-
ization (Grossman and Helpman Forthcoming), with the political repercussions seen in Brexit,
the resurgence of the far right in Europe, and Donald Trump’s election victory. Similar forces ap-
pear to be playing out in India with the ascent of Narendra Modi and the Bharatiya Janata Party
(BJP) on the back of a surge in Hindu nationalism.
     While it is straightforward to motivate why it is interesting to study identity choices and how
they affect economic behavior, measuring identity choices is challenging. Identity is usually
conceptualized in terms of preferences, i.e., it is part of the “self” whose self-interest we seek
to maximize. Thus, to identify with different groups means to care about different things (for
reviews see Haslam and Ellemers 2005; Charness and Chen 2020; Shayo 2020). However, to
measure identity outside the lab, much of the existing literature relies on survey questions or
on ethnographic and historical case studies. But while case studies can provide important in-
sights, they are often very specific and evaluating causal arguments is hard. Surveys offer the
possibility of broad representative samples, but it is at present less clear to what extent differ-
ent self-reported identity measures reflect day-to-day economic behavior.1 Finally, experiments
provide rich revealed-preference data but they are necessarily limited in scope to a particular
time, place, and population (often students at American universities). A more recent strand of
the literature uses naturally occurring data to understand how social identities can affect the be-
havior of judges (Shayo and Zussman 2011), team production (Hjort 2014), female labor supply
(Bertrand et al. 2015), grading decisions (Feld et al. 2016; Lavy et al. 2018), and conflict (Depetris-
Chauvin and Durante 2019). We build on these recent advances.
     Our approach starts from the observation that consumption choices are both widely docu-
     1
    With the increasing interest in identity and polarization, survey questions on identity are likely to become more
common. Our approach suggests a method for validating such questions in the spirit of Falk et al. (2018)—by testing
whether they capture non-hypothetical, costly decisions. For studies correlating survey and behavioral measures of
identity see Ellemers et al. (1999); Klor and Shayo (2010); Bankert et al. (2017).




                                                         1
mented and are affected by the norms and taboos of groups people identify with. Since different
groups have different norms, consumption choices have the potential to reveal the consumer’s
identity. For example, conditional on prices and income, a Muslim who consumes pork iden-
tifies less with his religion than a Muslim who abstains from pork. We explore whether this in-
sight can help better understand identity choices. By drawing on standard and readily-available
consumption data as well as well-established tools for analyzing them, we can investigate mul-
tiple determinants of identity among a large and representative population over a long period of
time. Turning the question around, we also ask whether ideas from social identity research can
improve economists’ understanding of consumer behavior.
   Our setting is food consumption in India where, given the high levels of malnutrition, dietary
choices driven by identity also have significant health implications. Two features make the In-
dian setting particularly suitable for implementing our approach. First, India is characterized by
deep ethnic and linguistic divisions (Basu et al. 2016; Fearon 2003; Reich et al. 2009). At the same
time, it is also religiously diverse, with members of the same ethnicity often distributed across
different religions and castes. This provides well-defined sets of (potential) identities that indi-
viduals can choose from. Second, food consumption in India is associated with strong norms
and taboos. In the words of noted anthropologist Arjun Appadurai (1988):

     Food in India is closely tied to the moral and social status of individuals and groups.
     Food taboos and prescriptions divide men from women, gods from humans, upper
     from lower castes, one sect from another.

The basic idea then is simple. A Hindu from Gujarat is born a member of multiple groups and
hence has several possible identities. While they cannot (easily) choose to be Muslim or Tamil,
they can choose whether to identify as Gujarati (one of India’s many ethno-linguistic groups) or
Hindu (one of India’s major religions). Given the different norms and taboos across religious and
ethnic groups, the food consumption bundle uncovers this identity choice. Our analysis exam-
ines how these revealed identities respond to key forces that economics and social psychology
conjecture drive identity choices.
   We base our analysis around a conceptual framework that we outline in Section 2. Follow-
ing the identity economics literature (e.g. Akerlof and Kranton 2000), an individual that iden-
tifies with a group suffers a utility loss if her consumption bundle is far from the prescribed or
prototypical bundle of that group. In other words, identification with a group means, among
other things, seeking to consume the goods that are acceptable to that group. However, extend-
ing Akerlof and Kranton (2000), we allow individuals to choose their identity among the multi-
ple groups they are members of, depending on which provides the highest utility. We identify

                                                 2
three major factors that affect this choice. From cognitive psychology and categorization theory
(Nosofsky 1992; Turner et al. 1987) as well as experimental economics (Benjamin et al. 2010),
we posit that if the salience of membership of a group rises, the utility from identifying with it
rises. From Social Identity Theory (Tajfel and Turner 1979), a high-status group provides some-
one identifying with it an enhanced self concept and hence greater utility. Finally, from standard
price theory, the more costly it is to follow the prescribed behaviors of a group, the less likely an
individual is to identify with it.
   This simple framework generates three sets of implications that we test using 350,000 de-
tailed household consumption surveys collected as part of India’s National Sample Survey (NSS)
over the period 1987-2000. In Section 4, we focus on consumption patterns for the four most
prominent food taboos associated with religious groups in India (the avoidance of beef, pork
and alcohol, and vegetarianism), as well as two foods that display particularly strong regional
preferences (rice and wheat). Then, in Section 5, we impose a particular functional form that in-
corporates identity choices into an Almost Ideal Demand System (Deaton and Muellbauer 1980)
and estimate a demand system that covers all foodstuffs. Using these estimates, in Section 6
we quantify the relative importance of salience, status and economic costs in driving identity
choices in India during the 1990s, as well as the implications for health and welfare. Further-
more, as a proof of concept, we compare the identity changes inferred from consumption data
with an alternative proxy for identity choices—changes in votes for religious and ethnic parties.
   We begin with outbreaks of Hindu-Muslim violence. A long line of scholarship in political
science argues that inter-group conflict increases the salience of membership in—and iden-
tification with—the fighting groups (e.g. Horowitz 1985; Kaufmann 1996). Are consumption
patterns consistent with this argument? We use a combination of cross-sectional and panel
regressions exploiting variation in exposure to religious conflict for households of the same
ethnicity-religion pair, either across districts or within districts over time. Since food prescrip-
tions vary across groups, we can control for local supply and demand conditions by including
good-district-time fixed effects in all our regressions. As our conceptual framework predicts,
mounting inter-religious tensions—proxied by reports of conflict in the national media—are ac-
companied by increased adherence to religious taboos among Hindus and Muslims. For exam-
ple, Hindus are more likely to abstain from beef and Muslims from pork. These findings hold
conditional on prices and income and do not appear to be driven by availability issues or so-
cial desirability bias in reporting. Nonetheless, we cannot fully dismiss all concerns related to
reverse causality (identity shifts leading to conflict).
   A somewhat different interpretation of these findings (and potentially later ones related to


                                                   3
status and costs) is that rather than directly changing identities, conflict alters social connec-
tions within and across identity groups, and that these changed social circles affect consump-
tion patterns. One possibility is that members of different social circles more strongly reward (or
punish) a person’s adherence to a given taboo. However, the fact that our consumption-based
estimates correlate with voting behavior—which is less observable—suggests that the effects go
beyond the mere observability of your consumption by others. A second possibility is that ex-
panded interactions and greater behavioral congruence with a particular group enhances one’s
identification with that group. For example, interacting more with members of your religious
group may make you more likely to identify with your religion. This would then be manifested
even in strictly private acts. Our results are fully consistent with—and our conceptual framework
isomorphic to—this possibility.
   Turning to ethnic identity, we study state splits along ethno-linguistic boundaries. As these
splits were preceded by demands for ethnic autonomy, we consider these events as shocks to the
salience of ethnicity. Two of the three splits during our period of study lie along the geographic
fault line that divides rice and wheat eaters in India. Consistent with a shift towards their eth-
nic identities, as ethnic autonomy approached, rice and wheat consumption patterns diverged
on either side of the future state border. And as predicted by our dueling-identity framework,
religious-taboo adherence decreased. The reverse is also true: inter-ethnic differences in cereal
consumption decline with religious conflict.
   Next, we borrow from the sociology literature in proxying for group status with the returns to
typical group occupations. As religious groups are over-represented in certain occupations, this
proxy generates two shift-share identification strategies where we exploit either cross-district
variation in local occupational returns or cross-time variation in national occupational returns.
We find strong support for our theoretical prediction. A rise in the status of one’s religion is
associated with increased adherence to that religion’s norms and taboos.
   Finally, our framework suggests that when the local cost of adhering to a group’s prescribed
behavior is lower, households should be more likely to tilt their consumption towards the norms
of that group. When considering prominent food taboos we explore a variant of this implica-
tion: that the endogeneity of identity is a force that generates complementarities between taboo
goods. For example, if the price of pork rises, it is now relatively less costly for Muslim house-
holds to identify with their religion since they would forgo pork anyway. If this leads them to
switch to their religious identity, their consumption of alcohol—another taboo in Islam—would
decline, making pork and alcohol complements in demand. This prediction is borne out by the
consumption data. We also find that demand for taboos is less own- and cross-price elastic.


                                                4
    Our conceptual framework thus captures important and previously undocumented regular-
ities in the consumption of prominent religious taboos and ethnic staples. While this has the
advantage of using easily recognized identity goods, there is little reason to suppose that identity
effects are limited only to these prominent examples. Our next step is therefore to estimate a full
demand system where we do not impose which goods are ‘identity goods’, nor what the ‘appro-
priate’ level of consumption is. Generalizing the above analysis, households suffer a utility loss
when their consumption bundle is far from the prototypical bundle of the group they identify
with (which we take to be the observed mean bundle in the group). We thus include all 124 food
items and jointly consider all three determinants of identity. We find that both religious con-
flict and a rising relative status of one’s religious group shift households towards the prototypical
bundle of their religious group and away from that of their ethnic group. In contrast, household
consumption diverges from their religion’s prototypical bundle and shifts toward their ethnic
bundle when the cost of their religious bundle rises relative to that of their ethnic bundle (in all
cases conditioning on standard price and income effects).
    Our demand system estimates also allow us to quantify, at least in an approximate sense, the
relative importance of these three determinants over India’s tumultuous reform period 1987-
2000.2 Our estimates suggest large shifts in identity choices. However, substantial heterogeneity
across districts and religions led to only a small shift from ethnic to religious identities on net.
While conflict-driven local salience shocks have significant effects on identification decisions
(consistent with previous literature and common narratives), quantitatively, economic cost and
status were more important drivers of identity choice in this period. This is because conflict
shocks are temporary—with the effects on identity fading out approximately nine months after
the shock—and rather rare. In contrast, changes in prices and occupational returns are both
more persistent and common.
    The finding that changes in the economic costs of identifying with a group have large impacts
is surprising given that this channel has received little attention in the social-identity literature.
However, such a finding can broaden our understanding of recent and much-discussed efforts
by the Hindu-nationalist BJP party to raise the effective price of beef through bans and legisla-
tion.3 Our results suggest that, intentionally or not, such a strategy may possibly contribute to
the hardening of Hindu identities, much like inciting religious violence (a tactic documented by
Wilkinson 2004). Indeed, we find that changes in identification patterns revealed by consump-
    2
      This reform period has been extensively studied (e.g. see Aghion et al. (2008), Topalova (2010), or Martin et al.
(2017) for the impacts of removing licensing, trade restrictions, and small-scale-industry reservations, respectively).
    3
      See, for example, https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/11/world/asia/india-cows-slaughter-beef-leather-hindu-
supreme-court-ban.html for coverage of the governments attempted ban on cow slaughter.



                                                          5
tion choices are associated with changes in the vote shares of religious and ethnic parties in
state elections. This insight might potentially extend beyond India. Since 2003, when Erdogan’s
Islamist AKP party came to power in Turkey, taxes on alcohol have increased steadily and now
account for two-thirds of the cost of basic alcoholic drinks. Between 2003 and 2019, the price of
raki—a traditional spirit—jumped by 1055 percent and the price of beer by 903 percent, while
the CPI only rose by 299 percent.4
   The paper contributes to two main (and largely disconnected) lines of inquiry: on consump-
tion and on identity. We show that incorporating social identity into our analysis of consumer
choice can enrich our understanding of how norms influence economic behavior (e.g. Young
2015), while maintaining well-established conceptual tools. For example, economists often as-
sume that certain goods are complements or substitutes but lack a theory for why that is the
case. It is therefore hard to understand why the same goods can be complements in one context
and substitutes in another. Our analysis suggests that when certain goods come to be associ-
ated with certain social groups, this tends to generate complementarities. Furthermore, while
several studies document how consumption is affected by individual status concerns (Charles
et al. 2009; Heffetz 2011; Bursztyn et al. 2018; Bellet and Colson-Sihra 2018), we show that con-
sumption patterns are shaped by group status as well. And, while conflict can obviously affect
consumption patterns by destroying resources and changing relative prices, we show that it can
also shift consumption by changing identity choices. A final point is that consumers may be
more flexible than we usually assume. When the price of a particular group-related bundle in-
creases, consumers can switch the norms they follow to better handle the new price environ-
ment. In this sense demand is more elastic, not with respect to any one price but rather to the
price of the entire prescribed bundle.
   We also make three contributions to the study of identity. First, The existing literature re-
lies mainly on lab experiments, surveys, content analysis and ethnographic studies to measure
identity (see Abdelal et al. 2009 for a review of methods). We propose a revealed preference ap-
proach to inferring identity, using naturally-occurring and widely-observed data (Bertrand and
Kamenica 2018 develop an analogous approach for inferring cultural differences across groups).
Second, while the “constructivist” literature in political science emphasizes the malleability of
social identities (see Chandra 2012), most work in economics takes ethnic and religious identi-
ties as given (see e.g. Alesina and La Ferrara 2005’s review of the literature on ethnic diversity).
Our goal in this paper is to understand the endogenous determination of identities (see also
Eifert et al. 2010; Shayo and Zussman 2011; Hjort 2014). Furthermore, due to the wide and long
   4
     Item level inflation between 2003 and February 2019 from the Turkish Statistics Institute (TUIK),
https://biruni.tuik.gov.tr/medas/?kn=84&locale=en.


                                                  6
coverage of the data we are able to simultaneously study several of the main determinants of
identification suggested by the experimental and theoretical literatures in psychology and eco-
nomics. Third, previous studies of identity have not, to the best of our knowledge, estimated the
effect of prices on identification decisions, which prove to be substantial.
     The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 introduces the conceptual framework. Section 3
describes the data. Section 4 provides reduced form evidence that salience, status and cost drive
identity choices as revealed by the consumption of prominent identity goods. Section 5 derives
and estimates a demand system incorporating identity using all food consumption. Section
6 quantifies the importance of the three determinants, compares our consumption results to
changes in voting patterns, and evaluates health and welfare implications. Section 7 concludes.


 2       Conceptual Framework
We present a brief exposition of the social identity framework that generates the three key com-
parative statics we bring to the data. See Shayo (2020) for a more detailed exposition as well as a
review of evidence supporting the basic assumptions of the model.
     Consider a society composed of several groups, where a member of society can belong to
multiple groups at once. We use h to denote an individual consumer, J to denote a group, and i
to denote a good. xih ∈ [0, 1] is h’s consumption of good i, expressed as a budget share, and xh is
h’s consumption bundle.
     Let Gh be the set of groups to which individual h belongs, e.g., her religious group and her
ethnic group. Gh is exogenously given. However, being born to a particular ethnic group does
not necessarily imply identification with that group. Our focus is to understand the individual’s
choice of which group within Gh to identify with. Following the social identity literature, “iden-
tification” with a group has two main features. The first is conformity to group norms and be-
havior (Akerlof and Kranton 2000; Benjamin et al. 2010). In our case, denote by xJ the prescribed
consumption bundle of social group J. For example, if group J has a taboo on the consumption
of good i, then xiJ = 0. Identifying with group J then implies seeking to reduce the distance
d(xh , xJ ) between own consumption and group J’s prescribed behavior. We also allow for ex-
ogenous shocks to the perceived distance between individual h and each of the groups in Gh .
Specifically, we use κhJ to denote shocks to the salience of h’s membership in group J.5 The sec-
ond feature of identification with a group is caring about its status (Tajfel and Turner 1979). We
     5
     This is made more precise in Shayo (2009) and Sambanis and Shayo (2013), where salience is the (potentially
endogenous) change in the attention weight that individuals place on a particular dimension (e.g. their religion or
ethnicity) when forming perceptions of the distance between themselves and the various groups in society. In the
present paper we are interested in exogenous shifts in the salience of h’s membership in different groups.



                                                        7
denote group J’s status by yJ . Defining identity in terms of preferences—rather than in terms of
beliefs—leads us to the following simple definition.

Definition 1. Individual h identifies with group J∈ Gh if her preferences can be represented by:

                                           UhJ = U (xh , yJ , κhJ ; xJ ),                                       (1)

where U is decreasing in the distance d(xh , xJ ), and increasing in yJ , κhJ .

    Let x∗hJ (p, mh , yJ , κhJ ; xJ ) be the optimal consumption bundle chosen when h identifies with
group J, given a vector of prices p and income mh . Since the consumption bundle is a function
of the group one identifies with, consumption choices can in principle reveal one’s identity.
    As noted by Shayo (2009), the above two features—distance and status—also capture the
major determinants of individuals’ identification choices documented in the literature. That is,
other things equal, individuals are more likely to identify with groups with higher status and with
groups that are perceived as more similar to them, where perceived similarity can be affected
by both the distance in consumption space and by the salience of other dimensions such as
ethnicity and religiosity. This leads to the following assumption.

Assumption 1. Identity is endogenous. Individual h identifies with group J if and only if

                                     J = argmaxVhJ (p, mh , yJ , κhJ ; xJ ),
                                            J∈Gh

where VhJ denotes h’s indirect utility if she identifies with J:

                               VhJ (p, mh , yJ , κhJ ; xJ ) = U (x∗hJ , yJ , κhJ ; xJ ).                        (2)

Thus, the choice of identity itself responds systematically to the social and economic environ-
ment.6 In Section 5 we derive consumer demand using a specific functional form that nests the
Almost Ideal Demand System (Deaton and Muellbauer 1980).
    Given the endogenous nature of identity, we expect individual h to be more likely to tilt con-
sumption towards xJ (e.g., respect group J’s taboos) when:

   1. Her membership in group J is more salient (κhJ is higher).

   2. The status of group J is higher (yJ is higher).

   3. The cost of adhering to J’s norms/taboos is lower (p · xJ is lower).
   6
     The sharp choice between identities—and restricting attention to cases where the set of optimal identities is a
singleton—is for conceptual clarity. Empirically, we will not distinguish between a model where households make a
binary choice between identities and one where they choose the relative weights they place on each identity.



                                                          8
   A particularly interesting implication of endogenous identity formation is that it tends to
generate complementarities between goods that are encouraged (or taboo) in a particular group.
To clarify this mechanism, it is instructive to consider a simple example where we shut down
standard substitution effects (i.e. cross-price elasticities are zero under any specific identity).

  Example. There are two groups, Gh = {A, B}, and three goods i = 1, 2, 3. Consumer h’s utility
  when identifying with group J is Cobb-Douglas: UhJ =
                                                                           P        J                   P    J
                                                                                 i βi   ln xi , where     i βi   = 1 for all
  J ∈ {A, B}. Group A encourages (or equivalently B discourages) the consumption of both goods
  1 and 2, hence β1A > β1B and β2A > β2B . Suppose an individual initially identifies with group A,
  then consider an increase in the price of good 1, p1 . If identity is fixed, budget shares do not
                                                                     ∂
  change (x2 = β2A ). However, it is easy to see that               ∂p1 (VhA       − VhB ) < 0.7 Thus, if identity is
  endogenous (Assumption 1), the individual may shift to identify with group B as A’s prescriptions
                                                                          dx2
  are too expensive. This would imply x2 = β2B < β2A and                  dp1   < 0. Endogenous identity makes the
  two goods encouraged by group A complements.

   In the framework above, the norms of the groups you identify with enter your preferences
directly and so there is conformity even though there is no material incentive to do so. Such a
modeling choice finds strong support in the experimental literature. For example, priming the
salience of ethnic, professional or criminal group membership increases conformity although
material incentives and image concerns are held constant (Benjamin et al. 2010; Cohn et al. 2014,
2015), and conformity is also observed under anonymous conditions (Burnkrant and Cousineau
1975). As noted in the introduction, this modeling choice is also consistent with shocks to
salience, status and costs altering the type and nature of social interactions within and across
identity groups, with these changed interactions leading to identity changes as defined above.
However, there may also be non-psychological benefits associated with a low distance d(xh , xJ )
from the prescribed behavior of group J. For example, employment and business opportunities
may be affected by the degree of closeness to other members of the community. Such bene-
fits may be larger if group J is high status. In the present paper we will not be able to clearly
distinguish between there being psychological or material benefits from respecting the group’s
prototypical behavior (although, to the extent that voting is not as easy for others to observe, our
voting results tend to support the former interpretation). This distinction only matters for our
welfare calculations in Section 6.4.
   A final remark. While in a more general framework, group status yJ , salience κhJ , and prices
p are endogenous to economic policy and to (aggregate) individual choices, in the present paper
we seek to understand individual responses to exogenous shifts in status, salience and prices.
   7
                                                                                βiJ ln pi , where BJ is a function of the β J ’s.
                                                                          P
       The indirect utility function in this case is VhJ = BJ + ln mh −     i



                                                            9
 3     Data and Context
To explore the hypotheses outlined in Section 2, we require data on the consumption patterns
of households, their religious and ethnic groups, and shocks to prices, status, and salience.

3.1    Household Data
Our primary source of data is the Indian NSS Consumer Expenditure survey. Each survey pro-
vides household expenditures and quantities consumed for more than 300 goods and services,
as well as economic, demographic and social characteristics. We use all three thick survey
rounds—covering around 120,000 households per round—that contain both district identifiers
and overlap with the conflict data we shall introduce shortly:8 the 43rd round (1987-1988), the
50th round (1993-1994) and the 55th round (1999-2000). We use the 1987 district boundaries
to follow 419 districts (contained in 77 regions) over time.9 The 50th round contains the exact
date each household was surveyed, while the other rounds only provide the quarter. We use
household survey weights throughout to make our results nationally representative.

Food consumption The three rounds of surveys allow us to track 124 consistently-categorized
food products for which surveyors record both expenditure and quantity. Appendix Table A.1
lists these items by food group.

Prices    From expenditures and quantities, we calculate unit values that serve as price proxies.
Following Atkin (2013), to guard against outliers and quality issues, we replace household-level
unit values with the median unit value in each village/urban block in that survey round.10

Group status       As we detail in Section 4.3, our measures of group status are based on the returns
to occupations disproportionately held by group members. We calculate these occupational
returns from the NSS surveys using detailed occupation codes for the household’s primary oc-
cupation, as well as total household expenditure which serves as a proxy for household income.
     8
       The Mitra and Ray (2014) conflict data end in 2000. The resulting sample restriction has the additional benefit
of spanning the major (and externally-enforced) economic reforms that India embarked on in 1991, reshaping its
economy. These policy changes plausibly drive much of the price and income variation we use to analyze the status
and economic cost channels. That said, as we show in Appendix Table I.5, the status and price results are similar
when including the 61st (2004-2005) and 66th (2009-2019) rounds.
     9
       As only region identifiers are available for urban households in round 50, we exclude these households from any
district-level analysis. Results are robust to excluding the whole of round 50, as shown in Appendix G.
    10
       The village price is robust to outliers and not contaminated by quality effects or measurement errors which
affect the price response at the household level. If no consumption of the good is reported in the village/urban block,
we compute the median price at an incrementally higher level of aggregation.




                                                          10
3.2     Religious and Ethnic Groups in India
Religious groups        The NSS surveys record the religion of the household as well as caste (two
categories: scheduled castes and others). We focus our analysis on the three largest religious
groups in India—Hindus, Muslims and Christians. As Hindu castes have different taboos and
prescribed behaviors, we further divide Hindus into those from lower castes (“scheduled caste”
in the survey) and those from upper castes (“others” in the survey), resulting in a total of four re-
ligious groups. These religious groups are present in every region of India, as shown in Appendix
Figure A.1, and represent 90 percent of the total population. In contrast, the omitted groups ei-
ther have very few members (Jains, Buddhists, Zoroastrians), are geographically concentrated
(Sikhs in Punjab) or are not a single religious group (scheduled tribes).

Ethnic groups       India is characterized by enormous ethnic diversity. This can be seen in the
diversity of language groups spoken (e.g. Tamil is Dravidian, Gujarati is Indo-Aryan, Megha-
layans speak Austro-Asiatic languages, and Sikkimese speak Sino-Tibetan languages). It is also
apparent from more recent genetic evidence which finds India to be four times more genetically
diverse than Europe (Reich et al. 2009), and to comprise five separate ancestral migrations (Basu
et al. 2016). This diversity is coupled with high ethnic endogamy and limited migration such
that ethnicities are spatially segregated across India. Defining and measuring ethnicity in India
is, however, conceptually challenging (see e.g. Fearon 2003; Somanathan 2018 for discussion),
and the NSS does not provide linguistic or genetic data.
      We propose two approaches to address this problem. Our primary approach leverages the
fact that in response to the demands of ethnic groups following Independence, India chose to
draw its state borders along ethno-linguistic lines.11 We can thus use the state of residence of
the household in the NSS surveys as a proxy for ethnicity, sidestepping the conceptual issues by
employing an unambiguous geographic notion of identity. One may also interpret the results
using this measure as indicating the strength of identification with one’s state.12
      Our second measure of ethnicity uses the mother tongue most commonly spoken in the dis-
trict (e.g. Hindi, Marathi, Telugu, Bengali, or Gujarati), as recorded in the 2001 Census of In-
dia. An ethnic group is then proxied by households living in the set of districts where the most-
commonly-spoken mother tongue is the same. This yields 44 ethnic groups across India.13
   11
      The first ethno-linguistic State, Andhra (presently Andhra Pradesh), separated Telugu-speaking people from the
State of Madras (presently Tamil Nadu) in 1953. It was formed following Sreeramulu’s fatal hunger strike and subse-
quent public protests demanding a state to preserve the culture of the Andhra people. In 1956, the State Reorganisa-
tion Act redrew state boundaries along ethno-linguistic lines.
   12
      See Atkin (2016) for evidence that inter-state migrants in India often carry their origin-state food preferences
with them. Our results are robust to excluding inter-state migrants, see Appendix Table I.1.
   13
      Appendix Figure A.2 shows linguistic and religious fractionalization (one minus the Herfindahl of group shares)



                                                         11
                                   Table 1: Taboos by Religious Group
                         Religious Identity       Beef Pork Meat                        Alcohol
                         Hindu Upper Caste          x       x      x                       x
                         Hindu Scheduled Caste      x
                         Muslim                             x                               x


3.3     Religious and Ethnic Goods
Central to our approach is the idea that the consumption choices of Indian consumers can reveal
their chosen identity. In the first part of our analysis (Section 4) we examine goods that are
strongly associated with specific religious and ethnic identities.

Religious goods         For religious identities in India, there are four particularly prominent exam-
ples: beef, pork, meat and alcohol. The avoidance of beef consumption is deeply ingrained in the
Hindu population and widely seen as one of the purest practices a Hindu could accomplish.14
Pork consumption is equally if not more taboo for Muslims.15 Non-vegetarian food is more gen-
erally a taboo for practicing upper-caste Hindus (especially Brahmins), who see this as an act
of violence that goes against their religious beliefs.16 Lower-caste Hindus do not widely share
this vegetarian norm, and in fact have developed a non-vegetarian cuisine particular to their
identity.17 Our primary definition of vegetarianism includes avoidance of eggs, poultry and fish.
Appendix H repeats our analysis with a less strict definition that does not incorporate eggs and
fish. The results are qualitatively similar. Finally, alcohol is a taboo shared by both Muslims and
upper-caste Hindus.18 Table 1 provides a schematic summary of these taboos.
      Direct evidence for these taboos comes from Figure 1, which reports the share of each re-
ligious group that abstains from consuming each of the four taboos, for each quarter of each
by state. Religious fractionalization is broadly similar in most states of India with an average of 0.58 across states,
close to the overall level of religious fractionalization in India (0.61). In contrast, linguistic fractionalization is much
higher when looking at India as a whole (0.8) than within states (average 0.31).
    14
       Gandhi writes: “Hindus will be judged not by their tilaks, not by the correct chanting of mantras, not by their
pilgrimages, not by their most punctilious observances of caste rules, but their ability to protect the cow” (Young In-
dia, 6 October 1921, p. 36). A few Scheduled Castes (some Dalits, formerly known as untouchables) consume beef,
especially those who traditionally worked as scavengers or leather workers. Because of the enormous stigma, these
groups typically stop this practice when they rise in social status, a process called sanskritization by Srinivas (1956).
    15
       The Qur’an, Surah Al-Baqarah 2:173 says: “He has forbidden you only carrion, blood, the flesh of the swine, and
that which has been offered to other than Allah.”
    16
       Several sacred texts mention eating meat as an impure and sinful act, among them the Manusmriti (5.48-5.52):
“One can never obtain meat without causing injury to living beings... There is no greater sinner than a man who,
outside of an offering to gods or ancestors, wants to make his own flesh thrive at the expense of someone else’s.”
    17
       Examples of such dishes can be found in a book on Dalit food, Anna He Apoornabrahma, written by Shahu Patole
in 2015 to serve as a counterpoint to the many Brahmin vegetarian cookbooks.
    18
       This is seen from the Qur’an’s prohibition (Surat 5:91)—“Satan only wants to cause between you animosity and
hatred through intoxicants and gambling and to avert you from the remembrance of Allah and from prayer. So will you
not desist?”—and from the Mahabharata (Adi Parva, 76): “a wretched Brahmin unable to resist the temptation to drink
shall be considered one who’s lost all virtue and considered guilty of murdering one of his own caste.”


                                                            12
                  Figure 1: Fraction of Population Abstaining from each Taboo, by Religion-Round-Quarter
                                              Beef                                                                                  Pork
Population Abstaining (%)




                                                                                     Population Abstaining (%)
   .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1




                                                                                        .8 .85 .9 .95 1
                            1   2   3   4     1   2   3   4     1   2   3   4                                     1   2   3   4     1   2   3   4        1   2   3   4

                       1987-1988            1993-1994         1999-2000                                     1987-1988             1993-1994            1999-2000



                                              Meat                                                                                 Alcohol
Population Abstaining (%)




                                                                                     Population Abstaining (%)
         .2 .4 .6




                                                                                        .6 .7 .8 .9 1
    0




                            1   2   3   4     1   2   3   4     1   2   3   4                                     1   2   3   4     1   2   3   4        1   2   3   4

                       1987-1988            1993-1994         1999-2000                                     1987-1988             1993-1994            1999-2000



                    Hindu Scheduled Castes                    Time trend                                         Hindu Upper Castes                 Time trend
                    Muslims                                   Time trend                                         Christians                         Time trend


NSS round. The top left panel shows that upper-caste Hindus essentially report no beef con-
sumption, and less than 10 percent of Scheduled Castes report consuming beef, while around
40 percent of Christians and Muslims consume some. Similarly, almost no Muslims report con-
suming pork (top right panel) or alcohol (bottom right). Finally, Hindus are much more likely to
be vegetarian than Christians or Muslims, and this is more pronounced for Upper Castes (bot-
tom left).

Ethnic goods Identifying ethnic goods is less straightforward, as the examples cited in the lit-
erature are less stark—in part because of the absence of formal prohibitions like those present
within religions. That is not to say that there are no regional foods associated with different eth-
nicities.19 The most prominent example is the strong regional preferences for rice and wheat
(Chakravarti 1974). Despite the fact that these two staple cereals provide similar nutrition per
rupee, there is dramatic regional variation in their consumption and cooking practices. For ex-
ample, despite similar relative prices, households in the state of Kerala consume thirteen times
              19
     For example, Appadurai (1988) mentions the “longstanding and distinct regional cuisines” in India and the di-
versity of ethno-regional cookbooks. Sen (2014) lists regional food specificities in her history of food in India. Atkin
(2013; 2016) also provide evidence of a regional component of food cultures in India.



                                                                                13
more rice than wheat, while those in Punjab ten times more wheat than rice (Atkin 2016). In
Section 4.2, we exploit the fault line bisecting India that divides rice eaters in the South and East
from wheat eaters in the North and West (clearly seen in Appendix Figure A.3).

3.4     Conflict Data
For data on episodes of Hindu-Muslim violence—a familiar feature of post-partition India—we
draw on the 1950-1995 Varshney-Wilkinson Dataset, extended to 2000 by Mitra and Ray (2014).
The dataset collects occurrences of Hindu-Muslim conflict that are sufficiently intense to be
reported by the national press (specifically The Times of India, a leading national newspaper).
For every episode, the dataset provides the date of incidence, the city/village, and the number
of people killed, injured, or arrested.20 The dataset records 505 Hindu-Muslim riots between
1987 and 2000, with about 4100 fatalities. Appendix Table A.3 presents descriptive statistics of
recorded conflicts by state during the three rounds of consumption surveys. Our baseline mea-
sure of conflict is the occurrence of at least one outbreak of violence between Hindus and Mus-
lims in the household’s district close to the date of the survey.


 4      Demand for Identity Goods
As described in Section 3.3, certain goods have long been associated with specific religious and
ethnic identities. A natural first step is to explore how the consumption of these goods responds
to the three forces that our conceptual framework suggests drive identity choices. Focusing on
prominent identity goods—i.e. goods where external sources can corroborate their strong asso-
ciation with specific religions or ethnicities—prior to turning to a fully-specified demand system
analysis, serves two main purposes. First, the reduced form analysis serves as a proof of concept
that consumption data can be used to help understand identity choices. Second, the identifi-
cation arguments for this analysis will be the same as when considering the full vector of food
consumption in Section 5, and so we discuss identification in this section.
      We begin by analyzing salience as a determinant of group identity, focusing on two shocks to
salience: conflict between religious groups and changes in political autonomy for ethnic groups.
We then turn to group status and to the costs of identity goods.
   20
     The dataset also records the duration and the reported proximate cause of the riot, but no information on which
side initiated the violence. Appendix Table A.2 reports the causes of Hindu-Muslim conflicts during our period.




                                                        14
4.1     Religious Conflict and Identity
Inter-group conflict has long been associated with hardening group identities.21 Exploring how
conflict affects consumption therefore serves as a useful first test of our approach. This ne-
cessitates introducing our common empirical approach and discussing the key identification
concerns in this section. That said, this is not a paper about conflict and, as we previewed in
the introduction, our results suggest that costs and status are more important determinants of
identity changes between 1987 and 2000.
      Through the lens of our conceptual framework, conflict along religious lines raises the salience
of membership in one’s religious group (κhr ), thereby stimulating identification with that group.
Indeed, in the Indian context, it has been argued that politicians use religious violence precisely
to that end (Wilkinson 2004). This section therefore examines whether religious conflict is also
associated with changes in consumption, consistent with a movement towards the prescribed
behaviors of one’s religion. Note that, from a standard economic perspective, while conflict can
affect prices and incomes, conditional on those it should not affect consumption choices.22

High-Frequency Plots from the 1993-94 Survey Round

Before turning to our district-level regression analysis—where we condition on prices and in-
comes, as well as on a battery of fixed effects—it is instructive to look at the raw data. Specifically,
we present plots of the raw consumption data against the time since a reported religious conflict
in the household’s region. These reports serve as a proxy for religious tensions, and hence the
salience of Hindus’ and Muslims’ religious identity.
      Figure 2 shows non-parametric regressions of a dummy for whether the household abstains
from consuming a good on the number of days before or after a conflict. For this specific exercise
we restrict attention to NSS round 50 (July 1993 to June 1994), since this is the only round that
reports the actual day of the survey. Given the sparsity of conflicts in any particular round, and
the fact that round 50 does not contain district identifiers for urban areas where most conflicts
occurred, these plots focus on conflicts at the level of 77 regions in India.23 The patterns are
   21
      See Shayo and Zussman (2017) for a recent discussion. Security Studies (13:4) contains a collection of essays de-
bating Kaufmann (1996)’s thesis that “in ethnic wars both hyper-nationalist mobilization rhetoric and real atrocities
harden ethnic identities to the point that cross-ethnic political appeals are unlikely to be made and even less likely to
be heard” (p. 137). Most relevant to our study, Iyer and Shrivastava (2018) show that Hindu-Muslim riots in the year
preceding an election significantly increase the vote share of the Hindu nationalist BJP.
   22
      Conflict could also lead individuals to want to hide or downplay their religious identity to avoid harm (see e.g.
Kalyvas 2008).
   23
      For each household we calculate the days before or after the first conflict occurred in their region. As we plot
days since conflict over the range -365 days to +365 days, to code the date of first conflict we only consider conflicts
occurring between July 1992 and June 1995.




                                                           15
                            Figure 2: Recorded Conflict and Taboo Avoidance, NSS 50th Round (1993-1994)
                                              Beef                                                                           Pork
Population Abstaining (%)




                                                                               Population Abstaining (%)
   .2 .4 .6 .8 1




                                                                                .75 .8 .85 .9 .95 1
                            -300 -200 -100     0     100 200       300                                     -300 -200 -100     0     100 200       300
                                  Days before and after conflict                                                 Days before and after conflict


                                              Meat                                                                         Alcohol
Population Abstaining (%)




                                                                               Population Abstaining (%)
  0 .2 .4 .6 .8




                                                                                 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1

                            -300 -200 -100     0     100 200       300                                     -300 -200 -100     0     100 200       300
                                  Days before and after conflict                                                 Days before and after conflict


                                Hindu Upper Castes                       Hindu Scheduled Castes                                          Muslims
Notes: Kernel-weighted local polynomial regression of abstention on days before/after conflict. 95 percent
confidence intervals shown with lighter shading.


qualitatively similar when conditioning on a battery of controls and using a balanced sample.24
                      The upper left panel of Figure 2 plots the fraction of the population that abstain from beef
consumption—the most prominent religious taboo good for Hindus. While essentially no upper-
caste Hindus report consuming beef, in peaceful times a considerable proportion of scheduled-
caste Hindu households do not respect this taboo. However, there is a marked increase in sched-
uled caste Hindu households reporting zero beef consumption in the run up to a reported episode
of conflict, followed by a modest decline in the following months.
                      This figure suggests that consumption patterns may potentially serve as leading indicators
for the eruption of conflicts. Recorded conflict—as manifested by reports that reach the national
press in India—is plausibly preceded by mounting inter-religious tensions that make religious
identity salient even before these tensions boil over. However, as we discuss below, once we
include multiple survey rounds and a battery of fixed effects, the association of taboo adherence
with future (as opposed to present and past) reported conflict dissipates.
                24
     Appendix Figure B.1.1 conditions on household per capita expenditure, local prices, and region-month fixed
effects. Appendix Figure B.2.1 restricts attention to locations surveyed both in the 6 months before and after a conflict.


                                                                          16
    The timepath of beef consumption for scheduled-caste Hindus suggests that religious iden-
tity is indeed strengthened by conflict. However, our framework—in which households choose
between two possible identities (religious and ethnic)—has additional implications, compared
to a model where households simply choose how religious to be and choose to become more
religious at times of conflict. For example, beef is not a taboo for Muslims, and so the prescribed
behavior for someone who identifies as Muslim allows for high beef consumption. In contrast,
the average household in most States of India consumes little or no beef and so the typical ethnic
cuisine is characterized by little beef consumption. If religious tensions lead Muslims to identify
more with their religious group and less with their ethnic group, then beef consumption should
rise as they move between the two groups’ prescribed behaviors. Such behavior is consistent
with the timepath of Muslim beef consumption (upper left panel of Figure 2). Beef avoidance
drops markedly around the time of conflict before rising back up in subsequent months.25
    The upper right panel of Figure 2 shows pork avoidance (a strong Muslim taboo). We see
the mirror image of the above pattern. Muslims essentially never consume pork, nor do upper-
caste Hindus, presumably due to the meat taboo we will turn to next. However, scheduled-caste
Hindus, for whom pork is not a taboo, markedly increase their pork consumption around the
time of conflict, while mostly avoiding it in peaceful times.
    Finally, the bottom two panels of Figure 2 show timepaths for the two less-adhered to taboos,
abstention from animal protein (vegetarianism), and alcohol avoidance. There are pronounced
increases in vegetarianism among both lower- and upper-caste Hindu groups around the time
of conflict. Patterns are more murky for alcohol avoidance.
    In the regression analysis we confront concerns that changes in availability or social desir-
ability bias may be behind our findings. Here we simply note that such stories do not explain
why beef consumption rises for Muslims and pork consumption rises for lower-caste Hindus in
times of conflict. And as shown in Appendix Figure B.2.2, we do not see a similar divergence in
Muslim-Hindu consumption patterns for chicken and mutton that would typically be purchased
at the same butchers.26
   25
       An alternative explanation is that Muslims’ reduced pork consumption during times of Hindu-Muslim conflict
leads to substitution into non-pork meats. While possible, such a large shift into beef requires large unreported
changes in Muslim pork consumption. Additionally, Section 4.2 shows that within cereals—where a simple substitu-
tion story is less plausible—the share of ethnic staples declines with religious conflict.
    26
       Muslims are massively over-represented in the butcher trade, comprising 45 percent of butchers but only 12 per-
cent of the Indian population (Appendix Table B.3.1). Thus, if availability or fear of travel were driving our results, we
would expect differential responses for Muslims and lower-caste Hindus. Relatedly, Appendix Figure B.2.3 finds sim-
ilar patterns splitting the sample into locations with high and low levels of Religious Fractionalization, a robustness
test the logic of which we discuss in more detail below.




                                                           17
Combining Taboos and Survey Rounds

We now turn to a more formal econometric analysis at the quarterly level that combines all four
taboo goods and all three survey rounds. The longer sample period and larger sample size allows
us to focus on district-level conflict (the most disaggregated geographic unit that can be followed
across rounds), and to include Christians in our analysis—the smallest of our religious groups
and one that has no taboos with respect to the four goods.
    We run the following difference-in-differences specification, variants of which will also be
used to assess the effects of changes in costs and status. For household h, of religion r , in district
d, ethnicity (state) s, in round-quarter t, consuming good i:


  Abstainihrdst = α1 Tabooir + α2 Conflictrdt + α3 Tabooir × Conflictrdt
                     X
                 +       γ1ij ln pricejht + γ2i ln realf oodexpht + δidt + δrdt + Additional F E + iht (3)
                     j

where Abstainihrdst is an indicator variable that takes the value 1 if the household does not con-
sume good i; Tabooir is an indicator for good i being a taboo for religion r (from Table 1); and
Conflictrdt is an indicator for Hindu/Muslim conflict in the district at time t (or potentially a
vector of lags and leads of conflict). We code Conflictrdt = 0 for Christian households.
    The key coefficient of interest is α3 , which captures how consumption differences across
taboo and non-taboo goods vary with conflict. To take a concrete example, we expect Muslims
are more likely to abstain from pork than beef (α1 > 0). Conflict may also affect the consump-
tion of goods that are taboo for other religions (captured by α2 ). However, a positive α3 implies
that conflict further increases abstention from the taboo good relative to non taboo goods.
    As we are estimating the determinants of demand, we also include standard controls for
prices and incomes: ln pricejht is the village median price of good j that controls for own- and
cross-price effects; and ln realf oodexpht is the log of per-capita food expenditure deflated by a
Stone price index that controls for income effects. To control for local supply and demand con-
ditions not adequately captured by prices, we further include product-district-time fixed effects
δidt . These fixed effects also absorb other factors that affect consumption of good i in district d at
time t and may correlate with conflict.27 Thus, we explore how taboo/non-taboo consumption
differences between religions within a location vary with conflict. Finally, we include religion-
district-time fixed effects, δrdt , to account for possible forces affecting total consumption of our
four prominent religious goods (relative to other goods) for a particular religion-location pair.
   27
     We do not include controls for household characteristics such as demographics and primary occupation as these
are potentially endogenous to identity choices. For completeness, Appendix F replicates all the key tables in this and
subsequent sections including controls for household characteristics, and finds qualitatively similar results.


                                                         18
We cluster standard errors at the rdt level.28
    The remaining worry is that the inter-religious tensions that conflict is proxying for are cor-
related with omitted variables that affect abstinence and vary at the religion-ethnicity level or
below. To further alleviate these identification concerns, we pursue two additional fixed-effect
strategies that we will use throughout the paper. Both strategies control for religion-ethnicity
fixed effects, so that the coefficients of interest are identified only from variation within house-
holds that are choosing between the same two identities (e.g. Muslim Gujaratis).
Cross-Sectional Identification (Additional F E = δirst ): here we include good-religion-ethnicity-
time fixed effects to control for temporal shocks to adherence at the religion-ethnicity level. For
example, there may be a health campaign in Gujarat to reduce alcohol consumption among
lower-caste Hindus. The fixed effects ensure that we are identifying effects from variation across
districts with and without conflict within a particular state, religious group, and time period.
Panel Identification (Additional F E = δirsdq ): here we include good-religion-ethnicity-district-
quarter of year fixed effects to control for omitted variables that generate persistent deviations
in abstinence across religious groups at the district level. For example, Muslims in Uttar Pradesh
may be more observant of the alcohol taboo in districts containing important mosques, and re-
ligious tensions may also be more common in those locations. The fixed effects ensure that we
identify effects from variation in conflict across survey rounds within the same religion-district-
quarter (with the quarter controlling for seasonality in consumption). As this omitted-variable
concern is the more serious of the two, we consider this our preferred specification.
    Table 2 reports the results of estimating equation (3) without any of the additional fixed ef-
fects (column 1), with the cross-sectional fixed effects (column 2), and with the panel fixed ef-
fects (column 3). In columns 1-3 we code Conflictrdt = 1 if any conflict incident occurred in
the quarter in which the survey was administered or in the 6 months preceding that quarter.
Appendix Table B.3.4 justifies this choice by including all four quarterly leads and all four quar-
terly lags in our preferred panel specification. The coefficients on the taboo interactions are only
significant for conflict shocks in the current and preceding two quarters.
    Our main interest is the interaction term in the second row. (Note that the main effect of
conflict is swept out by the δrdt fixed effects, and the main effect of taboo by either the δirst or
δirsdq additional fixed effects). Across all three specifications, religious conflict increases the ad-
herence to the taboos prescribed by the household’s religion. The effect sizes are substantial.
An incident of conflict increases the proportion of households adhering to their religious taboos
   28
     Results are robust to higher spatial clustering at the religion-region-time level (Appendix Table B.3.2), or cluster-
ing at the religion-district level to account for serial correlation (Appendix Table B.3.3).




                                                           19
                                    Table 2: Religious Conflict and Taboo Adherence
                                                           LHS Variable: Abstain from Consuming Good i
                                             Baseline      Cross-section         Panel                               Panel
                                                                                               Geographic Area              Cause of Conflict
                                                                                               Urban         Rural        Narrow        W/o Relig
                                                (1)              (2)               (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)            (7)
 taboo=1                                     0.181∗∗∗
                                            (0.00364)

 taboo × conflict                            0.106∗∗∗         0.0396∗∗∗        0.0599∗∗∗                                 0.0660∗∗∗      0.0536∗∗∗
                                             (0.0162)         (0.0107)         (0.00981)                                 (0.0101)       (0.0175)

 taboo × conflict past 2 quarters                                                            0.0431∗∗      0.0550∗∗∗
                                                                                             (0.0194)      (0.0134)

 taboo × conflict present quarter                                                            0.0587∗∗       0.0293
                                                                                             (0.0293)      (0.0187)
 Observations                               1,115,640        1,115,292         1,114,116     347,556       764,344       1,114,116      1,114,116
 Adjusted R2                                  0.560            0.585             0.596         0.612         0.603         0.596          0.596
 log prices and total expenditure              Yes              Yes               Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
 prod*district*round*quarter                   Yes              Yes               Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
 relig*district*round*quarter                  Yes              Yes               Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
 relig*state*prod*round*quarter                No               Yes               No            No            No            No             No
 relig*state*prod*district*quarter             No               No                Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
 Notes: Dependent variable is an indicator for abstaining from good i. Taboo is an indicator equal to 1 if the good is considered a taboo for the
religion of the household. Conflict is an indicator for at least one occurrence of Hindu-Muslim conflict in the district. Columns 1-3 consider a
conflict occurrence in the quarter in which the household is surveyed or in the preceding two quarters. Column 1 includes the baseline fixed effects,
column 2 adds the fixed effects for cross-sectional identification and columns 3-7 for panel identification. Columns 4-5 differentiate the effect of a
conflict occurring in the quarter of the survey from conflict in the preceding six months. Column 4 restricts the analysis to the urban population,
and column 5 to the rural population. Column 6 excludes conflicts due to animal slaughter, economic, or political factors. Column 7 additionally
excludes conflicts with religious reported causes. Robust standard errors clustered at religion-district-round-quarter in parentheses. Regressions
weighted by survey population weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.



by 6 percentage points in our preferred panel specification (column 3) relative to the effect on
non taboo goods. The estimate from the cross-sectional fixed-effects specification is somewhat
smaller in size but similar in significance, despite drawing on very different variation.29 Effect
sizes are larger in the baseline specification which does not include the additional fixed effects
(column 1). In that specification, the main taboo effect is not absorbed, which shows that ab-
stinence is 18 percentage points higher if the good is a taboo for the household’s religion. This
difference increases by more than a half during times of conflict.
    Appendix Table B.3.6 repeats the analysis using a non-binary measure of conflict, log fatal-
ities, with similar results. There is also some evidence that the effect of conflict spills over to
nearby districts, at least when exploiting cross-sectional variation (see Appendix Table B.3.7).
Finally, as suggested by the earlier plots of beef consumption for Upper Caste Hindus and pork
consumption for Muslims, effects may be more muted for products with very high rates of (lo-
cal) abstention. Appendix Table B.3.8 provides some supportive evidence for such ceiling effects,
  29
     Figure 2 showed larger unconditional effects for beef abstention using the date of survey that is only available in
NSS 50. Appendix Table B.3.5 finds similarly large effects using the regression analysis restricted to beef in NSS 50.



                                                                         20
although differences are generally insignificant for our preferred panel specification.
    As emphasized above, accounting for local supply and demand conditions—using both good-
district-time fixed effects as well as prices and incomes—is crucial to identify the effect of con-
flict on the consumption of taboo goods. Our analysis, however, can also shed light on the effect
of conflict on local markets. Specifically, our results suggest a shift towards religious identity at
times of religious conflict, hence decreasing the demand for taboo goods among those whose
religion forbids those goods, but possibly increasing it among those whose religion does not.
As long as supply is not perfectly elastic, any change in net demand should affect prices. As
we show in Appendix Table B.3.9, a 1-percentage-point increase in conflict-induced abstention
rates leads to a 0.8 percent drop in prices.30

Reverse Causality, Availability Issues and Social Desirability Bias

There are three potential confounds to interpreting these results as evidence for our framework.
The first worry is reverse causality. Shocks to determinants of identity at the rsdt level other
than salience—such as changes in group status or the economic costs of identifying with a group
that we explore later—may lead to identity changes which both change taboo consumption and
generate conflict. We partially deal with this issue in Section 5 by jointly examining the effects
of all three forces in our conceptual model. Here, although we do not have random shocks to
Hindu-Muslim conflict that would explicitly rule out reverse causality, we can dig deeper into
the time structure and the reported causes of conflict to provide some reassurance.
    Our first approach exploits the fact, noted by both Varshney (2001) and Mitra and Ray (2014),
that Hindu-Muslim riots are primarily an urban phenomenon.31 Thus, if the conflict itself raises
religious salience—thus causing changes in identification and consumption—the timing of the
response would likely differ between rural and urban areas. Specifically, these urban conflicts
would immediately increase religious salience in urban areas and hence affect consumption. In
contrast, it is reasonable to expect the salience of religious cleavages to take time to spill over
to adjacent rural areas, and so identity changes and the observed consumption response would
likely be delayed.
    To investigate this hypothesis, columns 4-5 of Table 2 break the conflict variable into two:
conflicts that occurred in the six months preceding the quarter of the survey, and conflicts that
occurred during the quarter of the survey itself. Consistent with the above scenario, among
   30
      We regress log prices at the good-district-time level on the fraction of population abstaining, instrumented by
predicted abstention from estimating equation (3). Our preferred specification (column 4) also includes conflict as
an independent variable but we find no direct effect beyond its effect through abstinence. See Table B.3.9 for details.
   31
      Varshney (2001) states “Villages constitute a remarkably small portion of communal rioting. Between 1950-
95, rural India, where a majority of Indians still live, accounted for a mere 3.6 per cent of the deaths in communal
violence.”


                                                          21
urban households (column 4), consumption changes are significantly associated with religious
conflict in both the current and the preceding quarters. By contrast, among rural households
(column 5), the association is only with reports of religious conflict in the preceding quarters.
This timing of consumption changes is consistent with the causal chain above whereby ur-
ban conflict raises religious salience but only with a lag in rural areas. For the simple reverse-
causation worry outlined at the top of this subsection, forces that change identity other than
salience would also have to be urban phenomena that spill over to rural areas with lags (a possi-
bility of course, but not one previously documented by scholars).
   A second and more direct approach to causality is to narrow the set of conflicts we con-
sider, using the reported cause of conflict in the Varshney-Wilkinson dataset (see list of causes
in Appendix Table A.2). For the association between taboo adherence and conflict to provide
causal evidence for our hypothesis—that changes in religious salience causally affect identity
choice—we require that either: 1a) exogenous shocks to inter-religious violence cause religious
salience and hence taboo adherence to rise, or 1b) exogenous shocks to religious salience cause
both inter-religious violence and taboo adherence to rise. However, our associations would be
spurious if identity changes are driven by a shock to some force other than religious salience;
and either 2a) those changes induce both greater taboo adherence and inter-religious violence,
or 2b) the inter-religious violence is itself caused by the changes in taboo adherence.
   To help dismiss these two spurious interpretations, we exclude conflicts that are most subject
to the concern of being driven by consumption changes, or most at risk of being driven by other
factors that affect taboo consumption differentially across religions (beyond raising the salience
of religion that our conflict variable is designed to capture). Column 6 of Table 2 reports our pre-
ferred panel specification after removing conflicts that are due either to animal slaughter (where
food consumption might potentially cause conflict as in case 2b), or to economic and political
factors (which may be driven by changes in group status, identity costs, or other endogenous
forces as in case 2a). This removes 11 percent of the conflicts with a reported cause, and leaves
us only with more plausibly exogenous shocks to religious salience—primarily public rituals, the
desecration of religious sites, previous violence, as well as private quarrels, homicides and sex-
ual harassment. Reassuringly, the coefficients on the Taboo × Conflict interaction change little
(if anything, the coefficient is larger).32
   A direct test of case 2a—non-salience induced identity changes causing conflict—is reported
in column 7. If some external force changed identities which in turn spurred inter-religious vio-
lence, we would expect these conflicts to be most commonly attributed to religious causes. Thus,
  32
       Appendix Table B.3.10 reports similar results with cross-section fixed effects and sequentially removing causes.



                                                           22
in column 7 we further remove all 40 percent of conflicts that have religious reported causes.33
Again, the coefficient on the taboo interaction changes little.
    Finally, Appendix Table B.3.11 shows that results are remarkably stable across multiple cate-
gories of reported cause (with the exception of the more endogenous causes noted above—animal
slaughter and economic/political factors). As omitted variable concerns differ markedly across
causes (e.g. previous communal violence versus public rituals), the similarity of the estimates
suggests that any endogeneity bias is likely small.
    The second potential confound is that taboo abstention, such as less beef consumption by
lower-caste Hindus during times of conflict, could simply be a matter of availability. For exam-
ple, Hindus may no longer feel safe traveling to Muslim areas to purchase beef. Such availability
issues should at least partly be captured by our price controls and the good-district-time fixed ef-
fects.34 However, to address this concern more directly, we use information from the NSS surveys
on the religion and location of butchers in India in the three survey rounds.35 If Hindu/Muslim
conflict prevents Hindus from patronizing Muslim butchers and vice versa, we should expect
this availability bias to be stronger in locations with few butchers of alternative religions. To ex-
plore this hypothesis, Table 3 adds interactions with the share of non-Hindu/Muslim butchers
in that region to the specification in equation (3). Column 1 uses the cross-sectional identifica-
tion strategy and column 4 shows our preferred panel approach. In both, the triple interaction
is insignificant, and flips sign across identification strategies.
    A second way to explore the availability issue is more indirect but exploits more localized
variation. Specifically we now add to equation (3) interactions with religious heterogeneity, cal-
culated at the village or urban neighborhood level.36 If availability is driving the conflict effect,
we would expect magnitudes to be largest in places where people of different religions live in
separate neighborhoods. In these places, purchasing goods taboo to your religion during times
of conflict may necessitate traveling to hostile neighborhoods.
    We use two variants of the widely-used fractionalization index, which is the probability that
two randomly-selected households from a given neighborhood do not belong to the same reli-
gion.37 “Religious Fractionalization” (third row in Table 3) is calculated using all seven religions
   33
       This removal also excludes case 1b above, and so leans only on the shocks to conflict in case 1a.
   34
       A remaining concern is that butchers increase non-market transactions to specific religions rather than lowering
prices. Note, however, that gifting of taboo goods is very uncommon (e.g. 0.26 percent of Muslims received beef gifts
and 0.01 percent of Hindus received pork).
    35
       We define a butcher as a household where the primary industry is “retail trade in meat, fish and poultry” or
“slaughtering, preservation or preparation of meat”, and/or the primary occupation is “butchers and meat preparers”.
There are 1342 butchers in our data. Appendix Table B.3.1 shows butcher numbers and shares by religion.
    36
       We use First-stage Sampling Unit identifiers that correspond to villages in rural areas and urban blocks in urban
areas. Ten households are surveyed
                               P 2 within each FSU.
    37
       Fractionalization = 1 −    πr where πr is the proportion of people in religion r in the neighborhood.


                                                          23
                                         Table 3: Conflict and Religious Composition
                                                                                    LHS Variable: Abstain from Consuming Good i
                                                                                  Cross-section                                     Panel
                                                                         (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)
 taboo × conflict                                                     0.0430∗∗∗      0.0467∗∗∗      0.0490∗∗∗      0.0599∗∗∗     0.0635∗∗∗      0.0677∗∗∗
                                                                      (0.0112)       (0.0120)       (0.0114)       (0.0101)      (0.0128)       (0.0122)

 taboo × conflict × non hindu/muslim butcher share                      -0.173                                     0.00218
                                                                        (0.222)                                    (0.0613)

 taboo × conflict × religious fractionalization                                       -0.0324                                     -0.0163
                                                                                      (0.0368)                                    (0.0375)

 taboo × conflict × hindu/muslim fractionalization                                                   -0.0491                                     -0.0410
                                                                                                     (0.0410)                                    (0.0417)
 Observations                                                         1,107,484      1,115,292      1,115,292     1,106,292      1,114,116      1,114,116
 Adjusted R2                                                            0.585          0.585           0.585        0.596          0.596           0.596
 main effects and double interactions                                    Yes            Yes             Yes          Yes            Yes             Yes
 log prices and total expenditure controls                               Yes            Yes             Yes          Yes            Yes             Yes
 product*district*round*quarter                                          Yes            Yes             Yes          Yes            Yes             Yes
 religion*district*round*quarter                                         Yes            Yes             Yes          Yes            Yes             Yes
 religion*state*product*round*quarter                                    Yes            Yes             Yes          No             No              No
 religion*state*product*district*quarter                                 No             No              No           Yes            Yes             Yes
 Notes: Dependent variable is an indicator for abstaining from good i. Taboo is an indicator equal to 1 if the good is considered a taboo for the religion
of the household. Conflict is an indicator for at least one occurrence of Hindu-Muslim conflict in the district in the quarter in which the household is
surveyed or in the preceding two quarters. Columns 1 and 4 interact the share of non-Hindu/Muslim butchers in the region. Columns 2 and 5 interact the
religious fractionalization in the neighborhood. Columns 3 and 6 interact the Hindu-Muslim fractionalization in the neighborhood. See text for a detailed
description of each measure.Columns 1-3 include fixed effects for cross-sectional identification. Columns 4-6 include fixed effects for panel identification.
All regressions include the main effects and interactions of taboo, conflict and religious composition. Robust standard errors clustered at religion-district-
round-quarter in parentheses. Regressions weighted by survey population weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.



available in the NSS data (treating all Hindus as one religion). “Hindu-Muslim Fractionaliza-
tion” (fourth row) is calculated using only the Hindu and Muslim populations. In none of the
four cases is the triple interaction with Tabooir × Conflictrdt close to significant, although the
sign is negative. This suggests that if any availability issues are present they are likely small.
     The final worry is that households under-report taboo behaviors and do so more during con-
flict. One possibility is fear of retribution from the local community if someone finds out. Such
fears may be elevated in times of conflict if one thinks that other members of the community
care more about respecting religious taboos at such times (that is, others identify more reli-
giously). Like the availability issues above, households are likely to be more worried about social
sanctions if they truthfully report taboo consumption in local communities that are more homo-
geneous. We reject this hypothesis above when discussing availability. Another possible reason
for under-reporting would be a heightened desire to please the surveyor—essentially elevated
social desirability bias—in times of conflict. This could generate the type of behavior we ob-
serve if the NSSO sent Muslim surveyors to Muslim households and Hindu surveyors to Hindu
households. The NSSO is careful to avoid such an outcome,38 but we have no information about
   38
     Enumerators are sent to villages selected at random and survey 10 randomly-selected households in that vil-
lage. To further ensure impartiality, the NSSO randomizes between two sets of survey teams, one hired by the NSSO



                                                                            24
the interviewer to directly explore this possibility (and we note that such heightened desire to
please might itself be a manifestation of stronger religious identification). The voting results in
Section 6.2 are also helpful here since voting is less visible than consumption; hence social desir-
ability bias is a less plausible explanation. A final point is that while there may be reasons other
than identity for Muslims to misreport their pork consumption in times of religious tensions,
it is harder to see why they would misreport their pork consumption when the price of alcohol
changes (Section 4.4 below).
      We view these robustness exercises as supportive of our preferred interpretation—that in-
creases in the salience of intergroup differences that accompany intergroup conflict cause changes
in identification. This interpretation is consistent with studies documenting the effect of conflict
on identification patterns in other contexts, or using other outcome variables. Nonetheless, we
acknowledge that threats to a causal interpretation may still remain, and one should not com-
pletely dismiss closely-related competing explanations. For example, differences in urban and
rural life may mean that taboo adherence responds more quickly in urban areas. Additionally,
conflict may alter social connections between and within identity groups in complicated ways,
and these can also affect consumption patterns—an interesting finding in its own right.39 As
mentioned above, the fact that our estimates correlate with voting behavior suggests that the
effects go beyond the mere observability of one’s consumption that is required for many social
mechanisms to operate. It is, however, consistent with our preferred interpretation, or isomor-
phic variants where altered social interactions affect preferences themselves.

4.2     Ethnic Autonomy and Identity
We now explore the ethnic dimension more directly by using shocks to ethnic salience due to
changes in political autonomy. As noted in Section 3, in 1956 Indian state borders were drawn
along ethno-linguistic boundaries under the States Reorganization Act. However, in some cases
similar ethnicities were grouped together within the same state. In the subsequent years, many
of the states that still contained substantial ethnic divisions split into smaller units. Such splits
were often disputed and preceded by political campaigns and demands for “azaadi” (liberty)
that emphasized ethnic distinctions.
      While no state splits occurred within our sample period, three splits took place in November
headquarters and one by the state NSSO office, and then checks for discrepancies.
   39
      For example, an alternative explanation for our results is that conflict reduces social interactions between mem-
bers of different religious groups. Thus, Muslims no longer need to observe Hindu taboos at social gatherings, and
Hindus no longer need to observe Muslim ones. However, under this explanation the effects should be attenuated
when excluding the third of households who served meals to guests during the period covered by the expenditure
survey (the number of meals served to guests, including at ceremonies, is recorded in NSS rounds 43 and 50). As
shown in Appendix Table B.3.12, the effect size actually increases rather than falls with this restriction.



                                                          25
2000, five months after the end of the 55th survey round. Predominantly Chhattisgarhi-speaking
areas of the state of Madhya Pradesh were carved out to form the new state of Chhattisgarh; what
was once the kingdom of Jharkand separated from Bihar; and the former kingdoms of Garwhal
and Kumaon split from Uttar Pradesh to became the new state of Uttaranchal (now called Ut-
tarakhand). These splits were preceded by a decade of political activism and agitation, and were
the outcome of drawn-out political processes.40 Thus, it is reasonable to hypothesize that for
people living in these states, the salience of their ethnicities rose sharply during the 1990s.
    As shown in Appendix Figure A.3, two of these splits fall along the fault line documented in
Section 3.3 that divides wheat and rice eaters in India: Chhattisgarh and Jharkand are predom-
inantly rice consumers, while Madhya Pradesh and Bihar tilt towards wheat. (And, as shown in
Appendix Figures C.1 and C.2, the splits also largely followed linguistic lines.) Thus, for these two
state splits, we can observe whether the increasing salience of their ethnic identity in the run up
to the state splitting led to greater consumption of their ethnic staple.
    We run the following specification for household h in location d (either one of 80 districts or
10 regions, see below), ethnicity (i.e. future state) s, in round-quarter t, consuming good i:


  CerealShareihdst = θ1 EthnicCerealis × Round93−94 + θ2 EthnicCerealis × Round99−00
                                        X
                                    +       γ1ij ln pricejht + γ2i ln realf oodexpht + δitso + δidq + iht (4)
                                        j

where CerealShareihdst is h’s share of expenditure spent on i ∈ {rice, wheat, other cereals},
EthnicCerealis is an indicator variable that takes the value 1 if cereal i is the ethnic cereal in future
state s (based on which side of the fault line the future state lies on), and Roundxx-yy are survey
round dummies. Thus, we explore how differences in consumption patterns on either side of
the future border evolve as the year of the state split approaches. As before we include price
and real-expenditure controls, as well as good-time-original state fixed effects δitso to control
for local supply and demand conditions in each period at the level of the existing state. Finally,
we include good-location-quarter of year fixed effects δidq which serve the same purpose as the
panel fixed effects above by controlling for persistent consumption differences across different
locations. Standard errors are clustered at the dt level.
    Note that the δidq fixed effects absorb an EthnicCerealis × Round87−88 dummy. Hence, θ1
reveals the increase in consumption of the ethnic cereal in the future state between the 43rd
   40
     The 1990s saw region-wide strikes and rallies in Chhattisgarh led by the Chhattisgarh Rajya Nirman Manch
political forum, with a resolution demanding an independent Chhattisgarh passing the Madhya Pradesh legislative
assembly in 1994 followed by the Separate Chhattisgarh Bill in 1998. In Jharkhand, regional parties including the
Jharkhand Mukti Mocha, All India Jharkhand Party and the All Jharkhand Students Union grew in importance before
uniting with the local BJP and Congress parties to pass the Jharkhand Act in 1998.



                                                       26
and 50th round, and θ2 reveals the increase between the 43rd and 55th round. If the increasing
salience of ethnicity in the run up to statehood leads to an increase in households identifying
with their ethnic identity and hence consuming their ethnic cereal, we would expect θ2 > θ1 > 0.
Similarly, if the increase in the salience of ethnicity is more pronounced for people living close
to a new ethnic border, we would expect θ2 to be higher in those areas.
   In order to explore the evolution of consumption across survey rounds, Table 4 first presents
a region-level analysis (recall that the round 50 surveys do not contain identifiers for urban dis-
tricts so the EthnicCerealis × Round93−94 coefficient from a district-level analysis would conflate
changes over time with differences between urban and rural households). Consistent with the
hypothesis above, column 1 shows that the share of the ethnic cereal rose by 3 percentage points
between the 1987 and 1994 (from a baseline of 52 percent), and by a further 3.9 percentage points
between 1994 and 2000. Appendix Table C.1 shows that a stronger result also holds—households
on the Chhattisgarh and Jharkand (southeast) sides of the future state borders increased their
rice consumption as the November 2000 state splits approached, and at the same time house-
holds on the northwest side of the border increased their wheat consumption.
   We further analyze these changes by focusing on households living close to the future border.
We expect districts either side of the border to be more similar and so there are fewer concerns
with omitted variables in this specification. In addition, we would expect larger effect sizes in
these locations. First, because, as mentioned above, the state split is likely to be even more
salient for households living close to a new ethnic border. Second, rice/wheat consumption was
more mixed in these locations (see Figure A.3), hence there was more scope to move towards the
ethnic cereal. We find support for these predictions using either the region-level regression or a
more disaggregated district-level specification (with the trade-off that the district-level analysis
excludes round 50 households for the reason discussed above). The increase in ethnic cereal
consumption between 1987 and 2000 grows by 0.7 percentage points between column 3 and
column 4 of Table 4 as we restrict attention to households living in border districts and those
districts adjacent to border districts (and similarly comparing all regions to border regions in
columns 1 and 2). The effect size further increases by a sizeable 3 percentage points when we
focus only on border districts in column 5. For border districts, the ethnic cereal share rose by
9.3 percentage points over this period of rising ethnic salience.
   There are two potential confounds. First, such results may be driven by the imposition of
trade barriers that would naturally lead to a greater availability and a lower price for the locally-
produced cereal (which is likely to correspond to the ethnic cereal, as discussed in Atkin 2013).
Here we are helped by the fact that we explicitly control for prices and, more importantly, that


                                                 27
                                                     Table 4: Ethnic Goods and State Splits Along Ethnic Lines
                                                                                                        LHS Variable: Share Spent on Cereal i
                                                                      Regions                                                              Districts
                                                                (1)           (2)            (3)              (4)                   (5)                (6)          (7)                    (8)
                                                                All         Border           All        Border+Neighbor           Border               All    Border+Neighbor            Border
      Ethnic Cereal × 1987-1988                                  0             0              0                 0                    0                  0             0                     0
                                                                (.)           (.)            (.)               (.)                  (.)                (.)           (.)                   (.)

      Ethnic Cereal × 1993-1994                              0.0297∗∗      0.0322∗∗            0                   0                  0                 0                0                   0
                                                             (0.0130)      (0.0130)           (.)                 (.)                (.)               (.)              (.)                 (.)

      Ethnic Cereal × 1999-2000                             0.0689∗∗∗      0.0697∗∗∗     0.0554∗∗∗           0.0625∗∗∗           0.0928∗∗∗      0.0546∗∗∗           0.0608∗∗∗          0.0928∗∗∗
                                                            (0.0124)       (0.0122)      (0.00857)           (0.0129)            (0.0182)       (0.00858)           (0.0130)           (0.0182)




28
      Ethnic Cereal × Hindu-Muslim Conflict                                                                                                     -0.0919∗∗           -0.127∗∗∗               0
                                                                                                                                                 (0.0358)           (0.0273)               (.)
      Observations                                           128,029        102,070        93,114              39,710              23,730         93,114             39,710              23,730
      Adjusted R2                                             0.732          0.755          0.793               0.830              0.836          0.793               0.830              0.836
      log prices and total expenditure controls                Yes            Yes            Yes                 Yes                Yes             Yes                Yes                Yes
      original state*product*round*quarter                     Yes            Yes            Yes                 Yes                Yes             Yes                Yes                Yes
      region*product*quarter                                   Yes            Yes            No                  No                 No              No                 No                 No
      district*product*quarter                                 No             No             Yes                 Yes                Yes             Yes                Yes                Yes
      Notes: Dependent variable is the share of cereal i (rice, wheat or other cereals) in total cereal expenditure. Ethnic Cereal is an indicator variable that takes the value 1 if cereal i is the
     ethnic cereal in future State. 1987-1988, 1993-1994 and 1999-2000 are round dummies with the initial round 1987-1988 as the reference group. Columns 1-2 are region-level regressions:
     column 1 includes all regions and column 2 restricts to regions along the future state border. Columns 3-8 are district-level regressions: column 3 includes all districts, column 4 restricts
     to border and border-adjacent districts, column 5 to border districts, and columns 6-8 reproduce columns 4-6 adding an interaction between ethnic cereal and Hindu-Muslim conflict.
     All regressions include the baseline fixed effects controlling for local supply and demand conditions (original state-product-time) and the fixed effects for panel identification (region- or
     district-product-quarter). Robust standard errors clustered at region-round-quarter (columns 1-2) or district-round-quarter (columns 3-8) in parentheses. Regressions weighted by survey
     population weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
our sample period precedes the actual state splits and thus predates the imposition of any trade
barriers. We can also rule out anticipatory supply responses, i.e. farmers shifting production
to the ethnic good in expectation of a future border thus increasing supply and lowering prices.
Appendix Table C.2 shows that the relative price of the ethnic good rose rather than fell in the
run up to the state split.41
      Second, there may be substantial migration during this period, as households move to ensure
they are on the same side of the new border as their co-ethnics, and these movements alone may
be behind the changing consumption patterns. The NSS data sheds light on such movements by
asking households whether they moved location and, if so, whether they moved district within
the same (original) state. As shown in Appendix Figure C.3, while cross-district movements did
increase between 1987 and 2000, these changes were actually less pronounced in the border
regions, making such an explanation for our results implausible.
      Returning to our conceptual framework, we can also explore the effect of religious conflict on
the consumption of ethnic staples. Columns 6-8 of Table 4 add an interaction between the eth-
nic cereal dummy and Hindu-Muslim conflict to the previous specification. Consistent with our
model of dueling identities—where religious salience leads households to move towards their
religious identity and away from their ethnic identity—episodes of Hindu-Muslim conflict re-
duce inter-ethnic differences in staple food shares. There is also evidence suggesting that the
converse relationship holds, i.e., that rising ethnic salience increases the consumption of reli-
gious taboo goods. Specifically, Appendix Table C.3 adapts equation (4) to the demand for taboo
goods and shows that households adhere less strongly to their religious taboos as a state split
approaches, especially in border districts (significantly so only in the latter case).
      Taken together with the results from section 4.1, the evidence strongly suggests that shocks
to the salience of one’s membership of a religion or an ethnicity—proxied by religious violence
and demands for ethnic autonomy—drive identity choices as revealed through consumption
choices over prominent identity goods.

4.3     Status and Identity
The second widely-discussed determinant of group identity is the status of the groups. Status is
a central group characteristic in both theoretical and empirical research on social identity and
inter-group relations. The basic argument is that low group status results in unfavorable com-
parisons between the ingroup and relevant outgroups, leading people to identify more with high
   41
      We run the same regression specification as in equation (4) but now replace the dependent variable with
log prices at the good-district-quarter-round level (and removing the price and income controls): lnPriceidt =
θ1 EthnicCerealis × Round93−94 + θ2 EthnicCerealis × Round99−00 + δitso + δidq + idt .




                                                     29
status groups (see e.g. Ellemers et al., 1999 for discussion and Bettencourt et al., 2001 for a meta
analysis). To test whether group status affects identification decisions as revealed through con-
sumption choices, we return to the four religious taboos considered above. We run the same
specification as in equation (3), but now replace conflict with Statusrdt which measures the sta-
tus of religious group r in district d at time t:


  Abstainihrdst = α1 Tabooir + α2 Statusrdt + α3 Tabooir × Statusrdt
                     X
                 +       γ1ij ln pricejht + γ2i ln realf oodexpht + δidt + δrdt + Additional F E + iht . (5)
                     j

As in the conflict regressions, we control for price and income effects, as well as for local supply
and demand conditions via δidt and δrdt fixed effects. This also addresses the possibility that the
local wealth distribution may directly affect supply and hence consumption (for example, by af-
fecting the number of shops selling a particular identity good). And as before, we present results
using both the additional cross-sectional fixed effects δirst that deal with temporal shocks to ad-
herence at the religion-ethnicity level, and the panel fixed effects δirsdq that deal with persistent
deviations in abstinence across religious groups at the district level.
    We follow the sociology literature (e.g. Parkin 1971; Weiss and Fershtman 1998) by proxying
for group status with the returns to the occupations that are typical of the group.42 We consider
a group as relatively high status in a location if its members in that location are in relatively
highly-paid occupations. However, simply running equation (5) with status measured as the
group’s local occupational returns raises several endogeneity problems not fully addressed by
the battery of fixed effects. First, identity choices may drive the local occupational mix, result-
ing in reverse causation (for example, if I identify as an upper-caste Hindu I may choose not
to work as a butcher). Second, identification patterns may directly affect local occupational re-
turns through, for example, productivity benefits from stronger ethnic-, caste- or religion-based
business networks, or through ingroup bias and discrimination. This again can lead to reverse
causation. We therefore employ two measures of status that address these concerns.
        national− occ(r)
Statusrdt                  : This measure draws on the fact that in India, different religions and castes
are over-represented in certain occupations. Appendix Figure D.1 documents the substantial
(and statistically significant) heterogeneity in occupational shares across religions. Thus, our
first status measure combines the national occupation shares by religion with cross-district vari-
   42
      In a recent review article, Connelly et al. (2016) state that “within sociology, there is a long-standing recognition
that in industrialised societies, occupations are the most powerful single indicator of levels of material reward, social
standing and life chances”.




                                                           30
ation in local occupational returns:

                                             national− occ(r)       X
                                  Statusrdt                     =            log wodt θod− rt ,
                                                                        o

where wodt are real returns in occupation o in district d at time t. We use the 107 2-digit occu-
pation codes o consistently recorded across survey rounds.43 θod− rt is the national occupation
share in religious group r, where the occupation shares are calculated leaving out own district,
which we denote by d− . When coupled with the cross-sectional fixed effects δirst , variation in lo-
cal occupational returns drives status differences across districts for a particular religious group
and state. For example, if demand in one district is particularly strong for shoes and leather
goods—an occupation dominated by scheduled-caste Hindus at the national level—this raises
the status of identifying as a scheduled-caste Hindu in that district. This approach directly tack-
les the first endogeneity concern, that the local occupational mix is driven by identity choices.
       national− w(o)
Statusrdt               : The second status measure exploits changes in national returns to different
occupations. Appendix Figure D.2 documents the substantial heterogeneity in the growth of oc-
cupational returns that provides the key variation over our sample period. We use a standard
Bartik shift-share that combines cross-round variation in national occupational returns with
initial local occupation shares by religion:

                                             national− w(o)        X
                                  Statusrdt                   =             log wod− t θodrto ,
                                                                    o

where wod− t are national occupational returns leaving out own district, and θodrto are occupation
shares by religion-district-quarter in the initial survey round t0 . Coupled with the panel fixed
effects δirsdq , identification comes from status changes across rounds within a religion-district-
quarter driven by national changes in occupational returns. For example, if there is an increase
in the national returns to weaving due to increased global demand for Indian handicrafts, this
will raise the status from identifying as a Muslim within districts that initially had many Muslim
weavers. This approach deals with the second endogeneity concern above, that identity choices
drive local occupational returns.
                                                                                      national− occ(r)
    Table 5 presents the results. Columns 1-3 use the Statusrdt                                          measure for the three
fixed-effect specifications (with cross-sectional fixed effects in column 2 most appropriate), and
                            national− w(o)
columns 4-6 use Statusrdt                    (with panel fixed effects in column 6 most appropriate).44
    Consistent with our conceptual framework, for all six columns, α3 is positive and significant:
   43
      Absent reliable wage data, we use the total per capita expenditure of households with primary occupation o
deflated by the all-India CPI.
   44
      To ease interpretation of the taboo main effect in columns 1 and 4, we demean both status variables.



                                                              31
                                              Table 5: Status and Choice of Identity
                                                                          LHS Variable: Abstain from Consuming Good i
                                                        Baseline      Cross-section          Panel        Baseline      Cross-section          Panel
                                                           (1)               (2)              (3)            (4)               (5)              (6)
 taboo=1                                                0.196∗∗∗                                          0.213∗∗∗
                                                       (0.00379)                                         (0.00383)
                      national occ(r)
 taboo=1 × statusrdt                                    0.120∗∗∗         0.0715∗∗∗        0.0439∗∗∗
                                                        (0.0128)         (0.0120)         (0.0102)
                      national w(o)
 taboo=1 × statusrdt                                                                                      0.490∗∗∗         0.0669∗∗∗        0.0556∗∗∗
                                                                                                          (0.0204)          (0.0197)         (0.0213)
 Observations                                          1,111,072         1,110,724        1,109,544      1,089,132         1,088,876        1,088,280
 Adjusted R2                                             0.560             0.584            0.595          0.561              0.583           0.593
 log prices and total expenditure controls                Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes              Yes
 product*district*round*quarter                           Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes              Yes
 religion*district*round*quarter                          Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes              Yes
 religion*state*product*round*quarter                     No                Yes              No              No                Yes              No
 religion*state*product*district*quarter                  No                No               Yes             No                No               Yes
 Notes: Dependent variable is an indicator for abstaining from good i. Taboo is an indicator equal to 1 if the good is considered a taboo for the religion
of the household. In columns 1-3, status is measured by local returns to the national occupational mix of each religion. In columns 4-6, status is
measured by national returns to the initial local occupational mix of each religion. Columns 1 and 4 include the baseline fixed effects, columns 2 and
5 add the fixed effects for cross-sectional identification and columns 3 and 6 for panel identification. Robust standard errors clustered at religion-
district-round-quarter in parentheses. Regressions weighted by survey population weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.



households are more likely to adhere to the norms and taboos of their religious group (relative
to those of other groups) when its status is higher. In terms of magnitudes, we focus on the
more conservative estimates that come from the more-standard Bartik shift-share with panel
fixed effects in column 6. A twenty-percent increase in the real returns to occupations that one’s
religious group initially specializes in—the 90th percentile of status changes between 1987 and
2000—increases abstinence of that member’s religious taboos by 1.1 percentage points relative
to non taboo goods.
      A closely related approach measures Statusrdt in equation (5) by the average per capita ex-
penditure of your religious group in your district, and then instruments status with one of the
two shift-share measures described above. As average group expenditures are strongly corre-
lated with both instruments—i.e. we have a strong first stage—we draw very similar conclusions
from this alternative approach (see Appendix Tables D.1 and D.2).

4.4     Costs and Identity
The final determinant of group identity is the most economic in nature (and the least studied
in the psychology literature): the market price of identifying with a group. Economists have
long argued that religiosity—and associated prescribed behaviors such as church attendance or
fertility rates—responds to economic incentives (Smith 1776; Manski and Mayshar 2003; Gruber
and Hungerman 2008). Extending this literature, in the next section we study how identities



                                                                          32
respond to the cost of the (entire) prescribed bundle, while in this section we focus on own- and
cross-price effects on the consumption of taboo goods.
   As noted in Section 2, endogenous identity formation tends to generate complementarities
between goods that are taboo for a particular group (absent strong countervailing income or
substitution effects). Suppose the price of pork rises. Since Muslims are now less likely to con-
sume pork anyway, their religious identity becomes more attractive relative to their ethnic iden-
tity. If this price effect leads to a change in identity, they would then consume less alcohol. Thus,
our framework offers a theoretical foundation for why some goods are complements or substi-
tutes. As with the effects of conflict, this implication is not obvious. If identity were fixed, one
might expect the violation of one taboo to increase the propensity to respect other taboos, e.g
due to “conscience accounting” (Gneezy et al., 2014). A second implication of our framework
is also worth noting. If a group has a strong taboo against consuming a particular good, then
identifying with the group tends to make demand for that good less sensitive to prices, as the
consumer could be at a corner solution.
   We run a similar specification as in the previous taboo regressions (equations 3 and 5) but
now, to provide a direct test of our hypotheses, we restrict the own- and cross-price elasticities
(previously included in the controls) to depend only on whether the own or other good is a taboo:
                                                 X                                                    X
 Abstainihrdst =α1 Tabooir + α2 ln piht + α3            ln pjht + α4 Tabooir × ln piht + α5 Tabooir          ln pjht
                                                 j6=i                                                 j6=i
                                          X                                      X
                                   + α6          Taboojr ln pjht + α7 Tabooir           Taboojr ln pjht
                                          j6=i                                   j6=i

                                   + γ2i ln realf oodexpht + δidt + δrdt + Additional F E + iht . (6)

We test two sets of hypotheses. The first concerns the demand for taboo goods. If a good is taboo
for a particular group, we would expect that for households identifying with that group, the own-
and cross-price elasticities would be relatively small. As the dependent variable is abstinence,
and we expect α2 > 0, this hypothesis corresponds to α4 < 0 and sign(α3 ) 6= sign(α5 ).
   The second set of hypotheses directly relates to identity changes. The mere fact that two
goods are both taboo does not have direct implications for whether goods are complements or
substitutes. However, as outlined above, if identities change in response to prices, this gener-
ates a force that makes taboos complements with each other (beyond any standard substitution
effects holding identity fixed). In terms of equation (6), this implies that α7 > 0, i.e. that cross-
price elasticities are more negative when both goods are taboos for the same identity group.
   Table 6 reports the results. Columns 1-3 include only the baseline set of fixed effects, and the
subsequent columns report results using the cross-section and panel fixed effects. For each set,

                                                        33
                                                                   Table 6: Costs, Price Elasticities and Identity
                                                                                                   LHS Variable: Abstain from Consuming Good i
                                                                          Baseline                                    Cross-section                                       Panel
                                                               (1)           (2)             (3)            (4)              (5)             (6)            (7)             (8)             (9)
      tabooi =1                                             0.187∗∗∗      0.170∗∗∗        0.228∗∗∗
                                                           (0.00359)      (0.0185)        (0.0158)

      ln pi                                                0.0127∗∗∗      0.0427∗∗∗      0.0323∗∗∗      0.00884∗∗∗       0.0453∗∗∗       0.0424∗∗∗     0.00721∗∗∗       0.0207∗∗∗       0.0211∗∗∗
                                                           (0.00270)      (0.00363)      (0.00488)      (0.00257)        (0.00511)       (0.00564)     (0.00255)        (0.00413)       (0.00527)

      sum ln pj                                            -0.00294∗     -0.0140∗∗∗      0.00659∗       -0.00166       -0.00883∗∗∗       -0.00503       -0.00112       -0.00644∗∗∗      -0.00351
                                                           (0.00167)     (0.00221)       (0.00367)      (0.00165)       (0.00286)        (0.00396)      (0.00165)       (0.00199)       (0.00377)

      tabooi =1 x ln pi                                                  -0.0382∗∗∗     -0.0287∗∗∗                      -0.0457∗∗∗      -0.0424∗∗∗                      -0.0168∗∗∗      -0.0173∗∗∗
                                                                         (0.00278)      (0.00454)                       (0.00488)       (0.00556)                       (0.00351)       (0.00509)

      tabooi =1 x sum ln pj                                               0.0146∗∗∗     -0.0293∗∗∗                      0.00946∗∗∗      -0.0117∗∗∗                      0.00681∗∗∗       0.00209




34
                                                                          (0.00171)     (0.00159)                       (0.00282)       (0.00416)                       (0.00131)       (0.00267)

      sum (ln pj x tabooj )                                                             -0.0618∗∗∗                                       -0.0142∗∗                                      -0.00791
                                                                                        (0.00422)                                        (0.00626)                                      (0.00574)

      tabooi =1 x sum (ln pj x tabooj )                                                  0.0905∗∗∗                                      0.0340∗∗∗                                        0.0101∗
                                                                                         (0.00171)                                      (0.00664)                                       (0.00575)
      Observations                                         1,115,640      1,115,640      1,115,640      1,115,292       1,115,292       1,115,292       1,114,116       1,114,116       1,114,116
      Adjusted R2                                            0.560          0.560          0.568          0.585           0.585           0.585           0.595           0.595           0.595
      log prices and total expenditure controls               Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
      product*district*round*quarter                          Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
      religion*district*round*quarter                         Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
      religion*state*product*round*quarter                    No             No             No             Yes             Yes             Yes             No              No              No
      religion*state*product*district*quarter                 No             No             No             No              No              No              Yes             Yes             Yes
      Notes: Dependent variable is an indicator for abstaining from good i. Taboo is an indicator equal to 1 if the good is considered a taboo for the religion of the household. Columns 1, 4 and 7
     include own and cross-price elasticities. Columns 2, 5 and 8 add the interaction between taboo and own and cross-price elasticities. Columns 3, 6 and 9 allow cross-price elasticities to differ
     depending on whether both own and other goods are taboos. Columns 1-3 include the baseline fixed effects, columns 4-6 add the fixed effects for cross-sectional identification and columns 7-9
     for panel identification. Robust standard errors clustered at religion-district-round-quarter in parentheses. Regressions weighted by survey population weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p <
     0.01.
we start by estimating the own- and cross-price elasticities (where all three cross-price elastici-
ties are restricted to be identical). As expected, higher prices significantly increase abstinence.
Goods are weak substitutes on average. Next (in columns 2, 5, and 8), we allow the own- and
cross-price elasticities to vary with whether the own good is a taboo to test the first set of hy-
potheses. We indeed find that α4 < 0 and signα3 6= signα5 in these specifications. Demand
for taboo goods is highly inelastic. Similarly, the cross-price terms imply goods are in general
substitutes, but are highly cross-price inelastic when the own good is a taboo.
    Most importantly, columns 3, 6, and 9 further allow the cross-price elasticities to vary de-
pending on whether the other good is a taboo or not. Our main hypothesis, that taboo goods
will tend to be complements with each other in a framework where identity choices depend on
economic costs, is strongly supported. Across all three specifications, α7 is significantly greater
than zero. When both the own and other good are taboos, the cross-price terms are more posi-
tive and goods are more complementary. In terms of magnitudes, abstention from taboo good i
rises by between 0.1 (column 9) and 0.9 percentage points (column 3) with a ten percent increase
in the price of other taboo goods (relative to the effect on non-taboo goods).
    As in any demand analysis, the endogeneity of prices is of concern and good instruments
are elusive. We note, however, that while a standard endogeneity story would tend to attenuate
the estimated magnitude of the own-price demand response, it is not clear why it should differ-
entially affect cross-price elasticities between taboo and non-taboo goods, where which goods
are taboo varies across households in the same location. We also note that any reverse-causality
would likely bias us against finding our key result, α7 > 0. Suppose the proportion of households
that identify with their religion falls due to another shock (e.g. status or salience changes). This
would lead households to abstain less from their religious taboo goods and prices should rise
as we move up the supply curve.45 Thus we would observe price increases for one taboo good
associated with lower abstention from other taboo goods, not higher as we find.
    Following the logic of Hausman (1996), we also instrument prices with the price in a nearby
village as in Atkin (2013). For the instrument to be valid, we require that supply shocks are
correlated spatially within districts (driving the correlation between nearby village prices) but
idiosyncratic village tastes are not. Atkin (2013) provides evidence that supports these assump-
tions for food products in India. Appendix Table E.1 reports these IV results. The first stages are
strong, the IV estimates are close to the OLS ones, and we cannot reject either set of hypotheses.
   45
      As long, of course, as these consumption changes dominate any movements in the opposite direction by mem-
bers of other religions. Indeed, as noted above, conflict-induced abstention does lower prices (Appendix Table B.3.9).




                                                         35
 5      An Almost Ideal Demand System with Identity Choice
The results in the previous section suggest that the tendency of Indian households to follow the
prescribed behavior of their religious or ethnic group depends on several features of their social
and economic environment: salience of group membership, group status, and prices. However,
our analysis has so far focused on a rather narrow set of goods, where religiously or ethnically
prescribed behavior is clearly documented in scriptures and historical texts. But social identity
may affect a household’s consumption of many other goods, even if they are not strict taboos or
the most well-known ethnic staples. In this section we therefore pursue an analysis of the en-
tire food-consumption bundle. We do not impose any assumption on which goods are ‘identity
goods’ and which are not. Nor do we assume ex-ante what the ‘appropriate’ level of consump-
tion of a particular good for a particular group is. Rather, we take the prototypical bundle to be
the observed mean bundle in the group. This is consistent with a long line of research show-
ing that individuals tend to mimic the observed prevalent behavior of other members of their
group—what is known in psychology as the descriptive norm (Cialdini et al. 1990, see Goldstein
et al. 2008 or Allcott 2011 for evidence of causal effects of descriptive norms on behavior).
      Furthermore, we now use a specification that combines all three factors that can shape iden-
tification choices—salience, status and costs—and explicitly takes into account the choice be-
tween religious and ethnic identity. This allows us to examine the marginal importance of each
of the three factors, taking into account that they may be correlated. We must, however, be care-
ful in interpreting the relative importance of the three factors since the total effect of changing
a particular factor may come in part through changing another one. For example, Mitra and
Ray (2014) argue that changes in group status can affect inter-group violence. Similarly, political
moves that increase the price of beef may also increase religious salience. Finally, by formalizing
the choice between a household’s ethnic and religious identities, we generate additional testable
implications of the model and can quantify changes in identity choices over our study period.

5.1     A Structural Model of Identity
Consider a household h belonging to two groups, Gh = {r, s}, where r denotes the household’s
religious group and s denotes the household’s ethnic group. To simplify notation, we use generic
r and s with the understanding that these groups are h-specific. Thus, for a Muslim Gujarati
household, xr is the prototypical Muslim bundle, and xs is the prototypical Gujarati bundle.
      The indirect utility of household h that identifies with group J ∈ Gh is:

                     VhJ (p, mh , yJ , κhJ ; xJ ) = δ1 v(p, mh ; xJ ) + δ2 yJ + δ3 κhJ + ξhJ ,   (7)


                                                        36
where v(· ) is an AIDS indirect utility function (made explicit below). Consistent with Definition
1, identifying with group J means utility is also affected by the status of group J, yJ , and by the
group-specific salience shifter κhJ . Finally, ξhJ is an idiosyncratic utility shifter.
      We adapt the AIDS indirect utility, defined over the vector of prices p and income mh , to take
into account the prototypical consumption bundle of group J, given by the vector xJ :

                                                                  ln mh − ln aJ (p)
                                         v(p, mh ; xJ ) =                              ,                                  (8)
                                                                         Πi pβi i
                            P                   1   P P                              P
where ln aJ (p) = a0 +        i xiJ   ln pi +   2    i    k   γik ln pi ln pk and      i xiJ    = 1. Note that, other things
equal, a household that identifies with group J is worse off when xJ is more expensive. Solving
for the budget share xhiJ of good i for household h that identifies with group J we obtain:
                                                         X                           mh
                                      xhiJ = xiJ +             γik ln pk + βi ln(          ).                             (9)
                                                         k
                                                                                    aJ (p)

      The observed budget share xhi will depend on the household’s chosen identity. From As-
sumption 1, the household chooses its religious identity if Vhr > Vhs and its ethnic identity if
Vhs ≥ Vhr .46 Therefore, defining x iJ ≡ xiJ − βi
                                                                 P
                                  g                                  i xiJ   ln pi , the observed budget share is:
                                                    X                                           1 XX
  xhi = xf
         is + (x
               fir − x
                     f is )1[Vhr > Vhs ] +               γik ln pk + βi (ln mh − a0 −                 γik ln pi ln pk ). (10)
                                                     k
                                                                                                2 i k

From equations (7) and (8), the difference in utilities is:

                                           − xis ) ln pi
                                P
                                  i (xir
            Vhr − Vhs = −δ1 (                                ) + δ2 (yr − ys ) + δ3 (κhr − κhs ) + (ξhr − ξhs ).        (11)
                                         Πi pβi i

Religious identity is more appealing when its prototypical bundle is relatively cheap (i.e.
P
  i xir   ln pi is relatively small), or when either its status or salience is relatively high.

5.2       Estimating the Model
Given the discrete choice between identities, the standard way to proceed is to assume that the
ξhJ terms are i.i.d. extreme value (type I). The probability of choosing religious identity r is then:
                                                                                                               !
                                                              − xis ) ln pi
                                                 P
                                                    i (xir
              P rob(Vhr > Vhs ) = F        −δ1                                + δ2 (yr − ys ) + δ3 (κhr − κhs ) ,       (12)
                                                          Πi pβi i
                      1
where F (x) =       1+e−x   is the standard logistic function. When averaging over many households
of the same type and location, this probability becomes a proportion.47 We obtain a non-linear
    46
    To break ties we assume the household identifies ethnically in case of indifference.
    47
    As noted in Section 2, we will not be able to empirically distinguish between a model where households make a
binary choice between identities and one where households choose the relative weights they place on each.




                                                                 37
demand system by substituting this probability for the function 1[Vhr > Vhs ] in equation (10).
    While elegant, the highly non-linear nature of such a demand system and the large number
of unknowns make it infeasible to estimate. Instead, we turn to a local linear approximation by
making the assumption that ξhr − ξhs is distributed uniformly with mean zero and a range equal
to 1.PThen the change in proportion of households of religion r simply equals the change in
            (xir −xis ) ln pi
−δ1     i
                   β            + δ2 (yr − ys ) + δ3 (κhr − κhs ). This motivates running the linear specification:
              Πi pi i
                                                                                                             !
                                                  X
                    xhi = (xir − xis ) −η1            (xir − xis ) ln pi + η2 (yr − ys ) + η3 (κhr − κhs )              (13)
                                                  i
                                                  X                             X
                                        + xis +       γik ln pk + βi (ln mh −        xis ln pi ) + F Es + εhi ,
                                                  k                              i

where in addition to linearizing P rob(Vhr > Vhs ), we follow Deaton and Muellbauer (1980) by
replacing the non-linear price index ln as (p) with a Stone price index, here using state-level av-
erage budget shares and village-level prices.48 As discussed earlier in this section, we proxy the
xiJ by the prototypical bundles we observe in these populations in the data (excluding own vil-
lage).49 Intuitively, reductions in the cost of my religious bundle relative to my ethnic bundle, or
increases in the relative status or salience of my religious identity, push me closer to consuming
the typical bundle of my religious group and further away from that of my ethnic group.
    Estimating equation (13) is useful for two reasons. First, it can be interpreted as a linear
approximation of equation (10) under some simplifying assumptions. Thus, the estimates will
allow us to consider counterfactual scenarios as well as to quantify the relative importance of
the three factors in shifting identity patterns. Second, equation (13) also provides a direct as-
sessment of how the factors we explored in Section 4 alter the proximity between a household’s
consumption of good i and the prototypical consumption of that good in group J. For example,
η2 > 0 indicates that as the status of one’s religious group increases relative to that of one’s eth-
    48
       The one term absent from equation P     (13) is the budget share changes that result from different income effect
magnitudes under the two identities, P −βi i (xir − xis ) ln pi P rob(Vhr > Vhs ). We assume that these differences are
negligible, or at least that cov[βi i (xir − xis ), (xir − xis )] ≈ 0 so that our coefficients of interest are unbiased. Simi-
larly, as we do not include the denominator Πi pβi i in the cost effect, η1 should be interpreted as approximately equal
to δ1 E[1/Πi pβi i ].P
                     Of course, if preferences
                                     P P are homothetic,     P neither of these issues arises. We apply the approximation
ln as (p) ≡ a0 + i xis ln pi + 12 i k γik ln pi ln pk ≈ i xis ln pi , where following Moschini (1995) we use average
budget shares in the Stone price index, not household-specific ones, here taking averages over members of group s
which are simply the prototypical bundles xis as we note below.
    49
       Specifically, we assume that xJ is the mean vector of budget shares in group J. To compute this reference con-
sumption for each household, we keep all observations except those in h’s village. The prototypical consumption
of the religious group is computed at the national level, while the prototypical ethnic bundle is simply the average
bundle among the relevant ethnicity (either the state or linguistic group). Although relatively limited in India (see
Atkin (2016)), inter-state migration may bias our ethnic bundle estimates. To assess the likely size of the bias, Ap-
pendix Table I.1 reproduces our cross section analysis for the 43rd round—the only round containing state of birth
information matched to consumption. Estimated coefficients are very similar when excluding interstate migrants.




                                                                 38
nic group, consumption moves closer to one’s religious bundle than to one’s ethnic bundle. But
in contrast to Section 4, we now evaluate the full consumption basket, recovering prototypical
bundles from the data rather than the scriptures, while jointly considering all three forces.
    We run this specification using the same sample and combinations of fixed effects as in Sec-
                                                                                       i (xir −xis ) ln pi , we use the cost
                                                                                  P
tion 4, but now we include all 124 food items. For the cost terms
                                                                                           P xjr                x
                                                                                                     ln pj − P js x ln pj ),
                                                                                P
of the two identity bundles leaving out the cost of good i itself,                  j6=i (       x
                                                                                             j6=i jr            j6=i js
to minimize the worry that own-price effects drive these results. Once again, we proxy status
shocks yr − ys with the Bartik version of the occupational-returns-based instruments we intro-
                                                    −
                            P                           P
duced in Section 4.3,         o log wod− t θodrt0       o log wod− t θodst0 .   Finally, for salience shocks we rely
on the data concerning Hindu-Muslim violence introduced in Section 4.1.
    Table 7, columns 1-3, present the results using our primary ethnicity measure, the state of
residence of the household.50 As before, all columns control for local supply and demand con-
ditions via δidt and δrdt fixed effects. Column 2 includes cross-sectional fixed effects δirst that deal
with temporal shocks to adherence at the good-religion-ethnicity level. Column 3 includes panel
fixed effects δirsdq that accommodate persistent deviations in good-religion-ethnicity-district-
season consumption patterns. We refer the reader to discussions in Sections 4.1-4.4 regarding
threats to identification for each of the three shocks. We cluster standard errors at the rdt level.
    In both the cross-sectional fixed effect specification in column 2 of Table 7, and in our pre-
ferred panel specification in column 3, we find that relative cost, relative status and religious
conflict shocks all have the expected signs and are significant at the 5 percent level or lower.51
These results generalize our previous findings concerning taboo goods. They support the notion
that identity is fungible, and that choices react systematically to these three forces. We discuss
magnitudes in Section 6 where, among other things, we quantify the net changes in identity
driven by each of the three forces over our sample period.
    The Appendix contains several additional results. Appendix Table I.3 relaxes the symmetry
implicit in equation (13)—that a shock moves the household as far away from one identity’s
prescribed behavior as it does towards the other identity’s prescribed behavior. More precisely,
   50
                                                        P
       Table 7 does not include the cross-price terms, k6=i γik ln pk , as they are infeasible to estimate for 124 foods in
a sample with 34 millions observations. To alleviate the concern that cross-price terms may affect our results, we first
impose that cross-price effects for good i are common within each of the thirteen food categories such as cereals or
fruits in the NSS surveys (see Appendix Table A.1) and aggregate category prices using a Stone price index. We then
draw a random sample of half the population within religion-district-time cells and estimate equation (13) on the
restricted sample both with and without cross-price terms. Appendix Table I.2 shows that the results with cross-price
terms are qualitatively and quantitatively similar, both to the half-sample results without cross-price terms and to
our full-sample baseline in Table 7.
    51
       The linear approximation appears to be reasonable despite 79 percent of budget shares being zero across our
124 goods. Three quarters of predicted values lie between 0 and 1, and the inadmissible values are all negative and
typically tiny (a median of -0.0003).



                                                            39
            Table 7: Linear Approximation of Identity Choice with Cost, Status and Conflict
                                                                         LHS Variable: Share Spent on Good i
                                                           Ethnicity as State                                 Ethnicity as Language
                                                 (1)              (2)                 (3)             (4)               (5)                 (6)
                                              Baseline       Cross-section           Panel         Baseline        Cross-section           Panel
 (xir − xis ) × (costr − costs )              -0.0346          -0.696∗∗∗           -0.624∗∗∗       -0.249∗∗∗         -0.915∗∗∗           -0.801∗∗∗
                                              (0.0535)         (0.0967)            (0.0868)        (0.0583)           (0.112)            (0.0989)

 (xir − xis ) × (statusr − statuss )          0.479∗∗∗           0.246∗∗∗          0.234∗∗∗         0.480∗∗∗           0.226∗∗∗          0.178∗∗∗
                                              (0.0264)           (0.0265)          (0.0371)         (0.0289)           (0.0311)          (0.0432)

 (xir − xis ) × conf lictr                    0.549∗∗∗          0.0818∗∗            0.110∗∗        0.519∗∗∗            0.0439           0.0700∗
                                              (0.0419)          (0.0335)           (0.0435)        (0.0384)           (0.0305)          (0.0393)
 Observations                                33,763,092        33,755,156         33,736,680      33,763,092         33,754,908        33,736,680
 Adjusted R2                                   0.767              0.773              0.778          0.767               0.773            0.778
 log prices and total expenditure                Yes               Yes                Yes             Yes                Yes               Yes
 prod*dist*round*quarter                         Yes               Yes                Yes             Yes                Yes               Yes
 relig*dist*round*quarter                        Yes               Yes                Yes             Yes                Yes               Yes
 relig*state*prod*round*quarter                  No                Yes                No              No                 No                No
 relig*state*prod*dist*quarter                   No                No                 Yes             No                 No                No
 relig*lang*prod*round*quarter                   No                No                 No              No                 Yes               No
 relig*lang*prod*dist*quarter                    No                No                 No              No                 No                Yes
 Notes: Dependent variable is the share spent on good i in total food expenditure. xir − xis is the difference between prototypical religious and
ethnic budget shares spent on good i. costr − costs is the difference in religious and ethnic Stone price indexes leaving out the cost of good i.
statusr −statuss is the difference between religious and ethnic status measured by national returns to the initial local occupational mix of religion
and ethnicity. conf lictr is an indicator for at least one occurrence of Hindu-Muslim conflict in the district in the quarter in which the household is
surveyed or in the preceding two quarters. Columns 4-6 define ethnicity as the set of districts where the most-commonly-spoken mother tongue
is the same based on the 2001 Census of India. Protypical ethnic bundles and the cost of these bundles are recalculated accordingly. Columns
1 and 4 include the baseline fixed effects, columns 2 and 5 add the fixed effects for cross-sectional identification and columns 3 and 6 for panel
identification. Robust standard errors clustered at religion-district-round-quarter in parentheses. Regressions weighted by survey population
weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.



we evaluate our assumption that households make a choice between their religious and eth-
nic identity by separately interacting xir and xis with each of the three shocks, and examining
whether the coefficients on the xir and xis interactions are of similar magnitudes but oppo-
site signs. We find reasonable support for the symmetry imposed by our model with the coef-
ficients on all three xir interactions of opposite signs to the coefficients on the xis interactions
and broadly similar in magnitude. Appendix Table I.4 allows the impacts of each of the three
shocks to vary by the religion of the household. The heterogeneity is rather limited, but upper-
caste Hindus appear to be somewhat more sensitive to status and Muslims are potentially more
sensitive to conflict.
    Columns 4-6 of Table 7 present the results using our linguistic definition of ethnicity—the set
of districts in which the most-commonly-spoken mother tongue is the same. This implies new
prototypical ethnic bundles, as well as new local bundle costs. The results are qualitatively sim-
ilar although there is some change in relative magnitudes (the estimated cost effects are some-
what stronger using this alternative measure, and the conflict effects somewhat weaker).
    In summary, households move closer to their religious bundle and further away from their


                                                                         40
ethnic bundle: as their ethnic bundle becomes relatively more expensive; as the relative status
of their religious group increases; and following religious conflict involving their religious group.


 6      Counterfactuals and Implications
In this section, we explore the implications of our demand-system estimates for changes in iden-
tity, voting for religious and ethnic parties, health, and welfare over our sample period. This
exercise serves two purposes. First, we quantify the absolute and relative importance of the
three drivers of identity choice: economic cost, status, and salience. Second, the period 1987-
2000 that our data span was a time of great change in India. The economic reforms that began
in 1991 moved India towards a market economy, liberalized trade and dismantled the “license
Raj”. These reforms led to significant changes in prices as well as in occupational returns. The
relationships between these once-in-a-generation events and identity choices are of obvious in-
terest and may have effects across multiple domains, including politics, health, and welfare.

6.1     Changes in Identity, 1987-2000
We first explore the changes in identity induced by changes in cost, status and salience. Drawing
on the local linear approximation in equation (13), the change in the proportion of households
in a religion-ethnicity-district cell that identifies with their religion, dPr , approximately equals
                                  X
                    dPr ≈ −η1 d       (xir − xis ) ln pi + η2 d(yr − ys ) + η3 d(κhr − κhs ).
                                  i

Thus we can use the η estimates from Table 7 and combine them with the long changes in cost,
status and salience (i.e. conflict) over the 1987-2000 period to calculate the (net) change in the
proportion of households that identify with their religion. Note that such an exercise abstracts
from potential general equilibrium effects on prices. As discussed in Section 4.4, η1 is likely bi-
ased towards zero due to positive shocks to a particular identity raising the prices of that group’s
bundle. Relatedly, the long changes in costs we feed into the counterfactual are probably smaller
than the underlying costs changes absent this GE feedback. Given these forces, our counterfac-
tuals likely underestimate the magnitude of the costs channel.
      Figure 3 presents the distributions of these changes in proportions for each district-religion
cell, both for the total change and for each of the three components. Three features stand out.
First, identity changes over this period were substantial. This is shown by the significant mass
away from zero in the lower right panel of Figure 3. District-religion cells contributing to the
mass to the left of zero are those where there was an increase in the proportion of households
identifying with their ethnicity (with the proportion changing identity denoted on the x-axis).


                                                       41
Figure 3: Proportion of Population Changing Identity across District-Religion Cells, 1987-2000
               Status Changes 1987-2000                               Cost Changes 1987-2000




 0.3     0.2       0.1     0      0.1       0.2     0.3 0.3     0.2      0.1     0       0.1      0.2     0.3
               Conflict Changes 1987-2000                             Total Changes 1987-2000




 0.3     0.2       0.1     0      0.1       0.2     0.3 0.3     0.2      0.1     0       0.1      0.2     0.3

        Change in Proportion Identifying with Ethnicity       Change in Proportion Identifying with Religion




Cells contributing mass to the right saw increases in the proportion of households identifying
with their religion. For the most affected district-religion cells (those in the 5 percent tail at
either end of the distribution), more than ten percent of households switched identity. Sec-
ond, there is substantial heterogeneity across district-religion cells. Over this period there were
more cells where households were shifting from their religious to ethnic identity than vice versa.
But on average there was a net movement of 0.3 percent of the population in the other direc-
tion—from ethnic to religious identity—as cells moving in this direction had more households
shifting identity. Appendix Figure J.1 breaks out these changes by religious group, aggregating
over all districts using population weights. Interestingly, while the general movement among
upper-caste Hindus in this period was towards a religious identity, Muslims tended to move to-
wards their ethnic identity.
   But perhaps the most unexpected result concerns the relative importance of the three forces.
While we have shown that salience shocks due to conflict have a significant effect on identi-
fication decisions (consistent with previous literature and common narratives), quantitatively,


                                                     42
prices and status have much larger impacts. The muted effects of conflict are less surprising
when realizing that our conflict shocks are both relatively uncommon and temporary, with the
effects on identity fading out six to nine months after the shock. In contrast, changes in prices
and occupational returns are ubiquitous and are much more persistent. Thus, when looking at
changes in identity over a decade or more, conflict only plays a substantial role if there were
shocks in that location at the start or end of the period.52 Furthermore, we are only identifying
the local effect of conflict. Thus, our estimates do not pick up the possibility that, for example,
Hindu-Muslim conflict in northern India affects identification choices in the south.
      The fact that the economic costs due to price changes have such large impacts is striking
given that this channel has been largely overlooked in both public discussion and scholarly
work. Indeed, it offers a new perspective on recent and much-discussed efforts by the Hindu-
nationalist BJP party to raise the effective price of beef through bans and legislation.53

6.2     Voting and Identity Change, 1987-2000
We now explore whether these identity changes, derived from household consumption deci-
sions, are associated with an alternative proxy for identity choices—changes in voting behavior.
A word of caution: voting is driven by many factors other than identity, and many people vote
for parties that are not running on an ethnic or religious agenda. Furthermore, identity shifters,
such as changes in prices and occupational returns, may affect voting via non-identity channels.
Nonetheless, since identity is often invoked as an important factor determining voter behavior,
especially given the rise of the Hindu nationalist vote in recent decades, a positive association
serves as a useful check on our revealed preference approach to uncovering identity choices.
      Our data on vote shares for religious versus ethnic parties comes from the Indian State As-
sembly Election and Candidates Database (Jensenius and Verniers 2017). We classify parties as
religious or ethnic based on both the party manifesto and media reports on the party’s political
philosophy and traditional support base. For ethnic parties we also use a second classification,
obtained from Election Commission reports which classify certain parties as “State Parties”. Of
a total of 457 parties listed in the database for the relevant years, we classify 6 as religious parties
and 30 as ethnic parties, and the Election Commission classifies 49 as State Parties (29 of which
overlap with our ethnic party classification). Note that many parties are neither ethnic nor re-
ligious according to this classification, including the Indian National Congress Party, which ac-
counts for around one third of the total state assembly votes in our sample period. To compute
   52
      Note that a similar conclusion holds if we just focus on the three states—Gujarat, Maharashtra and Uttar
Pradesh—where most of the conflicts occurred (see Appendix Figure J.2).
   53
      See, for example, https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/11/world/asia/india-cows-slaughter-beef-leather-hindu-
supreme-court-ban.html for coverage of the government’s attempted ban on cow slaughter.


                                                     43
                                                      Figure 4: Recovered Identity Changes and Changes in Vote Shares, 1987-2000
                                               .2
  Change in Religious versus Ethnic Vote Share
       -.2       -.1       0
                         -.3         .1




                                                    -.2                 -.1                        0                       .1         .2
                                                                    Change in Proportion Identifying with Religion versus Ethnicity

Notes: Binned scatter-plot of changes in religious versus ethnic vote shares on changes in proportion of households
in a district-religion cell that identify with their religion. Linear regression line shown (slope = 0.397, s.e. = 0.102).


vote shares for a given identity at the district-identity-round level, we aggregate constituencies
up to the district level and use the state assembly election closest to each NSS round.54 Appendix
K provides further details on our classifications and Appendix Table K.3 provides descriptive
statistics for vote shares by identity group and round.
                   Figure 4 shows a binned scatter-plot of vote shares on identity changes. On the x-axis we
plot the net change between 1987-2000 in the proportion of households in a district-religion
cell that identify with their religion, calculated from our consumption data in Section 6.1 above.
On the y-axis we plot the change in the difference between the religious and ethnic vote shares
in that cell over the same time period. As we saw in Figure 3, many district-religion cells had
small net changes in household identification. However, in those cells where a significant share
of households switch to identify with their religion (dPrd > 0), the vote share of the religious
parties relative to ethnic parties also tends to increase. Similarly, the ethnic vote share tends to
increase relative to the religious in cells where more households identify ethnically (dPrd < 0).
                   Table 8 explores this relationship in more detail. Column 1 regresses the change in the re-
ligious versus ethnic vote share between 1987-2000 on the estimated change in the proportion
          54
                         State Assembly elections are organized every five years and are not held at the same time across India.



                                                                                              44
                                Table 8: Identity Changes and Vote Shares, 1987-2000
                                                                     LHS Variable: Change in Vote Shares, 1987-2000
                                                        Religious vs. Ethnic               Religious             Ethnic                State
                                                          (1)             (2)                 (3)                  (4)                  (5)
 change in proportion religiousrd                    0.397∗∗∗                               0.113∗
                                                     (0.102)                               (0.0581)

 change in costr - costs                                               -0.145∗
                                                                      (0.0748)

 change in statusr - statuss                                           -0.203
                                                                       (0.175)

 change in conflictr                                                  0.0931∗∗∗
                                                                      (0.0150)

 change in proportion religiousd                                                                                -0.321∗∗            -0.566∗∗∗
                                                                                                                 (0.127)             (0.176)
 Observations                                           729              729                  795                  334                 358
 Adjusted R2                                           0.019            0.056                0.004                0.016               0.025
 Notes: Dependent variable in columns 1-2 is the double difference in vote share for religious parties versus ethnic parties between 1987 and
2000 by district-religion. Dependent variable in column 3 is the difference in vote share for religious parties by district-religion over the period.
Dependent variable in columns 4-5 is the difference in vote share for ethnic parties (two definitions) by district over the period. Vote shares
are computed for State Assembly elections closest to the 1987-1988 and 1999-2000 NSS rounds. See text for a detailed description of the party
categorization. Change in proportion religious is the recovered change in proportion identifing with religion versus ethnicity over the period as
revealed by food consumption. Differences in costs, status and conflict are long differences between the 1987-1988 and 1999-2000 NSS rounds
within district-religion-ethnicity cells. Cost is the mean cost in the district of the entire prototypical bundle. Status is the difference between
religious and ethnic status measured by national returns to the initial local occupational mix of religion and ethnicity. Regressions weighted by
survey population weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.



religious from Section 6.1. A 10 pp increase in the share of households who identify religiously
rather than ethnically is associated with a 4 pp increase in the vote share of religious versus eth-
nic parties in that district-religion cell (significant at the 1 percent level).
    Column 2 explores the ‘reduced-form’ relationship between vote shares and the three iden-
tity shifters that we have been exploring. Cells in which the prototypical religious bundle became
more expensive relative to the prototypical ethnic bundle exhibit a reduction in the religious vote
share relative to the ethnic vote share. Consistent with Iyer and Shrivastava (2018), increased re-
ligious conflict is associated with an increase in the vote share of religious versus ethnic parties.
The association with status changes is statistically insignificant.
    The last three columns show the association between recovered identity changes and the
change in the religious vote share (column 3), and with the change in the ethnic vote share
measured either using our classification (column 4) or the classification of “State Parties” in the
Election Commission reports (column 5).55 In all three specifications, the correlation is in the
expected direction and is particularly strong for the vote share of ethnic/state parties.
    Taken together, the association between our revealed preference measures and voting-based
   55
   Notice that for the ethnic vote share regressions, there is now only one observation per district. Hence the
number of observations drops and “change in proportion religious” refers to all religions in the district.



                                                                        45
measures corroborates the view that identity changes are important for explaining shifts in vot-
ing behavior. More generally, food consumption patterns might be useful for studying other
identity-driven behaviors like occupational choice or female labor force participation. Addi-
tionally, this exercise provides some reassurance that our measures are uncovering changes in
identity choices, particularly since voting is done in private and so is less likely to merely reflect
social pressure, social connections and signaling to others.

6.3     Effects of Identity Changes on Health 1987-2000
We next turn to documenting the impacts of identity changes on an easily measurable proxy for
health: caloric intake. During this period, around half of Indian children were malnourished,
and so changes in caloric intake due to changing identity choices have clear health implica-
tions.56 The change in caloric intake per capita can be calculated for each religion-district cell
by taking the change in identity choices and multiplying by the difference in the caloric intake
of households under their two possible identities:

                                                              f oodexph
                       dCaloriesih ≈ calories per kg i ×                (xir − xis )dPr .
                                                                  pih

The left panel of Figure 5 plots the distribution of the difference in caloric intake assuming ev-
eryone starts from their ethnic identity and switches to their religious one. The potential for
caloric gains from identity changes is substantial, with possible gains of 20 percent or more at
the 5 percent tails of the distribution. By and large, identifying with one’s religion rather than
with one’s ethnicity tends to reduce caloric intake (the distribution is left-skewed). This is be-
cause in general the ethnic bundle is relatively less expensive at local prices than the religious
one (see Atkin 2013 for a model of habit formation that generates this pattern due to developing
a taste for comparative-advantage foods that are locally inexpensive).
      The right panel of Figure 5 plots the distribution of realized caloric gains and losses due to
identity changes over this period. As with the choices themselves, the distribution is reason-
ably symmetric. On average, caloric consumption declined by 1.4 percent due to identity shifts.
Note that if this average comes from a binary identity choice, only a fraction of households are
switching identity but those few that are lose or gain many more calories—the magnitudes in
the left panel. Either way, identity choices have real ramifications in terms of calories and hence
health. To put these magnitudes in context, 1.4 percent is equal to the average decline in caloric
intake per capita between 1987 and 2000 in our Indian sample. This decline in the face of rising
real incomes has spawned much discussion (e.g. Deaton and Drèze 2009). Our findings suggest
  56
     The 1992/93 NFHS finds that 52.0 percent of children aged 0-4 were stunted (more than 2 s.d. below the median
WHO height-for-age) and 53.4 percent were underweight (more than 2 s.d. below the median weight-for-age).


                                                       46
                                          Figure 5: Caloric Gains from Identity Changes, 1987-2000
               Potential Caloric Gain/Loss From Identfying With Religion                                     Realized Caloric Gain/Loss Due To Identity Changes




                                                                                                 150
          4
          3




                                                                                                 100
                                                                                       Density
Density
          2




                                                                                                 50
          1
          0




                                                                                                 0
              -.5              -.25              0               .25              .5                   -.1             -.05              0                .05             .1
                     Potential Caloric Gain/Loss (Fraction of Current Calories)                               Realized Caloric Gain/Loss (Fraction of Current Calories)




              identity changes may have played a role.

              6.4     Effects of Identity Changes on Welfare 1987-2000
              Finally, if we take our conceptual framework literally, we can say something about the addi-
              tional welfare gains made possible by the fungibility of identity. In our framework, households
              are more flexible than consumer theory typically assumes, as they have an additional means to
              respond to shocks to their environment. By switching identity, households are essentially able
              to change the set of parameters that enter their (indirect) utility function VhJ (p, mh , yJ , κhJ ; xJ ),
              which can mitigate adverse price or status shocks. For example, if there is a shock that substan-
              tially raises the price of an important ethnic good, shifting into your religious identity amelio-
              rates the resulting welfare loss.
                    We can calculate the change in compensating variation (CV) due to ability to shift identity.
              To do so, first we implicitly define zJJ 0 as the proportional increase in income required in post-
              shock period 1 under identity J 0 to maintain the utility level of period 0 under identity J:

                                          VhJ 0 (p1 , m1 zJJ 0 , yJ 0 1 , κhJ 0 1 ; xJ 0 ) = VhJ (p0 , m0 , yJ0 , κhJ0 ; xJ ).

              Our interest is to compare zJJ 0 to the (standard) compensating variation zJJ which obtains when
              identities are rigid. Substituting the indirect utility function from equation (7) and solving for
              ln zJJ 0 , it is straightforward to show that the log difference in the CV from maintaining the initial



                                                                                  47
         Figure 6: Realized Compensating Variation Gains from Identity Changes, 1987-2000




       0.05                                                                 0                                                                            0.05

                                     Realized CV Gain Moving to Ethnic Identity (Proportional Increase)
                                     Realized CV Gain Moving to Religious Identity (Proportional Increase)




identity compared to switching identity is:

                                     X                                        Πi pβi1i
              ln zJJ − ln zJJ 0 =          (xiJ − xiJ 0 ) ln pi1 −                     (δ2 (yJ1 − yJ 0 1 ) + δ3 (κJ1 − κJ 0 1 )).                        (14)
                                       i
                                                                               δ1

To see the intuition, suppose status and salience are equal across identity groups. In this case,
the potential CV gain from being able to switch identities is essentially the difference in the
(post-shock) cost of the two prototypical bundles.
   We evaluate equation (14) using the estimated ηs from the linear approximation above.57
We then multiply the estimated (ln zss − ln zsr ) by positive values of dPr , and (ln zrr − ln zrs ) by
negative values of dPr to obtain the distribution of these additional welfare gains made possible
due to the fungibility of identity. Figure 6 plots this distribution. For households in religion-
district cells that are on average moving towards their ethnic identity, there is a long tail with 5
percent of cells enjoying a proportional increase in their compensating variation of more than
0.03 and an increase of 0.01 for cells moving towards their religious identity. As above, these
cell-level averages are small as only a fraction of households switch. Appendix Figure J.4 shows
numbers many times larger if all households in the cell change identity. Such welfare gains are
substantial. By changing the norms they follow in the face of adverse shocks, households can
better cope with their new economic environment.
  57
                                                   (xiJ − xiJ 0 ) ln pi1 − Πi pβi1i E[      1
                                                                                                    ]( ηη12 (yJ1 − yJ 0 1 ) +   η3
                                           P
       Specifically, ln zJJ − ln zJJ 0 ≈       i                                                β                               η1
                                                                                                                                   (κJ1   − κJ 0 1 )).
                                                                                         Πi pi i




                                                                         48
 7     Conclusions
Recent political developments in both the developed and developing worlds have made more
urgent the need to understand whether social identities are fungible, how they are chosen, and
what the implications of those choices are. However, understanding the nature and implica-
tions of identity is difficult since identity choices are not directly observable. But consumption
choices are observable and affected by norms and taboos of groups people identify with. This
paper draws on this insight to explore how Indian households choose between their religious
and ethnic identities.
     We find that the consumption of prominent identity goods responds systematically to sev-
eral forces, which we capture through a simple theoretical framework. Two of these forces fea-
ture prominently in prior social-identity research—group status and group salience, with the
latter proxied here by inter-group tensions. Consistent with economic theory, revealed iden-
tity choices also respond to a third, less studied, force: the cost of identifying with a group. To
understand the relative magnitudes of these forces, we propose and estimate an Almost Ideal
Demand System that incorporates endogenous identity choice. The estimates suggest that eco-
nomic forces loom large, with changes in economic costs leading to the largest identity shifts
over the period spanning India’s 1991 economic reforms.
     More broadly, our revealed preference approach draws on consumption survey data that are
widely available for many countries and time periods. It can therefore be fruitfully used in other
contexts to provide a deeper understanding of both identity choice and its ramifications not only
for voting but also for other identity-driven behaviors like schooling, occupational choice and
female labor force participation.


 References
Abdelal, R., Y.M. Herrera, A.I. Johnston, and R. McDermott, Measuring Identity: A Guide for Social
  Scientists, Cambridge, New York: Cambridge University Press, 2009.

Aghion, P., R. Burgess, S. J. Redding, and F. Zilibotti, “The Unequal Effects of Liberalization: Ev-
  idence from Dismantling the License Raj in India,” American Economic Review, September
  2008, 98 (4), 1397–1412.

Akerlof, G. and R.E. Kranton, “Economics and Identity,” Q.J.E., 2000, 115 (3), 715–753.

Alesina, A. and E. La Ferrara, “Ethnic Diversity and Economic Performance,” J. Econ. Literature,
  2005, 43 (3), 762–800.

Allcott, H., “Social Norms and Energy Conservation,” J. Pub. Econ., 2011, 95 (9-10), 1082–1095.



                                                49
Appadurai, A., “How to Make a National Cuisine: Cookbooks in Contemporary India,” Compar-
  ative Studies in Society and History, 1988, 30 (1), 3–24.

Atkin, D., “Trade, Tastes, and Nutrition in India,” A.E.R., 2013, 103 (5), 1629–63.

  , “The Caloric Costs of Culture: Evidence from Indian Migrants,” A.E.R., 2016, 106 (4), 1144–81.

Bankert, Alexa, Leonie Huddy, and Martin Rosema, “Measuring partisanship as a social identity
  in multi-party systems,” Political behavior, 2017, 39 (1), 103–132.

Basu, A., N. Sarkar-Roy, and P.P. Majumder, “Genomic Reconstruction of the History of Extant
  Populations of India Reveals Five Distinct Ancestral Components and a Complex Structure,”
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2016, 113 (6), 1594–1599.

Bellet, C. and E. Colson-Sihra, “The Conspicuous Consumption of the Poor: Forgoing Calories
  for Aspirational Goods,” Working Paper, SSRN 3270814, 2018.

Benjamin, D.J., J.J. Choi, and A.J. Strickland, “Social Identity and Preferences,” A.E.R., 2010, 100
  (4), 1913–1928.

Bertrand, M. and E. Kamenica, “Coming apart? Cultural Distances in the United States over
  Time,” Working Paper no. 24771, NBER, Cambridge, MA, 2018.

  , , and J. Pan, “Gender identity and relative income within households,” The Quarterly Jour-
  nal of Economics, 2015, 130 (2), 571–614.

Bettencourt, B., K. Charlton, N. Dorr, and D.L. Hume, “Status Differences and In-group Bias:
  A Meta-analytic Examination of the Effects of Status Stability, Status Legitimacy, and Group
  Permeability,” Psychological Bulletin, 2001, 127 (4), 520.

Burnkrant, R.E. and A. Cousineau, “Informational and Normative Social Influence in Buyer Be-
  havior,” J. Consumer Res., 1975, 2 (3), 206–215.

Bursztyn, L., B. Ferman, S. Fiorin, M. Kanz, and G. Rao, “Status Goods: Experimental Evidence
  from Platinum Credit Cards,” Q.J.E., 2018, 133 (3), 1561–1595.

Chakravarti, A.K., “Regional Preference for Food: Some Aspects of Food Habit Patterns in India,”
  Canadian Geographer/Le Géographe Canadien, 1974, 18 (4), 395–410.

Chandra, K., Constructivist Theories of Ethnic Politics, New York: Oxford University Press, 2012.

Charles, K.K., E. Hurst, and N. Roussanov, “Conspicuous Consumption and Race,” Q.J.E., 2009,
  124 (2), 425–467.

Charness, Gary and Yan Chen, “Social Identity, Group Behavior and Teams,” Annual Review of
  Economics, 2020, 12.

Cialdini, R.B., R.R. Reno, and C.A. Kallgren, “A Focus Theory of Normative Conduct: Recycling
  the Concept of Norms to Reduce Littering in Public Places,” J. Personality and Soc. Psych., 1990,
  58 (6), 1015.

Cohn, A., E. Fehr, and M.A. Maréchal, “Business Culture and Dishonesty in the Banking Indus-
  try,” Nature, 2014, 516 (7529), 86.


                                                 50
  , M.A. Maréchal, and T. Noll, “Bad Boys: How Criminal Identity Salience Affects Rule Viola-
  tion,” Rev. Econ. Studies, 2015, 82 (4), 1289–1308.

Connelly, R., V. Gayle, and P.S. Lambert, “A Review of Occupation-based Social Classifications for
  Social Survey Research,” Methodological Innovations, 2016, 9, 2059799116638003.

Deaton, A. and J. Drèze, “Food and Nutrition in India: Facts and Interpretations,” Econ. and
 Polit. Weekly, 2009, pp. 42–65.

  and J. Muellbauer, “An Almost Ideal Demand System,” A.E.R., 1980, 70 (3), 312–326.

Depetris-Chauvin, E. and R. Durante, “Building Nations Through Shared Experiences:Evidence
 from African Football,” Working Paper, 2019.

Eifert, B., E. Miguel, and D.N. Posner, “Political Competition and Ethnic Identification in Africa,”
  American J. Poli. Sci., 2010, 54 (2), 494–510.

Ellemers, N., P. Kortekaas, and J.W. Ouwerkerk, “Self-categorisation, Commitment to the Group
  and Group Self-esteem as Related but Distinct Aspects of Social Identity,” European J. Soc.
  Psych., 1999, 29 (23), 371–389.

Falk, Armin, Anke Becker, Thomas Dohmen, Benjamin Enke, David Huffman, and Uwe Sunde,
  “Global evidence on economic preferences,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2018, 133
  (4), 1645–1692.

Fearon, J.D., “Ethnic and Cultural Diversity by Country,” J. Econ. Growth, 2003, 8 (2), 195–222.

Feld, J., N. Salamanca, and D.S. Hamermesh, “Endophilia or Exophobia: Beyond Discrimina-
  tion,” Econ. J., 2016, 126 (594), 1503–1527.

Gneezy, U., A. Imas, and K. Madarász, “Conscience Accounting: Emotion Dynamics and Social
 Behavior,” Management Sci., 2014, 60 (11), 2645–2658.

Goldstein, N.J., R.B. Cialdini, and V. Griskevicius, “A Room with a Viewpoint: Using Social Norms
 to Motivate Environmental Conservation in Hotels,” J. Consumer Res., 2008, 35 (3), 472–482.

Grossman, G. and E. Helpman, “Identity Politics and Trade Policy,” Review of Economic Studies,
  Forthcoming.

Gruber, J. and D.M. Hungerman, “The Church versus the Mall: What Happens when Religion
  Faces Increased Secular Competition?,” Q.J.E., 2008, 123 (2), 831–862.

Haslam, S Alexander and Naomi Ellemers, “Social identity in industrial and organizational psy-
 chology: Concepts, controversies and contributions,” International Review of Industrial and
 Organizational Psychology, 2005, 20 (1), 39–118.

Hausman, J.A., “Valuation of New Goods under Perfect and Imperfect Competition,” in Timo-
 thy F. Bresnahan and Robert J. Gordon, eds., The Economics of New Goods, Chicago: University
 of Chicago Press, 1996, pp. 207–248.

Heffetz, Ori, “A test of conspicuous consumption: Visibility and income elasticities,” Review of
 Economics and Statistics, 2011, 93 (4), 1101–1117.

Hjort, J., “Ethnic Divisions and Production in Firms,” Q.J.E., 2014, 129 (4), 1899–1946.

                                                51
Horowitz, Donald, Ethnic groups in conflict, University of California Press, 1985.

Iyer, Sriya and Anand Shrivastava, “Religious riots and electoral politics in India,” Journal of De-
  velopment Economics, 2018, 131, 104–122.

Jensenius, Francesca R and Gilles Verniers, “Studying Indian politics with large-scale data: In-
  dian election data 1961–today,” Studies in Indian Politics, 2017, 5 (2), 269–275.

Kalyvas, S.N., “Ethnic Defection in Civil War,” Compar. Polit. Stud., 2008, 41 (8), 1043–1068.

Kaufmann, C., “Possible and Impossible Solutions to Ethnic Civil Wars,” International Security,
  1996, 20 (4), 136–175.

Klor, Esteban F and Moses Shayo, “Social identity and preferences over redistribution,” Journal
  of Public Economics, 2010, 94 (3-4), 269–278.

Lavy, V., E. Sand, and M. Shayo, “Charity Begins at Home (and at School): Effects of Religion-
  Based Discrimination in Education,” Working Paper no. 24922, NBER, Cambridge, MA, 2018.

Manski, C.F. and J. Mayshar, “Private Incentives and Social Interactions: Fertility Puzzles in Is-
 rael,” J. European Econ. Assoc., 2003, 1 (1), 181–211.

Martin, L. A., S. Nataraj, and A. E. Harrison, “In with the Big, Out with the Small: Removing Small-
 Scale Reservations in India,” American Economic Review, February 2017, 107 (2), 354–86.

Mitra, A. and D. Ray, “Implications of an Economic Theory of Conflict: Hindu-Muslim Violence
 in India,” J. P.E., 2014, 122 (4), 719–765.

Moschini, Giancarlo, “Units of Measurement and the Stone Index in Demand System Estima-
 tion,” American J. Agricultural Econ., 1995, 77 (1), 63–68.

Nosofsky, R.M., “Similarity Scaling and Cognitive Process Models,” Annual Rev. Psych., 1992, 43
 (1), 25–53.

Parkin, F., Class Inequality and Political Order, London: MacGibbon & Kee, 1971.

Reich, D., K. Thangaraj, N. Patterson, A.L. Price, and L. Singh, “Reconstructing Indian Population
  History,” Nature 461, 2009, 461 (7263), 489.

Sambanis, N. and M. Shayo, “Social Identification and Ethnic Conflict,” American Polit. Sci. Rev.,
  2013, 107 (2), 294–325.

Sen, Colleen Taylor, Feasts and fasts: A history of food in India, Reaktion Books, 2014.

Shayo, M., “A Model of Social Identity with an Application to Political Economy: Nation, Class,
  and Redistribution,” American Polit. Sci. Rev., 2009, 103 (02), 147–174.

  , “Social Identity and Economic Policy,” Annual Review of Economics, 2020, 12.

   and A. Zussman, “Judicial Ingroup Bias in the Shadow of Terrorism,” Q.J.E., 2011, 126 (3),
  1447–1484.

   and , “Conflict and the Persistence of Ethnic Bias,” American Econ. J.: Appl. Econ., 2017, 9
  (4), 137–65.


                                                52
Smith, A., An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, London: Cadell and
  Strahan, 1776.

Somanathan, Rohini, “The Measurement and Mismeasurement of Social Difference,” Centre for
  Development Economics, 2018, Working Paper No. 294.

Srinivas, M.N., “A Note on Sanskritization and Westernization,” Far Eastern Quart., 1956, 15 (4),
  481–496.

Subramanian, S. and A. Deaton, “The Demand for Food and Calories,” J.P.E., 1996, 104 (1), 133–
  162.

Tajfel, H. and J.C. Turner, “An Integrative Theory of Intergroup Conflict,” in W.G. Austin and
  S. Worchel, eds., The Social Psychology of Intergroup Relations, Monterey, CA: Brooks-Cole,
  1979, chapter 3.

Topalova, P., “Factor Immobility and Regional Impacts of Trade Liberalization: Evidence on
  Poverty from India,” AEJ: Applied, October 2010, 2 (4), 1–41.

Turner, J.C., M.A. Hogg, P.J. Oakes, S.D. Reicher, and M.S. Wetherell, Rediscovering the Social
  Group: A Self-Categorization Theory, New York: Basil Blackwell, 1987.

Varshney, Ashutosh, “Ethnic conflict and civil society: India and beyond,” World politics, 2001,
  53 (3), 362–398.

Weiss, Y. and C. Fershtman, “Social Status and Economic Performance: A Survey,” European
 Econ. Rev., 1998, 42 (3-5), 801–820.

Wilkinson, S.I., Votes and Violence: Electoral Competition and Ethnic Riots in India, Cambridge,
 UK: Cambridge University Press, 2004.

Young, H Peyton, “The evolution of social norms,” Annual Review of Economics, 2015, 7 (1), 359–
  387.




                                               53
    How Do We Choose Our Identity?
    A Revealed Preference Approach Using Food Consumption
    David Atkin, Eve Colson-Sihra and Moses Shayo


    Online Appendices


    Contents

A Data                                                                                                 2

B Religious Conflict                                                                                   8
     B.1 Conditional Event Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    8
     B.2 Event Study: Other Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     B.3 Religious Conflict and Taboo Adherence Regressions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

C State Splits                                                                                         22

D Status Shocks                                                                                        26

E Cost of Identity                                                                                     31

F Regressions with Household Controls                                                                  32

G Regressions without NSS Round 50                                                                     36

H Baseline Taboo Regressions with Ovo-Pesco Vegetarianism                                              40

I    Linear Approximation of Identity Choice                                                           43

J    Counterfactuals                                                                                   48

K Ethnic and Religious Parties                                                                         51




                                                    1
A   Data


    Figure A.1: Fraction Population by Religious Groups in each District, all NSS Rounds




                                             2
                                     Figure A.2: Linguistic and Religious Fractionalizations by State
             .8

                                                                                                                           Arunachal
                                                West Bengal                                   Assam
                                  Kerala
                                                     Orissa                   Tripura                                  India
                                             Madhya Pradesh
                                           Rajasthan
                                                                               Daman & Diu
Religious Fractionalization
                        .6




                                                                            Chandigarh
                                     Uttar Pradesh
                                         Punjab                Bihar Jamu     & Kashmir
                                                             Maharashtra
                                                                       Sikkim
                                                              Karnataka Manipur
                                              Andhra
                                         TamilNadu   Pradesh
                                                 Gujarat                    Goa
                                              Pondicherry                                                          A&N Islands
                                               Haryana
                                             Himachal               Delhi
            .4




                                                                                                    Dadra & N Haveli




                                                                                             Meghalaya
 .2




                                                                            Mizoram
                                                                                                                                 Nagaland



                                                      Lakshadweep
             0




                              0                  .2                      .4               .6                     .8                         1
                                                                     Linguistic Fractionalization
                              Notes: Religious fractionalization based on all religions, NSS 55.
                              Linguistic fractionalization based on mother tongue, 2001 Census.
                              Size of State label proportional to State population.




                                                                               3
Figure A.3: Share of Rice and Wheat in Total Cereal Expenditures by District, all NSS Rounds



                                                        Uttarakhand

                                                           Uttar Pradesh




                                                                           Bihar
                       Madhya Pradesh                              Jharkhand


                         Chhattisgarh




                                                        Uttarakhand

                                                           Uttar Pradesh




                                                                           Bihar
                       Madhya Pradesh                              Jharkhand


                         Chhattisgarh




                                             4
                             Table A.1: List of Food Items by NSS Categories
Category             Items
Cereals              bajra, barley, jowar, maize, millet, ragi, rice, wheat, other cereals
Pulses               gram, arhar, moong, masur, urd, khesari, peas, soya, other pulses
Dairy products       butter, curd, ghee, milk, baby food, condensed milk, ice cream, other milk products
Oils                 vanaspati oil, mustard oil, groundnut oil, coconut oil, other oils
Meat                 beef, chicken, eggs, fish, mutton, pork, other meats
Sugar                sugar, gur, misri, honey
Vegetables           onion, potato, radish, carrot, turnip, beet, sweet potato, arum, pumpkin, gourd, bitter gourd,
                     cucumber, parwal, jhinga, snake gourd, cauliflower, cabbage, brinjal, bhindi, other leaf vegetables,
                     french beans, tomato, green peas, chilli, capsicum, plantain, jackfruit, lemon, other vegetables
Fruits               banana, watermelon, pineapple, coconut, guava, singara, orange, mango, kharbooza, pear,
                     berries, leechi, apple, grape, other fruits
Dry fruits           copra, groundnut, date, cashewnut, walnut, other nuts, kishmish, other dry fruits
Spices               garlic, turmeric, black pepper, dry chilli, tamarind, ginger, curry, other spices
Drinks               tea leaves, coffee beans, tea cup, coffee cup, cold drink, fruit juice, coconut juice, other drinks
Processed products   biscuits, salted refreshments, sweets, cooked meal, cake, pickle, sauce, jam, other processed food
Alcohol              beer, country liquor, foreign liquor, toddy
Intoxicant           pan




                                                          5
Table A.2: Causes of Hindu-Muslim Conflict as Reported in the Varshney-Wilkinson Dataset Dur-
ing Period of NSS Rounds 43, 50 and 55
  Category                               Reported Cause                                        Percent of Conflicts
  Animal Slaughter                       Total Animal Slaughter                                       1.4%

  Politics and Economics                 Economic Interest (Land)                                       0.7%
                                         Economic Interest (Other)                                      0.3%
                                         Political (Agitation)                                          2.5%
                                         Political (Other)                                              1.0%
                                         Political Elections                                            1.0%
                                         Political Rivalry                                              1.7%
                                         Total Politics and Economics                                   7.2%

  Religion                               Desecration of Religious Site/Symbol                          23.7%
                                         Public Rituals\Festivities                                    16.3%
                                         Religious Pamphlets                                            0.3%
                                         Total Religion                                                40.3%

  Previous Violence                      Previous Violence (Communal)                                   9.8%
                                         Previous Violence (Other)                                      1.4%
                                         Previous Violence (Terrorism, War)                             1.4%
                                         Total Previous Violence                                       12.6%

  Other Reported Cause                   Allegations of Unpatriotic Acts                                1.0%
                                         Construction/Attempted Construction                            0.3%
                                         Cricket Match                                                  1.0%
                                         Crime                                                          0.3%
                                         Death of Muslim Protestors in Police Firing                    0.7%
                                         Family Rivalry                                                 0.3%
                                         Homicide                                                       2.0%
                                         Illegal Attack (Miscellaneous)                                 0.7%
                                         Militant Gun Down by Army                                      0.3%
                                         Petty Issue                                                    1.0%
                                         Private Quarrel                                                3.4%
                                         Protest Against Police Actions                                 1.0%
                                         Protest against Urdu News Telecast                             0.3%
                                         Rape                                                           0.3%
                                         Sexual Harrasment                                              2.5%
                                         Student Clashes over T.V. Channel Surfing                      0.3%
                                         Total Other Reported Cause                                    15.4%

  Cause Insufficiently Reported          Total Cause Insufficiently Reported                           23.1%
  Notes: Table reports causes of Hindu-Muslim conflict for the period six months before, during and six months after each
 round in the Varshney-Wilkinson Dataset.




                                                            6
                   Table A.3: Hindu-Muslim Conflict by State and NSS Round
                                      1987-88                       1993-94                    1999-2000
          State              Incidence      No. Killed    Incidence      No. Killed     Incidence      No. Killed
 Andhra Pradesh                   0               0             5              24             2              1
 Arunachal Pradesh                0               0             0               0             0              0
 Assam                            0               0             5               0             0              0
 Bihar                            3              18            10              44             4             19
 Delhi                            9              14             3              41             2              1
 Goa                              0               0             0               0             0              0
 Gujarat                         49             131            16             316             9             14
 Haryana                          0               0             1               4             0              0
 Himachal Pradesh                 0               0             0               0             0              0
 Jammu and Kashmir                9               7             0               0             3              9
 Karnataka                       10              23            20              57             2              6
 Kerala                           1               0             0               0             2              7
 Madhya Pradesh                   4               2             4             130             0              0
 Maharashtra                     28              51            15             796            13              2
 Manipur                          0               0             1              94             0              0
 Meghalaya                        0               0             0               0            0               0
 Mizoram                          0               0             0               0            0               0
 Nagaland                         0               0             0               0            0               0
 Orissa                           0               0             1               0            1               0
 Punjab                           0               0             0               0            0               0
 Rajasthan                        7               4             3              47            2              14
 Sikkim                           0               0             0               0            0               0
 Tamil Nadu                       1               1             3              10            0               0
 Tripura                          0               0             0               0            0               0
 Uttar Pradesh                   18             181            13             210            8              13
 West Bengal                      4              15             3              42            1               1
Notes: Table reports incidents of Hindu-Muslim conflict and numbers of people killed in each State for the period six
months before, during and six months after each round based on the Varshney-Wilkinson Dataset.




                                                          7
 B     Religious Conflict

B.1    Conditional Event Study
The non-parametric plots that show taboo abstention in the period building up to and after
local conflict (Figure 2) do not account for potential confounds coming from price and income
changes or other factors. For example, conflicts may be more likely in certain regions (those with
different endowments or histories) or at certain moments of the year (religious festivals). We can
potentially account for these factors by explicitly controlling for prices, total food expenditures
and good-region-month fixed effects:

                   12
                   X                                  12
                                                      X
                           SC                                M
  Abstainihgm =           θim SCh × Conflictgm +            θim Muslimh × Conflictgm + SCh + Muslimh
                  m=−12                             m=−12
                                          X
                                      +       γ1ij ln pricejh + γ2i ln realf oodexph + δigm + ihgm , (15)
                                          j


where Abstainihgm is an indicator variable that takes the value 1 if a householed does not con-
sume good i; SCh and Muslimh are indicators that take the value 1 if a household h is scheduled-
caste Hindu or Muslim (upper-caste Hindu is the reference group); Conflictgm is an indicator for
being surveyed m months before or after the first Hindu/Muslim conflict in region g; ln pricejh is
the village median price of good j that controls for own- and cross-price effects; ln realf oodexph
is the log of per capita food expenditure deflated by a Stone price index that controls for income
effects; and δigm are good-region-month fixed effects that control for any local supply and de-
mand conditions that are potentially correlated with conflict and are not adequately captured
by prices. Standard errors are clustered at the gm level.
          r coefficients capture consumption deviations relative to omitted group, upper-caste
     The θim
Hindus. Figure B.1.1 displays the predicted values from estimating Equation (15) for upper-caste
                                  r coefficients for scheduled-caste Hindus and Muslims to
Hindus, and adding the estimated θim
this baseline consumption. The resulting patterns are very similar to those obtained using non-
parametric regressions in Figure 2.




                                                     8
Figure B.1.1: Conflict and Taboo Avoidance, Conditional on Price, Income, Religion and Good-
Region-Month FE, NSS 50th Round (1993-1994)

                                         Beef, Conditional                                                            Pork, Conditional
  Population Abstaining (%)




                                                                               Population Abstaining (%)
                                                                                 .6 .7 .8 .9 1
       0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1




                              -12 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12                                          -12 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12
                                        Months before and after conflict                                             Months before and after conflict


                                         Meat, Conditional                                                          Alcohol, Conditional
  Population Abstaining (%)




                                                                               Population Abstaining (%)
         0 .2 .4 .6 .8




                                                                                  .4 .6 .8 1



                              -12 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12                                          -12 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12
                                        Months before and after conflict                                             Months before and after conflict


                                                  Hindu UC                     Hindu SC                                       Muslim




                                                                           9
B.2                       Event Study: Other Tests

Figure B.2.1: Conflict and Taboo Avoidance, 6 Months Before/After Conflict, NSS 50 (1993-1994)

                                                   Beef                                                                           Pork
     Population Abstaining (%)




                                                                                    Population Abstaining (%)
        .2 .4 .6 .8 1




                                                                                     .75 .8 .85 .9 .95 1
                                 -150 -100 -50      0     50     100    150                                     -150 -100 -50      0     50     100    150
                                       Days before and after conflict                                                 Days before and after conflict


                                                  Meat                                                                          Alcohol
     Population Abstaining (%)




                                                                                    Population Abstaining (%)
                                                                                       .7 .8 .9 1 1.1
       0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1




                                 -150 -100 -50      0     50     100    150                                     -150 -100 -50      0     50     100    150
                                       Days before and after conflict                                                 Days before and after conflict


                                     Hindu Upper Castes                       Hindu Scheduled Castes                                          Muslims




                        Figure B.2.2: Conflict and Chicken/Mutton Avoidance, NSS 50th Round (1993-1994)

                                                Chicken                                                                          Mutton
  Population Abstaining (%)




                                                                                    Population Abstaining (%)
                                                                                        .2 .4 .6 .8 1
     .7 .8 .9        1




                                 -300 -200 -100 0       100 200 300                                             -300 -200 -100 0       100 200 300
                                      Days before and after conflict                                                 Days before and after conflict


                                     Hindu Upper Castes                       Hindu Scheduled Castes                                          Muslims




                                                                               10
Figure B.2.3: Conflict and Beef/Pork Avoidance, Round 1993-1994, High vs. Low Local Religious
Fractionalization

                                        Beef, High Frac.                                                               Beef, Low Frac.
  Population Abstaining (%)




                                                                                 Population Abstaining (%)
    0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1




                                                                                   0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
                              -300 -200 -100     0     100 200       300                                     -300 -200 -100     0     100 200       300
                                    Days before and after conflict                                                 Days before and after conflict


                                        Pork, High Frac.                                                               Pork, Low Frac.
  Population Abstaining (%)




                                                                                 Population Abstaining (%)
                                                                                                     1
                      1




                                                                                              .9
               .9




                                                                                         .8
    .7    .8




                                                                                   .7


                              -300 -200 -100     0     100 200       300                                     -300 -200 -100     0     100 200       300
                                    Days before and after conflict                                                 Days before and after conflict


                                  Hindu Upper Castes                       Hindu Scheduled Castes                                          Muslims




                                                                            11
B.3   Religious Conflict and Taboo Adherence Regressions


                    Table B.3.1: Butcher Shares by Religion, All Survey Rounds
                                       Butchers                    Households
                                 Count Weighted Share Count Weighted Share
              Hindus              703         0.514        284,905         0.827
              Muslims             561         0.451         42,145         0.119
              Christians           55         0.022         19,549         0.023
              Sikhs                12         0.006          8,561         0.019
              Jains                0          0.000          1,478         0.003
              Budhists             4          0.005          3,175         0.006
              Zoroastrians         1          0.000           126          0.000
              Other Religions      6          0.004          3,593         0.004
              Total              1,342          1          363,532           1



 Table B.3.2: Religious Conflict and Taboo Adherence, Clustering at Higher Geographic Level
                                             LHS Variable: Abstain from Consuming Good i
                                                        Baseline      Cross-section               Panel
                                                           (1)               (2)                    (3)
                                                           All               All                    All
  taboo=1                                               0.181∗∗∗
                                                       (0.00727)

  taboo=1 × conflict                                    0.106∗∗∗         0.0396∗∗∗              0.0599∗∗∗
                                                        (0.0169)          (0.0108)              (0.00988)
  Observations                                         1,115,640         1,115,292              1,114,116
  Adjusted R2                                            0.560             0.585                  0.596
  log prices and total expenditure controls                Yes               Yes                   Yes
  product*district*round*quarter                           Yes               Yes                   Yes
  religion*state*product*round*quarter                     No                Yes                   No
  religion*state*product*district*quarter                  No                No                    Yes
  Notes: Dependent variable is an indicator for abstaining from good i. Taboo is an indicator equal to 1 if the
 good is considered a taboo for the religion of the household. Conflict is an indicator for at least one occurrence
 of Hindu-Muslim conflict in the district in the quarter in which the household is surveyed or in the preceding
 two quarters. Column 1 includes the baseline fixed effects, column 2 adds the fixed effects for cross-sectional
 identification and column 3 for panel identification. Robust standard errors clustered at religion-region-round-
 quarter in parentheses. Regressions weighted by survey population weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                        12
  Table B.3.3: Religious Conflict and Taboo Adherence, Clustering at Religion-District Level
                                             LHS Variable: Abstain from Consuming Good i
                                                        Baseline       Cross-section                Panel
                                                            (1)               (2)                    (3)
                                                            All               All                    All
 taboo=1                                                 0.181∗∗∗
                                                        (0.00944)

 taboo=1 × conflict                                      0.106∗∗∗        0.0396∗∗                0.0599∗∗∗
                                                         (0.0254)         (0.0158)                (0.0119)
 Observations                                           1,115,640        1,115,292               1,114,116
 Adjusted R2                                              0.560            0.585                   0.593
 log prices and total expenditure controls                  Yes              Yes                     Yes
 product*district*round*quarter                             Yes              Yes                     Yes
 religion*state*product*round*quarter                       No               Yes                     No
 religion*state*product*district*quarter                    No               No                      Yes
 Notes: Dependent variable is an indicator for abstaining from good i. Taboo is an indicator equal to 1 if the good
is considered a taboo for the religion of the household. Conflict is an indicator for at least one occurrence of
Hindu-Muslim conflict in the district in the quarter in which the household is surveyed or in the preceding two
quarters. Column 1 includes the baseline fixed effects, column 2 adds the fixed effects for cross-sectional identifi-
cation and column 3 for panel identification. Robust standard errors clustered at religion-district in parentheses.
Regressions weighted by survey population weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                         13
               Table B.3.4: Religious Conflict and Taboo Adherence, Lags and Leads
                                                 LHS Variable: Abstain from Consuming Good i
                                                                                  Panel
                                                           (1)            (2)                     (3)
 taboo=1 × conflict t-0 quarter                         0.0527∗∗∗      0.0522∗∗∗               0.0517∗∗∗
                                                        (0.0172)       (0.0171)                (0.0168)

 taboo=1 × conflict t-1 quarter                                        0.0381∗∗∗               0.0378∗∗∗
                                                                       (0.0141)                (0.0143)

 taboo=1 × conflict t-2 quarter                                        0.0468∗∗∗               0.0473∗∗∗
                                                                       (0.0131)                (0.0132)

 taboo=1 × conflict t-3 quarter                                         0.00630                0.00712
                                                                        (0.0131)               (0.0129)

 taboo=1 × conflict t-4 quarter                                        -0.00995                -0.00918
                                                                       (0.0137)                (0.0138)

 taboo=1 × conflict t+1 quarter                                                                 0.0209
                                                                                               (0.0157)

 taboo=1 × conflict t+2 quarter                                                                0.00415
                                                                                               (0.0170)

 taboo=1 × conflict t+3 quarter                                                                 0.0237
                                                                                               (0.0151)

 taboo=1 × conflict t+4 quarter                                                                -0.0218
                                                                                               (0.0302)
 Observations                                           1,114,116      1,114,116              1,114,116
 Adjusted R2                                              0.596          0.596                  0.596
 log prices and total expenditure controls                 Yes            Yes                     Yes
 product*district*round*quarter                            Yes            Yes                     Yes
 religion*district*round*quarter                           Yes            Yes                     Yes
 religion*state*product*round*quarter                      No             No                      No
 religion*state*product*district*quarter                   Yes            Yes                     Yes
 Notes: Dependent variable is an indicator for abstaining from good i. Taboo is an indicator equal to 1 if the
good is considered a taboo for the religion of the household. Conflict is an indicator for at least one occurrence of
Hindu-Muslim conflict in the district. Column 1 shows the effect of conflict in the quarter in which the household
is surveyed (t-0). Column 2 additionally includes lags of conflict from quarters t-1 to t-4. Column 3 further
includes leads of conflict from quarters t+1 to t+4. All regressions include the main effects of taboo and conflict,
including lags and leads of conflict in columns 2 and 3 (not shown). All regressions include the baseline fixed
effects and the fixed effecs for panel identification. Robust standard errors clustered at religion-district-round-
quarter in parentheses. Regressions weighted by survey population weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                         14
            Table B.3.5: Religious Conflict and Beef Abstention in NSS 50 (1993-1994)
                                                 LHS Variable: Abstain from Consuming Beef
                                                         Baseline                  Cross-section
                                                            (1)                           (2)
   taboo=1                                               0.325∗∗∗
                                                         (0.0123)

   taboo=1 × conflict                                    0.407∗∗∗                     0.343∗∗∗
                                                         (0.0439)                     (0.0516)

   Observations                                           59,279                       59,248
   Adjusted R2                                             0.378                        0.480
   log prices and total expenditure controls                Yes                          Yes
   district*quarter                                         Yes                          Yes
   religion*state*quarter                                   No                           Yes
  Notes: Dependent variable is an indicator for abstaining from beef. Taboo is an indicator equal to 1 if beef is
 a taboo for the religion of the household. Conflict is an indicator for at least one occurrence of Hindu-Muslim
 conflict in the district in the quarter in which the household is surveyed or in the preceding two quarters. Col-
 umn 1 includes the baseline fixed effects and column 2 adds the fixed effects for cross-sectional identification.
 The regression is run using the NSS 50 round (1993-1994). Robust standard errors clustered at religion-district-
 quarter in parentheses. Regressions weighted by survey population weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p <
 0.01.



           Table B.3.6: Number of Religious Conflict Fatalities and Taboo Adherence
                                             LHS Variable: Abstain from Consuming Good i
                                                        Baseline      Cross-section                Panel
                                                           (1)               (2)                    (3)
 taboo=1                                                0.185∗∗∗
                                                       (0.00360)

 taboo=1 × log fatalities                              0.0439∗∗∗          0.00782                0.0118∗∗
                                                       (0.00889)         (0.00587)              (0.00596)
 Observations                                          1,115,640         1,115,292              1,114,116
 Adjusted R2                                             0.560             0.585                   0.596
 log prices and total expenditure controls                Yes               Yes                     Yes
 product*district*round*quarter                           Yes               Yes                     Yes
 religion*district*round*quarter                          Yes               Yes                     Yes
 religion*state*product*round*quarter                     No                Yes                     No
 religion*state*product*district*quarter                  No                No                      Yes
 Notes: Dependent variable is an indicator for abstaining from good i. Taboo is an indicator equal to 1 if the good
is considered a taboo for the religion of the household. Log fatalities is the log of the number of people killed in
Hindu-Muslim conflicts in the district in the quarter in which the household is surveyed or in the preceding two
quarters. It is computed using the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation to account for the zero observations.
Column 1 includes the baseline fixed effects, column 2 adds the fixed effects for cross-sectional identification
and column 3 for panel identification. Robust standard errors clustered at religion-district-round-quarter in
parentheses. Regressions weighted by survey population weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.



                                                        15
              Table B.3.7: Religious Conflict in Nearby Districts and Taboo Adherence
                                                   LHS Variable: Abstain from Consuming Good i
                                                            Baseline      Cross-section                Panel
                                                               (1)              (2)                     (3)
                                                               All              All                     All
 taboo=1                                                    0.158∗∗∗         677438.0                  8.035
                                                           (0.00385)       (58582231.3)             (115479.0)

 taboo=1 × conflict                                         0.101∗∗∗         0.0509∗∗∗               0.0597∗∗∗
                                                            (0.0162)         (0.0107)                (0.00981)

 taboo=1 × conflict, other districts in region              0.106∗∗∗         0.0489∗∗∗               -0.00581
                                                           (0.00900)         (0.00779)               (0.00501)
 Observations                                              1,115,640         1,115,292               1,114,116
 Adjusted R2                                                 0.561             0.585                   0.596
 log prices and total expenditure controls                     Yes              Yes                     Yes
 product*district*round*quarter                                Yes              Yes                     Yes
 religion*district*round*quarter                               Yes              Yes                     Yes
 religion*state*product*round*quarter                          No               Yes                     No
 religion*state*product*district*quarter                       No               No                      Yes
 Notes: Dependent variable is an indicator for abstaining from good i. Taboo is an indicator equal to 1 if the good is
considered a taboo for the religion of the household. Conflict is an indicator for at least one occurrence of Hindu-
Muslim conflict in the district in the quarter in which the household is surveyed or in the preceding two quarters.
Conflict, other districts in region is an indicator for a conflict occurrence in other districts in the same region. Col-
umn 1 includes the baseline fixed effects, column 2 adds the fixed effects for cross-sectional identification and col-
umn 3 for panel identification. Robust standard errors clustered at religion-district-round-quarter in parentheses.
Regressions weighted by survey population weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                          16
     Table B.3.8: Religious Conflict and Taboo Adherence, Interaction with Local Abstention
                                                                         LHS Variable: Abstain from Consuming Good i
                                                              (1)            (2)         (3)         (4)      (5)       (6)
 taboo × conflict                                          0.0393∗∗∗      0.0442∗∗∗ 0.0380∗∗∗ 0.0428∗∗∗ 0.0334∗∗∗ 0.0415∗∗∗
                                                           (0.0106)       (0.0101)    (0.0111)    (0.0115) (0.0127)  (0.0132)

 taboo × conflict × 1[abstentionirst > 0.99]               -0.0440∗∗
                                                            (0.0178)

 taboo × conflict × 1[abstentionirsdq > 0.99]                              -0.0119
                                                                           (0.0151)

 taboo × conflict × 1[abstentionirst > 0.95]                                             -0.0414∗∗∗
                                                                                          (0.0119)

 taboo × conflict × 1[abstentionirsdq > 0.95]                                                             -0.0185
                                                                                                          (0.0143)

 taboo × conflict × 1[abstentionirst > 0.90]                                                                            -0.0310∗∗
                                                                                                                         (0.0139)

 taboo × conflict × 1[abstentionirsdq > 0.90]                                                                                          -0.0267∗
                                                                                                                                        (0.0154)
 Observations                                              1,115,292      1,114,116      1,115,292       1,114,116      1,115,292      1,114,116
 Adjusted R2                                                 0.585          0.596          0.585           0.596          0.585          0.596
 log prices and total expenditure controls                    Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes
 product*district*round*quarter                               Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes
 religion*district*round*quarter                              Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes
 religion*state*product*round*quarter                         Yes            No             Yes             No             Yes             No
 religion*state*product*district*quarter                      No             Yes            No              Yes            No              Yes
 Notes: Dependent variable is an indicator for abstaining from good i. Taboo is an indicator equal to 1 if the good is considered a taboo for
the religion of the household. Conflict is an indicator for at least one occurrence of Hindu-Muslim conflict in the district in the quarter in
which the household is surveyed or in the preceding two quarters. 1[abstentionirst ] and 1[abstentionirsdq ] are indicators equal to 1 if the local
absention level for good i is above 0.99 (columns 1-2), 0.95 (columns 3-4) or 0.90 (columns 5-6). They measure cross-sectional (good-religion-
state-time) and panel (good-religion-state-district-quarter) abstention levels respectively. All columns include the main effects and interactions
of taboo, conflict and local abstention. All columns include the baseline fixed effects, columns 1, 3 and 5 add the fixed effects for cross-sectional
identification and columns 2, 4 and 6 for panel identification. Robust standard errors clustered at religion-district-round-quarter in parentheses.
Regressions weighted by survey population weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                        17
                           Table B.3.9: Demand-Side Effects of Conflict on Prices
                                                            LHS Variable: log price by good-district-time
                                          (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)          (8)
                                         2SLS         2SLS        2SLS         2SLS          RF           RF          RF           RF
 fraction abstainingidt                -2.989∗∗∗     -0.0427     -0.412      -0.757∗∗     -2.517∗∗∗     -0.0704     -0.343      -0.958∗∗
                                        (0.696)      (0.153)     (0.431)      (0.353)      (0.572)      (0.253)     (0.360)      (0.447)

 conflict                                                                     0.0681                                             0.146∗∗
                                                                             (0.0470)                                           (0.0590)
 Observations                           12,368       13,185      12,368       12,368       12,368        13,185      12,368      12,368
 Adjusted R2                            0.237        0.220        0.525        0.528       0.254         0.219       0.520        0.520
 district*product*quarter                Yes           No          Yes          Yes         Yes           No          Yes          Yes
 product*round*quarter                   No            Yes         Yes          Yes         No            Yes         Yes          Yes
 First-stage F-statistic (CDF)          447.9        1408.9      431.7        684.0
 First-stage F-statistic (RKF)          157.1         350.9      154.9        311.6
 Notes: Dependent variable is the log price at the good-district-quarter-round level. Fraction abstainingidt is the fraction of popula-
tion abstaining, instrumented by the predicted rate of abstention ShareAbstain
                                                                          \         idt in the district, based on the estimated parameters
from equation (3). Specifically for each household h we compute the predicted likelihood of abstaining Abstain   \ ihdt = α    b1 Tabooir +
b2 Conflictrdt + α
α                 b3 Tabooir × Conflictrdt using the estimated α b’s from the baseline regression, and then compute ShareAbstain
                                                                                                                             \        idt as
the weighted mean of Abstain
                         \ ihdt by product-district-quarter-round. Columns 4 and 8 also include conflict as an independent variable
(dummy for at least one occurrence of Hindu-Muslim conflict in the district in the quarter in which the household is surveyed or in the
preceding two quarters.). Columns 1-4 are estimated using 2SLS, while columns 5-8 are the reduced-form results. Columns 1 and 5 add
district-product-quarter fixed effects (panel identification), columns 2 and 6 add product-round-quarter fixed effects (cross-sectional
identification), and columns 3-4 and 7-8 add both sets of fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at district-round-quarter in
parentheses. Regressions weighted by survey population weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                    18
     Table B.3.10: Religious Conflict and Taboo Adherence, without Conflicts Caused by Animal Slaughtering, Political/Economic or Reli-
     gious Factors
                                                                                                   LHS Variable: Abstain from Consuming Good i
                                                                                                                             Without Conflicts Caused by
                                                         Baseline                Animal Slaughter             Political/Economic                  Slaughter/PolEcon                  Slaughter/PolEcon
                                                                                                                     Factors                           Factors                      and Religious Factors
                                                     (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)            (7)                 (8)                   (9)           (10)
                                                   Cross          Panel          Cross          Panel          Cross         Panel          Cross               Panel                 Cross          Panel
      taboo=1 × conflict                         0.0396∗∗∗      0.0599∗∗∗      0.0387∗∗∗      0.0606∗∗∗      0.0401∗∗∗     0.0636∗∗∗      0.0392∗∗∗           0.0660∗∗∗             0.0439∗∗       0.0536∗∗∗
                                                  (0.0107)      (0.00981)       (0.0108)      (0.00983)       (0.0111)     (0.00995)       (0.0112)            (0.0101)              (0.0176)      (0.0175)




19
      Observations                               1,115,292      1,114,116      1,115,292      1,114,116      1,115,292     1,114,116      1,115,292      1,114,116 1,115,292        1,114,116
      Adjusted R2                                  0.585          0.596          0.585          0.596          0.585         0.596          0.585                0.596                 0.585          0.596
      log prices and total expenditure               Yes           Yes             Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes             Yes                 Yes                   Yes            Yes
      prod*district*round*quarter                    Yes           Yes             Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes             Yes                 Yes                   Yes            Yes
      relig*district*round*quarterr                  Yes           Yes             Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes             Yes                 Yes                   Yes            Yes
      relig*state*prod*round*quarter                 Yes           No              Yes           No              Yes          No              Yes                 No                    Yes            No
      relig*state*prod*district*quarter              No            Yes             No            Yes             No           Yes             No                  Yes                   No             Yes
      Notes: Dependent variable is an indicator for abstaining from good i. Taboo is an indicator equal to 1 if the good is considered a taboo for the religion of the household. Conflict is an indicator for at
     least one occurrence of Hindu-Muslim conflict in the district in the quarter in which the household is surveyed or in the preceding two quarters. In columns 3-4, conflicts caused by animal slaughtering
     are coded as zero. In columns 5-6, conflicts caused by political or economic events are coded as zero. In columns 7-8, both conflicts caused by animal slaughtering or political/economic events are
     coded as zero. In columns 9-10, conflicts cause by religious factors, animal slaughtering or political/economic events are coded as zero. All columns include the baseline fixed effects, columns 1, 3, 5,
     7 and 9 add the fixed effects for cross-sectional identification and columns 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 for panel identification. Robust standard errors clustered at religion-district-round-quarter in parentheses.
     Regressions weighted by survey population weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
                                         Table B.3.11: Religious Conflict and Taboo Adherence by Cause of Conflict
                                                                                                 LHS Variable: Abstain from Consuming Good i
                                                                                                                             Conflicts Caused by
                                                                Baseline           Religion      Previous Conflict       Other Causes        No Reported Cause          Slaughter/PolEcon
                                                                   (1)                (2)                 (3)                   (4)                    (5)                        (6)
      taboo=1 × conflict                                       0.0599∗∗∗          0.0594∗∗∗             0.0485              0.0972∗∗                0.0364∗                    -0.0288
                                                               (0.00981)           (0.0113)            (0.0314)              (0.0392)               (0.0194)                   (0.0267)
      Observations                                             1,114,116          1,114,116           1,114,116             1,114,116              1,114,116                  1,114,116




20
      Adjusted R2                                                0.596               0.596               0.596                 0.596                  0.596                     0.596
      log prices and total expenditure controls                   Yes                 Yes                 Yes                   Yes                    Yes                        Yes
      product*district*round*quarter                              Yes                 Yes                 Yes                   Yes                    Yes                        Yes
      religion*district*round*quarter                             Yes                 Yes                 Yes                   Yes                    Yes                        Yes
      religion*state*product*round*quarter                        No                  No                  No                    No                     No                         No
      religion*state*product*district*quarter                     Yes                 Yes                 Yes                   Yes                    Yes                        Yes
      Notes: Dependent variable is an indicator for abstaining from good i. Taboo is an indicator equal to 1 if the good is considered a taboo for the religion of the household. Conflict
     is an indicator for at least one occurrence of Hindu-Muslim conflict in the district in the quarter in which the household is surveyed or in the preceding two quarters. Column 1 is
     the baseline-panel specification. Conflict is restricted to Hindu-Muslim conflict caused by religious factors in column 2, previous violence in column 3, other miscellaneous causes in
     column 4, unreported cause in column 5, and animal slaughter, political or economic causes in column 6. All columns include the baseline fixed effects and the fixed effects for panel
     identification. Robust standard errors clustered at religion-district-round-quarter in parentheses. Regressions weighted by survey population weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
Table B.3.12: Religious Conflict and Taboo Adherence in Survey Rounds 43 and 50, Excluding
Households Serving Meals to Guests
                                                              LHS Variable: Abstain from Consuming Good i
                                                              All                        W/o Households Serving Meals to Guests
                                          Baseline     Cross-section         Panel        Baseline      Cross-section           Panel
                                             (1)              (2)              (3)           (4)               (5)                (6)
 taboo=1                                  0.176∗∗∗                                        0.168∗∗∗
                                         (0.00460)                                       (0.00473)

 taboo=1 × conflict                       0.122∗∗∗        0.0605∗∗∗        0.0483∗∗∗      0.132∗∗∗         0.0652∗∗∗          0.0571∗∗∗
                                          (0.0184)        (0.0145)         (0.0125)       (0.0189)         (0.0162)           (0.0145)
 Observations                             689,004          688,744          687,404       495,696           495,452            494,064
 Adjusted R2                               0.557            0.582            0.596         0.565             0.589              0.603
 log prices and total expend                 Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes              Yes                Yes
 prod*district*round*quart                   Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes              Yes                Yes
 relig*district*round*quart                  Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes              Yes                Yes
 relig*state*prod*round*quart                No              Yes              No             No               Yes                No
 relig*state*prod*district*quart             No              No               Yes            No               No                 Yes
 Notes: Dependent variable is an indicator for abstaining from good i. The sample is restricted to survey rounds 43 and 50 (1987-1988 and
1993-1994) for which households reported meals served to guests. Taboo is an indicator equal to 1 if the good is considered a taboo for
the religion of the household. Conflict is an indicator for at least one occurrence of Hindu-Muslim conflict in the district in the quarter in
which the household is surveyed or in the preceding two quarters. Columns 4-6 exclude households reporting to have served meals to guests.
Columns 1 and 4 include the baseline fixed effects, columns 2 and 5 add the fixed effects for cross-sectional identification and columns 3 and
6 for panel identification. Robust standard errors clustered at religion-district-round-quarter in parentheses. Regressions weighted by survey
population weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                              21
C                          State Splits


                                                                       Figure C.1: Dialects Spoken in Bihar and Jharkand
                                   .3
Fraction of Districts within State
       .1       0     .2




                                                 ur
                                                      i            i           ili        i
                                                                                                du         ur
                                                                                                              i  kh       li   li       ia        a
                                                                 dh        ith         nd     Ur                        ga anta      ur        rth
                                         ho
                                            jp
                                                          ag
                                                             a           a           Hi               jr ap Kuru       n            p        o
                                        B             M                 M                          Su               Be       S
                                                                                                                                Na
                                                                                                                                  g        Kh

                                                                                              Bihar                  Jharkhand
                                            Notes: For each district we compute the dialect most commonly spoken. The bars show the fraction
                                            of districts within each state by most-spoken dialect. Data on languages from 2001 Indian Census.




                                                                                                      22
                                                     Figure C.2: Dialects Spoken in Madhya Pradesh and Chattisgarh
                                      .8
   Fraction of Districts within State
       .2        .40        .6




                                                  i               i          i           li        ili        eli         jia        i         i
                                                nd          lv             d        de           Bh                                nd        rh
                                             Hi          Ma             ma        un                      ag
                                                                                                            h           gu        o
                                                                                                                                         isg
                                                                                                                                            a
                                                                      Ni                                            Su
                                                                                                                      r         G
                                                                                 B                       B
                                                                                                                                     hatt
                                                                                                                                  Ch

                                                                            Madhya Pradesh                              Chhattisgarh
                                           Notes: For each district we compute the dialect most commonly spoken. The bars show the fraction
                                           of districts within each state by most-spoken dialect. Data on languages from 2001 Indian Census.




                                                              Figure C.3: Cross-District Migration and State Splits


                                                        All
Bihar




                                   Border+Neighbor


                                                     Border
Madhya Pradesh




                                                        All


                                   Border+Neighbor


                                                     Border


                                                              0                   .02                 .04                .06
                                                                      Share of Cross-District Migrants within Population

                                                                                     1987-1988                1999-2000

                                                                                              23
                                             Table C.1: Ethnic Goods and State Splits
                                                                                      LHS Variable: Share Spent on Cereal i
                                                               (1)              (2)                    (3)                 (4)                     (5)
                                                          All Regions      Border Regions         All Districts     Border+Neighbor          Border Districts
                                                                                                                        Districts
 Wheat-loving × Ethnic Cereal × 1993-1994                   0.0373∗∗            0.0379∗∗∗
                                                            (0.0183)            (0.0138)

 Rice-loving × Ethnic Cereal × 1993-1994                    0.0227∗∗            0.0369∗∗∗
                                                            (0.0103)            (0.0138)

 Wheat-loving × Ethnic Cereal × 1999-2000                  0.0953∗∗∗            0.0724∗∗∗          0.0845∗∗∗             0.0590∗∗∗               0.0787∗∗∗
                                                           (0.0174)             (0.0134)           (0.0100)              (0.0129)                (0.0186)

 Rice-loving × Ethnic Cereal × 1999-2000                   0.0428∗∗∗            0.0797∗∗∗          0.0260∗∗∗             0.0656∗∗∗                0.107∗∗∗
                                                           (0.00966)            (0.0116)           (0.00866)             (0.0139)                 (0.0185)
 Observations                                               128,023              70,379             93,114                39,710                   23,730
 Adjusted R2                                                 0.732                0.772              0.793                 0.830                    0.836
 log prices and total expenditure controls                    Yes                  Yes                Yes                   Yes                      Yes
 original state*product*round*quarter                         Yes                  Yes                Yes                   Yes                      Yes
 region*product*quarter                                       Yes                  Yes                No                    No                       No
 district*product*quarter                                     No                   No                 Yes                   Yes                      Yes
 Notes: Dependent variable is the share of cereal i (rice, wheat or other cereals) in total cereal expenditure. Ethnic Cereal is an indicator variable that takes
the value 1 if cereal i is the ethnic cereal in future State. 1987-1988, 1993-1994 and 1999-2000 are round dummies with the initial round 1987-1988 as the
reference group. In this table we break out the round effects separately for wheat- and rice-loving ethnicities (northwest and southeast of the fault line,
respectively). Columns 1-2 are region-level regressions: column 1 includes all regions and column 2 restricts to border regions. Columns 3-5 are district-level
regressions: column 3 includes all districts, column 4 restricts to border and border-adjacent districts, and column 5 to border districts. All regressions include
the baseline fixed effects controlling for local supply and demand conditions (original state-product-time) and the fixed effects for panel identification (region-
or district-product-quarter). Robust standard errors clustered at region-round-quarter (columns 1-2) or district-round-quarter (columns 3-5) in parentheses.
Regressions weighted by survey population weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                               Table C.2: Demand-Side Effects of Anticipated State Split
                                                                            LHS Variable: Log Price by Cereal-District-Time
                                                           (1)              (2)                     (3)                  (4)                      (5)
                                                      All Regions      Border Regions          All Districts      Border+Neighbor           Border Districts
                                                                                                                      Districts
 Ethnic Cereal × 1987-1988                                   0                   0                    0                   0                           0
                                                            (.)                 (.)                  (.)                 (.)                         (.)

 Ethnic Cereal × 1993-1994                             -0.00271             -0.00230
                                                       (0.00663)            (0.00726)

 Ethnic Cereal × 1999-2000                              0.0167∗∗             0.00862             0.0183∗                 0.0236                   0.0291
                                                       (0.00654)            (0.00592)            (0.0106)               (0.0151)                 (0.0214)
 Observations                                             2,840               1,452                1,880                   696                      456
 Adjusted R2                                              0.676               0.702               0.765                   0.774                    0.768
 original state*product*round*quarter                      Yes                 Yes                  Yes                    Yes                      Yes
 region*product*quarter                                    Yes                 Yes                  No                     No                       No
 district*product*quarter                                  No                  No                   Yes                    Yes                      Yes
 Notes: Dependent variable is the log price of cereal i at the district-quarter-round level. Ethnic Cereal is an indicator variable that takes the value 1
if cereal i is the ethnic cereal in future state. 1987-1988, 1993-1994 and 1999-2000 are round dummies with the initial round 1987-1988 as reference
group. Columns 1-2 are region-level regressions: column 1 includes all regions and column 2 restricts to border regions. Columns 3-5 are district-
level regressions: column 3 includes all districts, column 4 restricts to border and border-adjacent districts, and column 5 to border districts. All
regressions include the baseline fixed effects controlling for local supply and demand conditions (original state-product-time) and the fixed effects for
panel identification (region- or district-product-quarter). Robust standard errors clustered at region-round-quarter (columns 1-2) or district-round-
quarter (columns 3-5) in parentheses. Regressions weighted by survey population weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                           24
                                        Table C.3: State Splits and Taboo Abstention
                                                                                 LHS Variable: Abstain from Consuming Good i
                                                           (1)              (2)                  (3)                     (4)                            (5)
                                                      All Regions      Border Regions       All Districts     Border+Neighbor Districts           Border Districts
                                                                                                                      Districts
 Taboo Good x 1987–1988                                     0                   0                  0                      0                                0
                                                           (.)                 (.)                (.)                    (.)                              (.)

 Taboo Good x 1993–1994                                 -0.0107            -0.00137
                                                        (0.0121)           (0.0135)

 Taboo Good x 1999–2000                                 -0.0130            -0.0119             -0.0147                   -0.0164                      -0.0479∗∗
                                                        (0.0105)           (0.0119)           (0.00948)                  (0.0162)                      (0.0226)
 Observations                                           171,780             94,600             124,708                    53,280                        31,796
 Adjusted R2                                             0.405               0.370              0.472                     0.437                          0.438
 log prices and total expenditure controls                 Yes                Yes                Yes                        Yes                           Yes
 original state*product*round*quarter                      Yes                Yes                Yes                        Yes                           Yes
 region*religion*product*quarter                           Yes                Yes                No                         No                            No
 district*religion*product*quarter                         No                 No                 Yes                        Yes                           Yes
 Notes: Dependent variable is an indicator for abstaining from good i. Taboo is an indicator equal to 1 if the good is considered a taboo for the religion of the
household. 1987-1988, 1993-1994 and 1999-2000 are round dummies with the initial round 1987-1988 as reference group. Columns 1-2 are region-level regressions:
column 1 includes all regions and column 2 restricts to border regions. Columns 3-5 are district-level regressions: column 3 includes all districts, column 4 restricts
to border and border-adjacent districts, and column 5 to border districts. All regressions include the baseline fixed effects controlling for local supply and demand
conditions (original state-product-time) and the fixed effects for panel identification (region- or district-religion-product-quarter for columns 3-5). Robust standard
errors clustered at region-religion-round-quarter (columns 1-2) or district-religion-round-quarter (columns 3-5) in parentheses. Regressions weighted by survey
population weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                         25
D   Status Shocks




                    26
                                               Figure D.1: Heterogeneity in Occupational Shares by Religion, All Rounds (49 Most Common Occupations)
                                                Accountants & Auditors (F=34)                  Agricultural Labourers (F=153)               Architects, Engineers, etc. (F=47)              Blacksmiths & Tool-Makers (F=11)               Book Keepers & Cashiers (F=34)              Bricklayers & Other Construction (F=92)           Building Caretakers & Cleaners (F=121)




                                                                                     .5
                                                                                                                                                                                  .01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .02




                                       .004
                                                                                                                                  .005




                                       .002
                                       0
                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                 SC      UC      Mus      Chr                  SC      UC      Mus      Chr                   SC      UC      Mus      Chr                    SC      UC      Mus     Chr                    SC      UC      Mus     Chr                    SC      UC      Mus        Chr                    SC      UC      Mus     Chr
                                                 Carpenters & Cabinets (F=36)               Clerical & Other Supervisors (F=43)                  Clerical, N.E.C (F=48)                  Construct., Manuf. Own. & Manag. (F=41)              Cooks and Waiters (F=14)                           Cultivators (F=128)                       Dockers & Freight Handlers (F=16)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .4




                                                                                     .01
                                                                                                                                  .04
                                                                                                                                                                                  .02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .02




                                       .01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .2




                                                                                                                                  .02




                                       .005
                                       0
                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                 SC      UC      Mus      Chr                  SC      UC      Mus      Chr                   SC      UC      Mus      Chr                    SC      UC      Mus     Chr                    SC      UC      Mus     Chr                    SC      UC      Mus        Chr                    SC      UC      Mus     Chr
                                               Electrical and Electronics (F=9.2)             Engineering Technicians (F=30)               Engravers (Except Printing) (F=102)           Farmers, Other Than Cultivators (F=119)                  Fishermen (F=20)                      Food & Beverage Processors (F=19)                    Glass Formers, Potters (F=16)




                                                                                                                                                                                  .1




                                       .01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .02




                                                                                     .005
                                                                                                                                  .005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .005




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .01




                                       0
                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                 SC      UC      Mus      Chr                  SC      UC      Mus      Chr                   SC      UC      Mus      Chr                    SC      UC      Mus     Chr                    SC      UC      Mus     Chr                    SC      UC      Mus        Chr                    SC      UC      Mus     Chr
                                              Hair Dressers & Beauticians (F=73)             Hotel & Restaurant Keepers (F=33)           Launderers, Dryclean & Pressers (F=19)               Manufacturers’ Agents (F=21)                Merchants & Shopkeepers (F=270)                     Metal Processers (F=2.2)                  Miners, Quarrymen, Well Drillers (F=9.6)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .1




                                       .01
                                                                                     .01
                                                                                                                                  .01
                                                                                                                                                                                  .01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .004




27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .002




                                       0
                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                 SC      UC      Mus      Chr                  SC      UC      Mus      Chr                   SC      UC      Mus      Chr                    SC      UC      Mus     Chr                    SC      UC      Mus     Chr                    SC      UC      Mus        Chr                    SC      UC      Mus     Chr
                                               Non Electrical Instruments (F=40)            Nurses & Medical Technicians (F=12)               Other Farm Workers (F=2.6)                      Physicians & Surgeons (F=61)                    Plantation Labourers (F=40)                   Preparers & Erectors (F=5.6)                        Production, N.E.C (F=23)




                                       .02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .01




                                                                                                                                  .005
                                                                                                                                                                                  .004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .005




                                                                                     .01
                                                                                                                                                                                  .002




                                                                                     .005




                                       0
                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                 SC      UC      Mus      Chr                  SC      UC      Mus      Chr                   SC      UC      Mus      Chr                    SC      UC      Mus     Chr                    SC      UC      Mus     Chr                    SC      UC      Mus        Chr                    SC      UC      Mus     Chr
                                              Professional Workers, N.E.C. (F=47)            Protective Service Workers (F=20)            Salesmen & Shop Assistants (F=54)                   Salsmen & Auctioneers (F=38)               Services Owners & Managers (F=66)                 Shoes & Leather Goods (F=75)                 Spinners, Weavers, Knitting, Dyers (F=40)




                                       .01
                                                                                     .02
                                                                                                                                  .04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .04




     Share of Religion in Occupation
                                                                                                                                                                                  .004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .01




                                                                                                                                  .02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .02




                                                                                                                                                                                  .002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .005




                                       0
                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                 SC      UC      Mus      Chr                  SC      UC      Mus      Chr                   SC      UC      Mus      Chr                    SC      UC      Mus     Chr                    SC      UC      Mus     Chr                    SC      UC      Mus        Chr                    SC      UC      Mus     Chr
                                              Tailors, Sewers, Upholsterers (F=68)                   Teachers (F=105)                               Tobacco (F=45)                        Transport Conductor & Guards (F=2.0)           Transport Equipment Operators (F=29)      Transport, Comms. Own. & Manag. (F=20)                Wholesale Owners & Managers (F=53)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .1




                                       .04
                                                                                     .04
                                                                                                                                  .02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .01




                                                                                                                                                                                  .004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .004




                                       .02
                                                                                     .02
                                                                                                                                                                                  .002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .002




                                       0
                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                 SC      UC      Mus      Chr                  SC      UC      Mus      Chr                   SC      UC      Mus      Chr                    SC      UC      Mus     Chr                    SC      UC      Mus     Chr                    SC      UC      Mus        Chr                    SC      UC      Mus     Chr

                                       Joint F-test of equality across religions for every occupation: F(294,277877)=53.43, Prob > F =0.0000
Figure D.2: Heterogeneity in the Growth of Returns by Occupation, 1987-2000 (49 Most Common
Occupations)

            Accountants & Auditors
             Agricultural Labourers
         Architects, Engineers, etc.
        Blacksmiths & Tool-Makers
          Book Keepers & Cashiers
   Bricklayers & Other Construction
    Building Caretakers & Cleaners
            Carpenters & Cabinets
       Clerical & Other Supervisors
                    Clerical, N.E.C
 Construct., Manuf. Own. & Manag.
                Cooks and Waiters
                         Cultivators
        Dockers & Freight Handlers
          Electrical and Electronics
           Engineering Technicians
        Engravers (Except Printing)
   Farmers, Other Than Cultivators
                         Fishermen
      Food & Beverage Processors
            Glass Formers, Potters
       Hair Dressers & Beauticians
       Hotel & Restaurant Keepers
  Launderers, Dryclean & Pressers
             Manufacturers’ Agents
         Merchants & Shopkeepers
                  Metal Processers
   Miners, Quarrymen, Well Drillers
         Non Electrical Instruments
     Nurses & Medical Technicians
               Other Farm Workers
            Physicians & Surgeons
              Plantation Labourers
              Preparers & Erectors
                 Production, N.E.C
      Professional Workers, N.E.C.
        Protective Service Workers
      Salesmen & Shop Assistants
            Salsmen & Auctioneers
      Services Owners & Managers
           Shoes & Leather Goods
   Spinners, Weavers, Knitting, Dye
      Tailors, Sewers, Upholsterers
                          Teachers
                           Tobacco
     Transport Conductor & Guards
    Transport Equipment Operators
 Transport, Comms. Own. & Manag.
    Wholesale Owners & Managers




                                       -.2           0                    .2           .4
                                             Real Wage Growth (Log Change 1987-2000)




                                                    28
                                                                                                                                                       national occ(r)
                    Table D.1: Status and Choice of Identity: First Stage and IV Regressions using statusrdt                                                              as Instrument
                                                                            First Stage                                          OLS                                                 IV
                                                               (1)             (2)                (3)          (4)              (5)                (6)           (7)               (8)               (9)
                                                            Baseline      Cross-section         Panel        Baseline      Cross-section          Panel        Baseline       Cross-section         Panel
              national occ(r)
      statusrdt                                             1.564∗∗∗        1.115∗∗∗           1.056∗∗∗
                                                            (0.0487)        (0.0856)           (0.0921)

      taboo=1                                                                                                0.194∗∗∗                                           0.201∗∗∗
                                                                                                            (0.00376)                                          (0.00404)

      taboo=1 × ln incomerdt                                                                                0.0423∗∗∗         0.0594∗∗∗        0.0103∗∗∗       0.0910∗∗∗        0.0855∗∗∗         0.0198∗∗∗
                                                                                                            (0.00600)         (0.00881)        (0.00293)       (0.00978)         (0.0145)         (0.00463)
      Observations                                            12,998           12,661           11,987      1,115,640         1,115,292        1,114,116       1,111,072        1,110,724         1,109,544
      Adjusted R2                                              0.831            0.852            0.885        0.560             0.585            0.595           0.015            -0.013            -0.023




29
      log prices and total expenditure controls                 No               No               No           Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes               Yes
      district*round*quarter                                    Yes              Yes              Yes          No                No               No              No                No                No
      religion*state*round*quarter                              No               Yes              No           No                No               No              No                No                No
      religion*state*district*quarter                           No               No               Yes          No                No               No              No                No                No
      product*district*round*quarter                            No               No               No           Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes               Yes
      religion*district*round*quarter                           No               No               No           Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes               Yes
      religion*state*product*round*quarter                      No               No               No           No                Yes              No              No                Yes               No
      religion*state*product*district*quarter                   No               No               No           No                No               Yes             No                No                Yes
      First-stage F-statistic (CDF)                                                                                                                            620135.4         833933.8          669060.1
      First-stage F-statistic (RKF)                                                                                                                              3102.8           4037.3            3761.0
                                                                           national occ(r)
      Notes: Columns 1-3 present the first stage regressions using statusrdt             as an instrument for religious-group-specific income. Dependent variable in columns 1-3 is the weighted mean
     ln incomerdt (monthly per capita expenditure). Columns 4-6 are the OLS regressions of taboo and the interaction of taboo and ln incomerdt on taboo abstention, and columns 7-9 are the 2SLS
                             national occ(r)
     regressions using statusrdt             to instrument ln incomerdt . Columns 1, 4 and 7 include the baseline fixed effects, columns 2, 5 and 8 add the fixed effects for cross-sectional identification and
     columns 3, 6 and 9 for panel identification. Columns 1-3 adapt the sets of fixed effects to the unit of observation religion-district-time. Robust standard errors clustered at religion-district-round-
     quarter in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
                                                                                                                                                      national w(o)
                     Table D.2: Status and Choice of Identity: First Stage and IV Regressions using statusrdt                                                          as Instrument
                                                                           First Stage                                         OLS                                                 IV
                                                               (1)            (2)                (3)         (4)              (5)                (6)           (7)              (8)                (9)
                                                            Baseline     Cross-section          Panel      Baseline      Cross-section          Panel        Baseline      Cross-section          Panel
             national w(o)
      statusrdt                                             0.744∗∗∗       0.406∗∗∗            0.237∗∗
                                                            (0.0301)       (0.0372)           (0.0922)

      taboo=1                                                                                               0.194∗∗∗                                          0.230∗∗∗
                                                                                                           (0.00376)                                         (0.00490)

      taboo=1 × ln incomerdt                                                                               0.0423∗∗∗        0.0594∗∗∗         0.0103∗∗∗      0.264∗∗∗          0.120∗∗∗        0.0105∗∗∗
                                                                                                           (0.00600)        (0.00881)         (0.00293)      (0.0126)          (0.0359)        (0.00399)
      Observations                                           11,627           11,281          11,049       1,115,640        1,115,292         1,114,116     1,089,132         1,088,876        1,088,280
      Adjusted R2                                             0.831            0.862           0.892         0.560            0.585             0.595          0.002            -0.013           -0.021




30
      log prices and total expenditure controls                No               No              No            Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes               Yes              Yes
      district*round*quarter                                   Yes              Yes             Yes           No               No                No             No                No               No
      religion*state*round*quarter                             No               Yes             No            No               No                No             No                No               No
      religion*state*district*quarter                          No               No              Yes           No               No                No             No                No               No
      product*district*round*quarter                           No               No              No            Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes               Yes              Yes
      religion*district*round*quarter                          No               No              No            Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes               Yes              Yes
      religion*state*product*round*quarter                     No               No              No            No               Yes               No             No                Yes              No
      religion*state*product*district*quarter                  No               No              No            No               No                Yes            No                No               Yes
      First-stage F-statistic (CDF)                                                                                                                         374508.0           71061.0         1185250.9
      First-stage F-statistic (RKF)                                                                                                                           1796.3             339.5           4116.6
                                                                           national w(o)
      Notes: Columns 1-3 present the first stage regressions using statusrdt           as an instrument for religious-group-specific income. Dependent variable in columns 1-3 is the weighted mean
     ln incomerdt (monthly per capita expenditure). Columns 4-6 are the OLS regressions of taboo and the interaction of taboo and ln incomerdt on taboo abstention, and columns 7-9 are the 2SLS
                             national w(o)
     regressions using statusrdt           to instrument ln incomerdt . Columns 1, 4 and 7 include the baseline fixed effects, columns 2, 5 and 8 add the fixed effects for cross-sectional identification and
     columns 3, 6 and 9 for panel identification. Columns 1-3 adapt the sets of fixed effects to the unit of observation religion-district-time. Robust standard errors clustered at religion-district-round-
     quarter in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
                                         Table E.1: Costs, Price Elasticities and Identity with Instrumented Prices                                                                                         E
                                                                                                    LHS Variable: Abstain from Consuming Good i
                                                                             Baseline                                    Cross-section                                        Panel
                                                                 (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)              (6)             (7)            (8)             (9)
      tabooi =1                                               0.188∗∗∗       0.167∗∗∗       0.225∗∗∗
                                                             (0.00364)       (0.0195)       (0.0161)

      ln pi                                                  -0.0331         0.00183        -0.0193         -0.0233          0.0284           0.0215        -0.0136         -0.00736        -0.0174
                                                             (0.0407)        (0.0415)       (0.0452)        (0.0383)        (0.0445)         (0.0483)       (0.0399)        (0.0432)        (0.0483)

      sum ln pj                                              -0.00251      -0.0139∗∗∗        0.00183       -0.00125       -0.00854∗∗∗       -0.00367       -0.000636       -0.00431∗       -0.00710∗
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Cost of Identity




                                                             (0.00173)     (0.00222)        (0.00543)      (0.00172)       (0.00295)        (0.00547)      (0.00189)       (0.00259)       (0.00430)

      tabooi =1 x ln pi                                                    -0.0380∗∗∗       -0.0203∗∗                      -0.0536∗∗∗      -0.0489∗∗∗                      -0.00692         0.00228
                                                                           (0.00343)        (0.00872)                       (0.0106)        (0.0149)                       (0.00658)        (0.0128)

      tabooi =1 x sum ln pj                                                 0.0148∗∗∗      -0.0297∗∗∗                      0.00952∗∗∗      -0.0114∗∗∗                     0.00466∗∗∗       -0.00155
                                                                            (0.00171)      (0.00164)                       (0.00316)       (0.00416)                      (0.00180)        (0.00339)

      sum (ln pj x tabooj )                                                                -0.0555∗∗∗                                       -0.0164∗∗                                      -0.000636
                                                                                           (0.00678)                                        (0.00791)                                      (0.00736)




31
      tabooi =1 x sum (ln pj x tabooj )                                                     0.0909∗∗∗                                       0.0348∗∗∗                                       0.0114∗
                                                                                            (0.00175)                                       (0.00670)                                      (0.00586)
      Observations                                          1,115,640       1,115,640       1,115,640      1,115,292       1,115,292        1,115,292      1,114,116       1,114,116       1,114,116
      Adjusted R2                                             0.559           0.560           0.567           0.585          0.585            0.585           0.595           0.595          0.595
      log prices and total expenditure controls                Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
      product*district*round*quarter                           Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
      religion*district*round*quarter                          Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
      religion*state*product*round*quarter                     No               No             No              Yes            Yes              Yes             No              No              No
      religion*state*product*district*quarter                  No               No             No              No             No               No              Yes             Yes             Yes
      First-stage F-statistic (CDF)                          5698.4           2835.9         2732.5          5587.6         2695.1           2609.2          5027.5          2474.9          2382.7
      First-stage F-statistic (RKF)                           37.87            18.95          18.88           37.22          18.67            18.56           32.83           16.48           16.43
      Notes: Dependent variable is an indicator for abstaining from good i. Taboo is an indicator equal to 1 if the good is considered a taboo for the religion of the household. In all regressions, the
     price of good i is instrumented by its price in a nearby village. Columns 1, 4 and 7 include own and cross-price elasticities. Columns 2, 5 and 8 add the interaction between taboo and own and
     cross-price elasticities. Columns 3, 6 and 9 allow cross-price elasticities to differ depending on whether both goods are taboos. Columns 1-3 include the baseline fixed effects, columns 4-6 add
     the fixed effects for cross-sectional identification and columns 7-9 for panel identification. Robust standard errors clustered at religion-district-round-quarter in parentheses. Regressions
     weighted by survey population weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
 F      Regressions with Household Controls


              Table F.1: Religious Conflict and Taboo Adherence, with Household Controls
                                                                LHS Variable: Abstain from Consuming Good i
                                                                                                                            Panel
                                                                                                                                  Cause of Conflict
                                                 Baseline      Cross-section          Panel                                     Narrow        Relig Only
                                                    (1)               (2)               (3)          (4)            (5)             (6)            (7)
                                                    All               All               All         Urban          Rural            All            All
 taboo=1                                         0.181∗∗∗
                                                (0.00364)

 taboo=1 × conflict                              0.106∗∗∗         0.0396∗∗∗         0.0599∗∗∗                                  0.0660∗∗∗       0.0594∗∗∗
                                                 (0.0162)         (0.0107)          (0.00981)                                  (0.0101)        (0.0113)

 taboo=1 × conflict past 2 quarters                                                                0.0431∗∗     0.0550∗∗∗
                                                                                                   (0.0194)     (0.0134)

 taboo=1 × conflict present quarter                                                                0.0587∗∗       0.0293
                                                                                                   (0.0293)      (0.0187)
 Observations                                   1,112,876         1,112,536         1,111,356      344,880       764,264       1,111,356      1,111,356
 Adjusted R2                                      0.563             0.588             0.599         0.616         0.606          0.599          0.599
 log prices and total expenditure                  Yes               Yes               Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
 household controls                                Yes               Yes               Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
 prod*district*round*quarter                       Yes               Yes               Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes
 relig*district*round*quarter                      Yes               Yes               Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes
 relig*state*prod*round*quarter                    No                Yes               No            No            No             No              No
 relig*state*prod*district*quarter                 No                No                Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes
 Notes: Dependent variable is an indicator for abstaining from good i. Taboo is an indicator equal to 1 if the good is considered a taboo for the religion of
the household. Conflict is an indicator for at least one occurrence of Hindu-Muslim conflict in the district. Columns 1-3 consider a conflict occurrence
in the quarter in which the household is surveyed or in the preceding two quarters. Columns 4-6 differentiate the effect of a conflict occurring in the
quarter of the survey from conflict in the preceding six months. Column 5 restricts the analysis to the urban population, and column 6 to the rural
population. All regressions include the household controls used in Subramanian and Deaton (1996): log of household size, household demographic
shares by age and gender, and indicators for being self-employed and working in the agricultural sector. Column 1 includes the baseline fixed effects,
column 2 adds the fixed effects for cross-sectional identification and columns 3-7 for panel identification. Robust standard errors clustered at religion-
district-round-quarter in parentheses. Regressions weighted by survey population weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                         32
                       Table F.2: Status and Choice of Identity with Household Controls
                                                                          LHS Variable: Abstain from Consuming Good i
                                                        Baseline      Cross-section          Panel        Baseline      Cross-section          Panel
                                                           (1)               (2)              (3)            (4)               (5)              (6)
 taboo=1                                                0.196∗∗∗                                          0.212∗∗∗
                                                       (0.00378)                                         (0.00382)
                      national occ(r)
 taboo=1 × statusrdt                                    0.120∗∗∗         0.0716∗∗∗        0.0444∗∗∗
                                                        (0.0128)         (0.0120)         (0.0103)
                      national w(o)
 taboo=1 × statusrdt                                                                                      0.489∗∗∗         0.0662∗∗∗        0.0556∗∗∗
                                                                                                          (0.0203)          (0.0196)         (0.0213)
 Observations                                          1,108,308         1,107,968        1,106,784      1,086,368         1,086,120        1,085,524
 Adjusted R2                                             0.563             0.587            0.598          0.564              0.587           0.596
 log prices and total expenditure controls                Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes              Yes
 Household controls                                       Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes              Yes
 product*district*round*quarter                           Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes              Yes
 religion*district*round*quarter                          Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes              Yes
 religion*state*product*round*quarter                     No                Yes              No              No                Yes              No
 religion*state*product*district*quarter                  No                No               Yes             No                No               Yes
 Notes: Dependent variable is an indicator for abstaining from good i. Taboo is an indicator equal to 1 if the good is considered a taboo for the religion
of the household. In columns 1-3, status is measured by local returns to the national occupational mix of each religion. In columns 4-6, status is
measured by national returns to the initial local occupational mix of each religion. All regressions include the household controls used in Subramanian
and Deaton (1996): log of household size, household demographic shares by age and gender, and indicators for being self-employed and working in
the agricultural sector. Columns 1 and 4 include the baseline fixed effects, columns 2 and 5 add the fixed effects for cross-sectional identification and
columns 3 and 6 for panel identification. Robust standard errors clustered at religion-district-round-quarter in parentheses. Regressions weighted by
survey population weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                        33
                                               Table F.3: Costs, Price Elasticities and Identity, with Household Controls
                                                                                                    LHS Variable: Abstain from Consuming Good i
                                                                            Baseline                                   Cross-section                                         Panel
                                                                (1)           (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)              (6)            (7)              (8)             (9)
      tabooi =1                                              0.187∗∗∗      0.170∗∗∗        0.228∗∗∗
                                                            (0.00359)      (0.0184)        (0.0158)

      ln pi                                                 0.0134∗∗∗      0.0434∗∗∗      0.0328∗∗∗      0.00962∗∗∗       0.0460∗∗∗        0.0429∗∗∗      0.00798∗∗∗       0.0214∗∗∗       0.0215∗∗∗
                                                            (0.00270)      (0.00363)      (0.00484)      (0.00257)        (0.00509)        (0.00560)      (0.00255)        (0.00412)       (0.00523)

      sum ln pj                                             -0.00214      -0.0132∗∗∗      0.00713∗∗       -0.000868      -0.00808∗∗∗       -0.00447       -0.000323       -0.00562∗∗∗      -0.00296
                                                            (0.00167)     (0.00220)       (0.00363)       (0.00165)       (0.00283)        (0.00393)      (0.00165)        (0.00198)       (0.00374)

      tabooi =1 x ln pi                                                   -0.0382∗∗∗      -0.0283∗∗∗                      -0.0455∗∗∗      -0.0420∗∗∗                      -0.0166∗∗∗      -0.0169∗∗∗
                                                                          (0.00278)       (0.00452)                       (0.00487)       (0.00553)                       (0.00351)       (0.00506)

      tabooi =1 x sum ln pj                                                0.0146∗∗∗      -0.0294∗∗∗                      0.00952∗∗∗      -0.0118∗∗∗                      0.00679∗∗∗        0.00198
                                                                           (0.00171)      (0.00159)                       (0.00280)       (0.00416)                       (0.00131)        (0.00265)




34
      sum (ln pj x tabooj )                                                               -0.0614∗∗∗                                       -0.0139∗∗                                       -0.00765
                                                                                          (0.00419)                                        (0.00621)                                       (0.00568)

      tabooi =1 x sum (ln pj x tabooj )                                                   0.0905∗∗∗                                       0.0342∗∗∗                                         0.0103∗
                                                                                          (0.00171)                                       (0.00659)                                        (0.00568)
      Observations                                         1,112,876       1,112,876      1,112,876       1,112,536       1,112,536       1,112,536       1,111,356        1,111,356       1,111,356
      Adjusted R2                                            0.563           0.564          0.571           0.588           0.588           0.588           0.599            0.599           0.599
      log prices and total expenditure controls               Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
      Household controls                                      Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
      product*district*round*quarter                          Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
      religion*district*round*quarter                         Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
      religion*state*product*round*quarter                    No              No             No              Yes             Yes             Yes             No               No              No
      religion*state*product*district*quarter                 No              No             No              No              No              No              Yes              Yes             Yes
      Notes: Dependent variable is an indicator for abstaining from good i. Taboo is an indicator equal to 1 if the good is considered a taboo for the religion of the household. Columns 1, 4 and 7
     include own and cross-price elasticities. Columns 2, 5 and 8 add the interaction between taboo and own and cross-price elasticities. Columns 3, 6 and 9 allow cross-price elasticities to differ
     depending on whether both goods are taboos. All regressions include the household controls used in Subramanian and Deaton (1996): log of household size, household demographic shares by
     age and gender, and indicators for being self-employed and working in the agricultural sector. Columns 1-3 include the baseline fixed effects, columns 4-6 add the fixed effects for cross-sectional
     identification and columns 7-9 for panel identification. Robust standard errors clustered at religion-district-round-quarter in parentheses. Regressions weighted by survey population weights.
     * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
Table F.4: Linear Approximation of Identity Choice with Cost, Status and Conflict, Household
Controls
                                                                            LHS Variable: Share Spent on Good i
                                                                   (1)                             (2)                           (3)
                                                                Baseline                         Cross-section                  Panel
 (xir − xis ) × (costr − costs )                                -0.0351                         -0.696∗∗∗                     -0.624∗∗∗
                                                                (0.0535)                        (0.0968)                      (0.0868)

 (xir − xis ) × (statusr − statuss )                            0.479∗∗∗                        0.246∗∗∗                       0.234∗∗∗
                                                                (0.0265)                        (0.0265)                       (0.0371)

 (xir − xis ) × conf lictr                                     0.549∗∗∗                         0.0819∗∗                       0.110∗∗
                                                               (0.0419)                         (0.0336)                      (0.0435)
 Observations                                                 33,677,408                       33,669,720                    33,651,244
 Adjusted R2                                                     0.767                            0.773                         0.778
 log price and total expenditure controls                         Yes                              Yes                           Yes
 household controls                                               Yes                              Yes                           Yes
 product*district*round*quarter                                   Yes                              Yes                           Yes
 religion*district*round*quarter                                  Yes                              Yes                           Yes
 religion*state*product*round*quarter                             No                               Yes                           No
 religion*state*product*district*quarter                          No                               No                            Yes
 Notes: Dependent variable is the share spent on good i in total food expenditure. xir − xis is the difference between prototypical religious
and ethnic budget share spent on good i. costr − costs is the difference in religious and ethnic Stone price indexes leaving out the cost of good
i. statusr − statuss is the difference between religious and ethnic status measured by national returns to the initial local occupational mix of
religion and ethnicity. conf lictr is an indicator for at least one occurrence of Hindu-Muslim conflict in the district in the quarter in which the
household is surveyed or in the preceding two quarters. Columns 1-3 include the household controls used in Subramanian and Deaton (1996):
log of household size, household demographic shares by age and gender, and indicators for being self-employed and working in the agricultural
sector. Column 1 includes the baseline fixed effects, column 2 adds the fixed effects for cross-sectional identification and column 3 for panel
identification. Robust standard errors clustered at religion-district-round-quarter in parentheses. Regressions weighted by survey population
weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                       35
 G       Regressions without NSS Round 50


                  Table G.1: Religious Conflict and Taboo Adherence, Only NSS 43 and 55
                                                              LHS Variable: Abstain from Consuming Good i
                                                                                                                         Panel
                                                                                                                               Cause of Conflict
                                                Baseline      Cross-section          Panel                                   Narrow       Relig Only
                                                   (1)               (2)              (3)          (4)           (5)             (6)           (7)
                                                   All               All              All         Urban         Rural            All           All
 taboo=1                                        0.187∗∗∗
                                               (0.00431)

 taboo=1 × conflict                            0.0863∗∗∗           0.0159         0.0577∗∗∗                                 0.0694∗∗∗      0.0464∗∗∗
                                               (0.0174)           (0.0105)        (0.0136)                                  (0.0140)       (0.0148)

 taboo=1 × conflict past 2 quarters                                                              0.0431∗∗     0.0493∗∗
                                                                                                 (0.0194)     (0.0196)

 taboo=1 × conflict present quarter                                                              0.0587∗∗      0.0222
                                                                                                 (0.0293)     (0.0300)
 Observations                                   878,524           878,300          876,956       347,556       527,104       876,956        876,956
 Adjusted R2                                     0.557             0.582            0.594         0.612         0.604         0.594          0.594
 log prices and total expenditure                 Yes               Yes              Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
 prod*district*round*quarter                      Yes               Yes              Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
 relig*district*round*quarter                     Yes               Yes              Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
 relig*state*prod*round*quarter                   No                Yes              No            No            No            No             No
 relig*state*prod*district*quarter                No                No               Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
 Notes: All regressions are restricted to NSS rounds 43 and 55 (i.e., without NSS round 50). Dependent variable is an indicator for abstaining from
good i. Taboo is an indicator equal to 1 if the good is considered a taboo for the religion of the household. Conflict is an indicator for at least one
occurrence of Hindu-Muslim conflict in the district. Columns 1-3 consider a conflict occurrence in the quarter in which the household is surveyed or
in the preceding two quarters. Columns 4-6 differentiate the effect of a conflict occurring in the quarter of the survey from conflict in the preceding
six months. Column 5 restricts the analysis to the urban population, and column 6 to the rural population. Column 1 includes the baseline fixed
effects, column 2 adds the fixed effects for cross-sectional identification and columns 3-7 for panel identification. Robust standard errors clustered at
religion-district-round-quarter in parentheses. Regressions weighted by survey population weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                        36
                           Table G.2: Status and Choice of Identity, Only NSS 43 and 55
                                                                          LHS Variable: Abstain from Consuming Good i
                                                       Baseline       Cross-section         Panel        Baseline      Cross-section          Panel
                                                           (1)               (2)              (3)            (4)              (5)              (6)
 taboo=1                                                0.199∗∗∗                                          0.207∗∗∗
                                                       (0.00430)                                         (0.00426)
                      national occ(r)
 taboo=1 × statusrdt                                    0.125∗∗∗        0.0772∗∗∗         0.0508∗∗∗
                                                        (0.0150)        (0.0137)          (0.0122)
                      national w(o)
 taboo=1 × statusrdt                                                                                     0.471∗∗∗         0.0867∗∗∗        0.0634∗∗∗
                                                                                                         (0.0231)         (0.0220)         (0.0242)
 Observations                                           873,956          873,732           872,396       860,272           860,076          859,316
 Adjusted R2                                             0.556            0.581             0.593          0.558            0.580            0.591
 log prices and total expenditure controls                Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes              Yes              Yes
 product*district*round*quarter                           Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes              Yes              Yes
 religion*district*round*quarter                          Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes              Yes              Yes
 religion*state*product*round*quarter                     No               Yes               No             No               Yes              No
 religion*state*product*district*quarter                  No               No                Yes            No               No               Yes
 Notes: All regressions are restricted to NSS rounds 43 and 55 (i.e., without NSS round 50). Dependent variable is an indicator for abstaining from
good i. Taboo is an indicator equal to 1 if the good is considered a taboo for the religion of the household. In columns 1-3, status is measured by
local returns to the national occupational mix of each religion. In columns 4-6, status is measured by national returns to the initial local occupational
mix of each religion. Columns 1 and 4 include the baseline fixed effects, columns 2 and 5 add the fixed effects for cross-sectional identification and
columns 3 and 6 for panel identification. Robust standard errors clustered at religion-district-round-quarter in parentheses. Regressions weighted by
survey population weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                        37
                                                  Table G.3: Costs, Price Elasticities and Identity, Only NSS 43 and 55
                                                                                                    LHS Variable: Abstain from Consuming Good i
                                                                            Baseline                                   Cross-section                                        Panel
                                                                (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)             (7)              (8)             (9)
      tabooi =1                                              0.193∗∗∗       0.190∗∗∗       0.240∗∗∗
                                                            (0.00422)       (0.0193)       (0.0165)

      ln pi                                                 0.0151∗∗∗      0.0491∗∗∗      0.0408∗∗∗       0.0107∗∗∗      0.0498∗∗∗       0.0474∗∗∗      0.00938∗∗∗        0.0232∗∗∗       0.0252∗∗∗
                                                            (0.00291)      (0.00408)      (0.00545)       (0.00275)      (0.00580)       (0.00633)      (0.00274)         (0.00486)       (0.00604)

      sum ln pj                                             -0.00247      -0.0135∗∗∗      0.00877∗∗       -0.000993      -0.00620∗∗      -0.000317       -0.000558      -0.00579∗∗∗      0.0000964
                                                            (0.00181)     (0.00238)       (0.00398)       (0.00179)       (0.00313)      (0.00434)       (0.00180)       (0.00221)       (0.00412)

      tabooi =1 x ln pi                                                   -0.0426∗∗∗      -0.0361∗∗∗                     -0.0484∗∗∗      -0.0458∗∗∗                      -0.0169∗∗∗      -0.0194∗∗∗
                                                                          (0.00321)       (0.00511)                      (0.00560)       (0.00627)                       (0.00429)       (0.00587)

      tabooi =1 x sum ln pj                                                0.0145∗∗∗      -0.0292∗∗∗                     0.00694∗∗       -0.0166∗∗∗                      0.00665∗∗∗       0.000727




38
                                                                           (0.00184)      (0.00174)                      (0.00311)       (0.00479)                       (0.00152)        (0.00310)

      sum (ln pj x tabooj )                                                               -0.0641∗∗∗                                     -0.0178∗∗                                         -0.0125∗
                                                                                          (0.00461)                                      (0.00693)                                        (0.00653)

      tabooi =1 x sum (ln pj x tabooj )                                                   0.0912∗∗∗                                      0.0378∗∗∗                                         0.0126∗
                                                                                          (0.00203)                                      (0.00751)                                        (0.00681)
      Observations                                           878,524        878,524        878,524         878,300        878,300         878,300         876,956          876,956         876,956
      Adjusted R2                                             0.557          0.557          0.565           0.581          0.582           0.582           0.594            0.594           0.594
      log prices and total expenditure controls                Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
      product*district*round*quarter                           Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
      religion*district*round*quarter                          Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
      religion*state*product*round*quarter                     No             No             No              Yes            Yes             Yes             No               No              No
      religion*state*product*district*quarter                  No             No             No              No             No              No              Yes              Yes             Yes
      Notes: All regressions are restricted to NSS rounds 43 and 55 (i.e., without NSS round 50). Dependent variable is an indicator for abstaining from good i. Taboo is an indicator equal to 1 if the
     good is considered a taboo for the religion of the household. Columns 1, 4 and 7 include own and cross-price elasticities. Columns 2, 5 and 8 add the interaction between taboo and own and
     cross-price elasticities. Columns 3, 6 and 9 allow cross-price elasticities to differ depending on whether both goods are taboos. Columns 1-3 include the baseline fixed effects, columns 4-6
     add the fixed effects for cross-sectional identification and columns 7-9 for panel identification. Robust standard errors clustered at religion-district-round-quarter in parentheses. Regressions
     weighted by survey population weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
Table G.4: Linear Approximation of Identity Choice with Cost, Status and Conflict, Only NSS 43
and 55
                                                                       LHS Variable: Share Spent on Good i
                                                                         (1)               (2)                (3)
                                                                      Baseline        Cross-section          Panel
              (xir − xis ) × (costr − costs )                         -0.172∗∗∗         -0.860∗∗∗          -0.752∗∗∗
                                                                      (0.0611)           (0.112)            (0.101)

              (xir − xis ) × (statusr − statuss )                      0.539∗∗∗          0.277∗∗∗           0.309∗∗∗
                                                                       (0.0309)          (0.0305)           (0.0434)

              (xir − xis ) × conf lictr                                0.545∗∗∗          0.0869∗∗           0.144∗∗
                                                                       (0.0442)          (0.0345)          (0.0563)
              Observations                                            26,668,432        26,662,356        26,638,796
              Adjusted R2                                               0.753              0.759             0.766
              log prices and total expenditure controls                   Yes               Yes               Yes
              product*district*round*quarter                              Yes               Yes               Yes
              religion*district*round*quarter                             Yes               Yes               Yes
              religion*state*product*round*quarter                        No                Yes               No
              religion*state*product*district*quarter                     No                No                Yes
              Notes: All regressions are restricted to NSS rounds 43 and 55 (i.e., without NSS round 50). Dependent
             variable is the share spent on good i in total food expenditure. xir − xis is the difference between proto-
             typical religious and ethnic budget share spent on good i. costr − costs is the difference in religious and
             ethnic Stone price indexes leaving out the cost of good i. statusr − statuss is the difference between reli-
             gious and ethnic status measured by national returns to the initial local occupational mix of religion and
             ethnicity. conf lictr is an indicator for at least one occurrence of Hindu-Muslim conflict in the district in
             the quarter in which the household is surveyed or in the preceding two quarters. Column 1 includes the
             baseline fixed effects, column 2 adds the fixed effects for cross-sectional identification and column 3 for
             panel identification. Robust standard errors clustered at religion-district-round-quarter in parentheses.
             Regressions weighted by survey population weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                 39
 H       Baseline Taboo Regressions with Ovo-Pesco Vegetarianism


             Table H.1: Religious Conflict and Taboo Adherence, Ovo-Pesco Vegetarianism
                                                               LHS Variable: Abstain from Consuming Good i
                                                                                                                           Panel
                                                                                                                                 Cause of Conflict
                                                Baseline       Cross-section         Panel                                     Narrow        Relig Only
                                                    (1)               (2)              (3)          (4)            (5)             (6)            (7)
                                                    All               All              All         Urban          Rural            All            All
 taboo=1                                         0.192∗∗∗
                                                (0.00389)

 taboo=1 × conflict                              0.122∗∗∗         0.0515∗∗∗        0.0715∗∗∗                                  0.0761∗∗∗       0.0750∗∗∗
                                                 (0.0169)         (0.0107)         (0.0103)                                   (0.0106)        (0.0123)

 taboo=1 × conflict past 2 quarters                                                               0.0448∗∗      0.0714∗∗∗
                                                                                                  (0.0205)      (0.0146)

 taboo=1 × conflict present quarter                                                               0.0852∗∗       0.0287
                                                                                                  (0.0333)      (0.0198)
 Observations                                   1,115,640        1,115,292         1,114,116      347,556       764,344       1,114,116       1,114,116
 Adjusted R2                                      0.423            0.454             0.467         0.528         0.465          0.467           0.467
 log prices and total expenditure                  Yes              Yes               Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes
 prod*district*round*quarter                       Yes              Yes               Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes
 relig*district*round*quarter                      Yes              Yes               Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes
 relig*state*prod*round*quarter                    No               Yes               No            No            No             No              No
 relig*state*prod*district*quarter                 No               No                Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes
 Notes: Dependent variable is an indicator for abstaining from good i. Taboo is an indicator equal to 1 if the good is considered a taboo for the religion
of the household. The vegetarian taboo is restricted to abstention of red meat and chicken (excluding fish and eggs). Conflict is an indicator for at
least one occurrence of Hindu-Muslim conflict in the district. Columns 1-3 consider a conflict occurrence in the quarter in which the household is
surveyed or in the preceding two quarters. Columns 4-6 differentiate the effect of a conflict occurring in the quarter of the survey from conflict in the
preceding six months. Column 5 restricts the analysis to the urban population, and column 6 to the rural population. Column 1 includes the baseline
fixed effects, column 2 adds the fixed effects for cross-sectional identification and columns 3-7 for panel identification. Robust standard errors clustered
at religion-district-round-quarter in parentheses. Regressions weighted by survey population weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                        40
                      Table H.2: Status and Choice of Identity, Ovo-Pesco Vegetarianism
                                                                           LHS Variable: Abstain from Consuming Good i
                                                        Baseline       Cross-section          Panel        Baseline      Cross-section          Panel
                                                            (1)               (2)               (3)           (4)               (5)               (6)
 taboo=1                                                 0.210∗∗∗                                          0.227∗∗∗
                                                        (0.00403)                                         (0.00410)
                       national occ(r)
 taboo=1 × statusrdt                                     0.154∗∗∗         0.0750∗∗∗        0.0341∗∗∗
                                                         (0.0134)         (0.0125)         (0.0109)
                       national w(o)
 taboo=1 × statusrdt                                                                                       0.554∗∗∗         0.0903∗∗∗           0.0141
                                                                                                           (0.0212)          (0.0206)          (0.0232)
 Observations                                           1,111,072        1,110,724         1,109,544      1,089,132         1,088,876         1,088,280
 Adjusted R2                                              0.424            0.454             0.467          0.425              0.452            0.464
 log prices and total expenditure controls                 Yes              Yes               Yes             Yes               Yes               Yes
 product*district*round*quarter                            Yes              Yes               Yes             Yes               Yes               Yes
 religion*district*round*quarter                           Yes              Yes               Yes             Yes               Yes               Yes
 religion*state*product*round*quarter                      No               Yes               No              No                Yes               No
 religion*state*product*district*quarter                   No               No                Yes             No                No                Yes
 Notes: Dependent variable is an indicator for abstaining from good i. Taboo is an indicator equal to 1 if the good is considered a taboo for the religion
of the household. The vegetarian taboo is restricted to abstention of red meat and chicken (excluding fish and eggs). In columns 1-3, status is measured
by local returns to the national occupational mix of each religion. In columns 4-6, status is measured by national returns to the initial local occupational
mix of each religion. Columns 1 and 4 include the baseline fixed effects, columns 2 and 5 add the fixed effects for cross-sectional identification and
columns 3 and 6 for panel identification. Robust standard errors clustered at religion-district-round-quarter in parentheses. Regressions weighted by
survey population weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                         41
                                              Table H.3: Costs, Price Elasticities and Identity, Ovo-Pesco Vegetarianism
                                                                                                   LHS Variable: Abstain from Consuming Good i
                                                                            Baseline                                    Cross-section                                       Panel
                                                               (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)            (7)             (8)             (9)
      tabooi =1                                             0.199∗∗∗        0.217∗∗∗        0.286∗∗∗
                                                           (0.00384)        (0.0201)        (0.0166)

      ln pi                                                0.0102∗∗∗        0.0164∗∗∗       0.0149∗∗∗      0.00520∗∗      0.0439∗∗∗        0.0429∗∗∗      0.00371        0.0182∗∗∗       0.0203∗∗∗
                                                           (0.00280)        (0.00369)       (0.00531)      (0.00265)      (0.00546)        (0.00617)     (0.00264)       (0.00453)       (0.00589)

      sum ln pj                                            -0.00409∗∗      -0.00473∗∗       0.0230∗∗∗      -0.00244      -0.00923∗∗∗       0.000949      -0.00194       -0.00591∗∗∗       0.00163
                                                            (0.00180)       (0.00233)       (0.00424)      (0.00178)      (0.00327)        (0.00477)     (0.00178)       (0.00223)       (0.00458)

      tabooi =1 x ln pi                                                   -0.00786∗∗∗       -0.0106∗∗                     -0.0481∗∗∗      -0.0472∗∗∗                     -0.0178∗∗∗      -0.0204∗∗∗
                                                                           (0.00275)        (0.00500)                     (0.00515)       (0.00605)                      (0.00391)       (0.00570)

      tabooi =1 x sum ln pj                                                 0.000886       -0.0472∗∗∗                     0.00892∗∗∗      -0.0192∗∗∗                    0.00507∗∗∗       -0.00347




42
                                                                            (0.00173)      (0.00155)                      (0.00315)       (0.00448)                     (0.00147)        (0.00306)

      sum (ln pj x tabooj )                                                                -0.0825∗∗∗                                     -0.0279∗∗∗                                     -0.0175∗∗
                                                                                           (0.00478)                                      (0.00787)                                      (0.00728)

      tabooi =1 x sum (ln pj x tabooj )                                                      0.110∗∗∗                                     0.0485∗∗∗                                      0.0189∗∗∗
                                                                                            (0.00171)                                     (0.00783)                                      (0.00700)
      Observations                                         1,115,640        1,115,640       1,115,640      1,115,292      1,115,292       1,115,292      1,114,116       1,114,116       1,114,116
      Adjusted R2                                            0.423            0.423           0.436          0.454          0.454           0.454          0.467           0.467           0.467
      log prices and total expenditure controls               Yes              Yes              Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
      product*district*round*quarter                          Yes              Yes              Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
      religion*district*round*quarter                         Yes              Yes              Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
      religion*state*product*round*quarter                    No               No               No            Yes            Yes             Yes            No              No              No
      religion*state*product*district*quarter                 No               No               No            No             No              No             Yes             Yes             Yes
      Notes: Dependent variable is an indicator for abstaining from good i. Taboo is an indicator equal to 1 if the good is considered a taboo for the religion of the household. The vegetarian taboo
     is restricted to abstention of red meat and chicken (excluding fish and eggs). Columns 1, 4 and 7 include own and cross-price elasticities. Columns 2, 5 and 8 add the interaction between taboo
     and own and cross-price elasticities. Columns 3, 6 and 9 allow cross-price elasticities to differ depending on whether both goods are taboos. Columns 1-3 include the baseline fixed effects,
     columns 4-6 add the fixed effects for cross-sectional identification and columns 7-9 for panel identification. Robust standard errors clustered at religion-district-round-quarter in parentheses.
     Regressions weighted by survey population weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
 I      Linear Approximation of Identity Choice


Table I.1: Linear Approximation of Identity Choice , NSS 43, with and without Interstate Migrants
                                                                      LHS Variable: Share Spent on Good i
                                                                        All                   Without Interstate Migrants
                                                             (1)              (2)                 (3)               (4)
                                                          Baseline       Cross-section         Baseline        Cross-section
     (xir − xis ) × (costr − costs )                      -0.267∗∗∗        -1.051∗∗∗           -0.216∗∗∗         -1.000∗∗∗
                                                          (0.0753)          (0.150)            (0.0746)           (0.149)

     (xir − xis ) × (statusr − statuss )                  0.623∗∗∗            0.432∗∗∗         0.606∗∗∗           0.419∗∗∗
                                                          (0.0407)            (0.0407)         (0.0412)           (0.0423)

     (xir − xis ) × conf lictr                            0.545∗∗∗          0.102∗∗∗           0.538∗∗∗           0.0795∗
                                                          (0.0562)          (0.0385)           (0.0546)           (0.0418)
     Observations                                        13,994,020        13,989,680         12,536,772         12,532,184
     Adjusted R2                                           0.740             0.746               0.746             0.752
     log prices and total expenditure controls               Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes
     product*district*round*quarter                          Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes
     religion*district*round*quarter                         Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes
     religion*state*product*round*quarter                    No                Yes                No                 Yes
  Notes: All regressions are restricted to the NSS 43rd round – the only round for which we observe interstate migrants. Columns
 1-2 are estimated using the entire NSS 43 sample, and columns 3-4 omit households with at least one inter-State migrant.
 Prototypical bundles are recomputed accordingly. Dependent variable is the share spent on good i in total food expenditure.
 xir −xis is the difference between prototypical religious and ethnic budget shares spent on good i. costr −costs is the difference
 in religious and ethnic Stone price indexes leaving out the cost of good i. statusr − statuss is the difference between religious
 and ethnic status measured by national returns to the initial local occupational mix of religion and ethnicity. conf lictr is an
 indicator for at least one occurrence of Hindu-Muslim conflict in the district in the quarter in which the household is surveyed
 or in the preceding two quarters. Columns 1 and 3 include the baseline fixed effects, columns 2 and 4 adds the fixed effects for
 cross-sectional identification. Robust standard errors clustered at religion-district-round-quarter in parentheses. Regressions
 weighted by survey population weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                43
Table I.2: Linear Approximation of Identity Choice with Cost, Status and Conflict, Including
Cross-Price Effects
                                                                                LHS Variable: Share Spent on Good i
                                                            (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)              (6)
 (xir − xis ) × (costr − costs )                         -0.0644         -0.646∗∗∗       -0.635∗∗∗        -0.0339         -0.606∗∗∗        -0.597∗∗∗
                                                         (0.0600)         (0.109)        (0.0990)         (0.0592)         (0.108)         (0.0981)

 (xir − xis ) × (statusr − statuss )                     0.479∗∗∗        0.272∗∗∗         0.232∗∗∗        0.476∗∗∗         0.271∗∗∗        0.228∗∗∗
                                                         (0.0287)        (0.0317)         (0.0462)        (0.0286)         (0.0317)        (0.0461)

 (xir − xis ) × conf lictr                              0.546∗∗∗          0.0473          0.104∗∗         0.544∗∗∗         0.0468           0.104∗∗
                                                        (0.0461)         (0.0395)        (0.0494)         (0.0459)        (0.0394)         (0.0493)
 Observations                                          16,878,102       16,868,583      16,845,763       16,741,240      16,731,823       16,709,148
 Adjusted R2                                             0.770             0.777           0.782           0.772           0.778             0.784
 log prices and total expenditure controls                 Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes
 product*district*round*quarter                            Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes
 religion*district*round*quarter                           Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes
 religion*state*product*round*quarter                      No               Yes             No               No              Yes              No
 religion*state*product*district*quarter                   No               No              Yes              No              No               Yes
 Notes: Dependent variable is the share spent on good i in total food expenditure. xir − xis is the difference between prototypical religious and
ethnic budget share spent on good i. costr − costs is the difference in religious and ethnic Stone price indexes leaving out the cost of good i.
statusr − statuss is the difference between religious and ethnic status measured by national returns to the initial local occupational mix of religion
and ethnicity. conf lictr is an indicator for at least one occurrence of Hindu-Muslim conflict in the district in the quarter in which the household
is surveyed or in the preceding two quarters. For computational feasibility, the table is based on a random 50 percent subsample at the religion-
district-time level. Columns 4-6 include cross-price terms with respect to a Stone price aggregator of thirteen food product groups designated in
the NSS product classification (e.g. cereals, fruits etc.). Columns 1 and 4 include the baseline fixed effects, columns 2 and 5 add the fixed effects for
cross-sectional identification and columns 3 and 6 for panel identification. Robust standard errors clustered at religion-district-round-quarter in
parentheses. Regressions weighted by survey population weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                        44
Table I.3: Identity Choice with Cost, Status and Conflict, Relaxing Symmetry across Religious
and Ethnic Identities
                                                  LHS Variable: Share Spent on Good i
                                                                 (1)              (2)                (3)
                                                              Baseline       Cross-section          Panel
      xir × (costr − costs )                                  0.0816∗          -0.359∗∗∗          -0.297∗∗∗
                                                              (0.0469)         (0.0939)           (0.0798)

      xis × (costr − costs )                                   0.0608           0.619∗∗∗           0.568∗∗∗
                                                              (0.0577)          (0.0928)           (0.0833)

      xir × (statusr − statuss )                              0.294∗∗∗          0.149∗∗∗           0.149∗∗∗
                                                              (0.0225)          (0.0233)           (0.0351)

      xis × (statusr − statuss )                             -0.490∗∗∗          -0.258∗∗∗         -0.252∗∗∗
                                                             (0.0258)           (0.0271)          (0.0387)

      xir × conf lictr                                        0.532∗∗∗          0.0700∗∗           0.105∗∗∗
                                                              (0.0403)          (0.0329)           (0.0396)

      xis × conf lictr                                        -0.456∗∗∗         -0.135∗∗           -0.135
                                                              (0.0634)          (0.0672)          (0.0954)
      Observations                                           33,763,092        33,755,156        33,736,680
      Adjusted R2                                               0.767            0.773              0.778
      log prices and total expenditure controls                  Yes               Yes               Yes
      district*product*round*quarter                             Yes               Yes               Yes
      religion*district*round*quarter                            Yes               Yes               Yes
      religion*state*product*round*quarter                       No                Yes               No
      religion*state*product*district*quarter                    No                No                Yes
     Notes: Dependent variable is the share spent on good i in total food expenditure. xir and xis are, respec-
    tively, the prototypical religious and ethnic budget share spent on good i. costr −costs is the difference in
    religious and ethnic Stone price indexes leaving out the cost of good i. statusr − statuss is the difference
    between religious and ethnic status measured by national returns to the initial local occupational mix of
    religion and ethnicity. conf lictr is an indicator for at least one occurrence of Hindu-Muslim conflict in
    the district in the quarter in which the household is surveyed or in the preceding two quarters. Column 1
    includes the baseline fixed effects, column 2 adds the fixed effects for cross-sectional identification and
    column 3 for panel identification. Robust standard errors clustered at religion-district-round-quarter in
    parentheses. Regressions weighted by survey population weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                        45
Table I.4: Linear Approximation of Identity Choice with Cost, Status and Conflict, by Religion
                                                                    LHS Variable: Share Spent on Good i
                                                                      (1)              (2)                 (3)
                                                                   Baseline       Cross-section           Panel
       Hindu SC ×(xir − xis ) × (costr − costs )                   0.182∗∗∗         -0.646∗∗∗           -0.564∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.0549)          (0.132)            (0.0874)

       Hindu UC ×(xir − xis ) × (costr − costs )                   -0.0989∗          -0.734∗∗∗          -0.639∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.0572)           (0.120)           (0.0958)

       Muslim ×(xir − xis ) × (costr − costs )                     0.278∗∗∗          -0.557∗∗∗          -0.660∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.0719)           (0.182)            (0.110)

       Christian ×(xir − xis ) × (costr − costs )                   -0.136            -0.579            -1.051∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.201)           (0.428)            (0.254)

       Hindu SC ×(xir − xis ) × (statusr − statuss )               -0.0429             0.0560            0.0675
                                                                   (0.0426)           (0.0426)          (0.0610)

       Hindu UC ×(xir − xis ) × (statusr − statuss )               1.585∗∗∗           0.827∗∗∗          0.759∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.0755)           (0.0875)          (0.123)

       Muslim ×(xir − xis ) × (statusr − statuss )                 0.351∗∗∗           0.152∗∗∗          0.180∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.0554)           (0.0462)          (0.0677)

       Christian ×(xir − xis ) × (statusr − statuss )               0.201∗∗            0.207∗∗           0.374∗∗
                                                                   (0.0915)           (0.0830)           (0.174)

       Hindu SC ×(xir − xis ) × conf lictr                         0.453∗∗∗          0.0747∗∗           0.0754∗
                                                                   (0.0460)          (0.0349)           (0.0432)

       Hindu UC ×(xir − xis ) × conf lictr                         0.508∗∗∗           0.104∗∗∗           0.104∗∗
                                                                   (0.0516)           (0.0394)          (0.0471)

       Muslim ×(xir − xis ) × conf lictr                           0.543∗∗∗          0.0815∗∗           0.177∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.0465)          (0.0381)           (0.0454)

       Christian ×(xir − xis ) × conf lictr                             0                0                   0
                                                                       (.)              (.)                 (.)
       Observations                                               33,763,092        33,755,156         33,736,680
       Adjusted R2                                                   0.767            0.773               0.778
       log prices and total expenditure controls                      Yes               Yes                Yes
       district*product*round*quarter                                 Yes               Yes                Yes
       religion*district*round*quarter                                Yes               Yes                Yes
       religion*state*product*round*quarter                           No                Yes                No
       religion*state*product*district*quarter                        No                No                 Yes
       Notes: Dependent variable is the share spent on good i in total food expenditure. xir − xis is the difference
      between prototypical religious and ethnic budget share spent on good i. costr − costs is the difference in
      religious and ethnic Stone price indexes leaving out the cost of good i. statusr − statuss is the difference
      between religious and ethnic status measured by national returns to the initial local occupational mix of
      religion and ethnicity. conf lictr is an indicator for at least one occurrence of Hindu-Muslim conflict in the
      district in the quarter in which the household is surveyed or in the preceding two quarters. All differences are
      interacted with the religion of the household: Hindu scheduled caste (SC), Hindu upper caste (UC), Muslim
      or Christian. Column 1 includes the baseline fixed effects, column 2 adds the fixed effects for cross-sectional
      identification and column 3 for panel identification. Robust standard errors clustered at religion-district-
      round-quarter in parentheses. Regressions weighted by survey population weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05,
      *** p < 0.01.
                                                            46
Table I.5: Linear Approximation of Identity Choice with Cost and Status, 1987-2010 (NSS 43rd to
NSS 66th)
                                                                      LHS Variable: Share Spent on Good i
                                                                 (1)                        (2)                      (3)
                                                              Baseline                   Cross-section              Panel
  (xir − xis ) × (costr − costs )                             -0.0128                    -0.750∗∗∗                -0.403∗∗∗
                                                              (0.0397)                   (0.0789)                 (0.0466)

  (xir − xis ) × (statusr − statuss )                         0.395∗∗∗                   0.172∗∗∗                 0.116∗∗∗
                                                              (0.0218)                   (0.0199)                 (0.0226)
  Observations                                               56,793,748                 56,783,601               56,773,769
  Adjusted R2                                                  0.761                      0.768                    0.771
  log prices and total expenditure controls                      Yes                        Yes                      Yes
  product*district*round*quarter                                 Yes                        Yes                      Yes
  religion*district*round*quarter                                Yes                        Yes                      Yes
  religion*state*product*round*quarter                           No                         Yes                      No
  religion*state*product*district*quarter                        No                         No                       Yes
  Notes: Dependent variable is the share spent on good i in total food expenditure. xir − xis is the difference between prototypi-
 cal religious and ethnic budget shares spent on good i. costr −costs is the difference in religious and ethnic Stone price indexes
 leaving out the cost of good i. statusr − statuss is the difference between religious and ethnic status measured by national
 returns to the initial local occupational mix of religion and ethnicity. Column 1 includes the baseline fixed effects, column 2
 adds the fixed effects for cross-sectional identification and column 3 for panel identification. Robust standard errors clustered
 at religion-district-round-quarter in parentheses. Regressions weighted by survey population weights. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05,
 *** p < 0.01.




                                                                47
J                            Counterfactuals


                                    Figure J.1: Population Changing Identity by Religion, 1987-2000

                                         Hindu SC                                                                       Hindu UC
Conflict Cost Status Total




                                                                            Conflict Cost Status Total
                             20m   10m       0         10m            20m                                20m     10m          0             10m   20m

                                          Muslim                                                                         Christian
Conflict Cost Status Total




                                                                            Conflict Cost Status Total




                             20m   10m       0         10m            20m                                20m     10m          0             10m   20m

                                            Move to Ethnic Identity                                            Move to Religious Identity




                                                                       48
Figure J.2: Proportion of Population Changing Identity across District-Religion Cells in Gujarat,
Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh, 1987-2000
               Status Changes 1987-2000                               Cost Changes 1987-2000




 0.3     0.2       0.1     0      0.1       0.2     0.3 0.3     0.2      0.1     0       0.1      0.2     0.3
               Conflict Changes 1987-2000                             Total Changes 1987-2000




 0.3     0.2       0.1     0      0.1       0.2     0.3 0.3     0.2      0.1     0       0.1      0.2     0.3

        Change in Proportion Identifying with Ethnicity       Change in Proportion Identifying with Religion




                                                     49
Figure J.3: Realized Compensating Variation Gains from Identity Changes, 1987-2000
                    Status Changes 1987-2000                                    Cost Changes 1987-2000




       0.05                     0                         0.05                0.05             0                 0.05
                    Conflict Changes 1987-2000                                  Total Changes 1987-2000




       0.05                         0                       0.05 0.05                      0                     0.05

                      Realized CV Gain Moving to Ethnic Identity (Proportional Increase)
                      Realized CV Gain Moving to Religious Identity (Proportional Increase)




Figure J.4: Potential Compensating Variation Gains from Identity Changes, 1987-2000
                    Status Changes 1987-2000                                    Cost Changes 1987-2000




        0.4   0.3   0.2   0.1       0   0.1   0.2   0.3     0.4 0.4     0.3    0.2   0.1   0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4
                    Conflict Changes 1987-2000                                  Total Changes 1987-2000




        0.4   0.3   0.2   0.1       0   0.1   0.2   0.3     0.4 0.4     0.3    0.2   0.1   0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4

                      Potential CV Gain Moving to Ethnic Identity (Proportional Increase)
                      Potential CV Gain Moving to Religious Identity (Proportional Increase)




                                                                 50
 K       Ethnic and Religious Parties
     Using party names from the Jensenius and Verniers (2017) database, we classify parties into
four categories: ethnic/regional; Muslim; Hindu upper caste; and Hindu scheduled caste. This
classification is derived from each political party’s founding manifesto, the political almanac
published by Centre for Public Affairs, and media reports on the party’s political philosophy and
outreach. Table K.1 below reports the resulting list of religious parties and Table K.2 reports the
list of ethnic parties.
     An alternative classification of ethnic parties uses the category “State Party” derived from
the election commission classification. Every year, the election commission classifies parties to
four types: (1) National Parties (currently 7); (2) State Parties (Currently 49); (3) Unrecognized
regional parties (1785); and (4) Independents. Table K.2 provides the list of State Parties.



                               Table K.1: Classification of Religious Parties
                          Religion                 Religious Parties
                          Hindu Upper Caste        Bhartiya Janta Party

                          Hindu Scheduled Caste    Bahujan Samaj Party
                                                   Lok Jan Shakti Party
                                                   Pattali Makkal Katchi

                          Muslim                   Indian Union Muslim League
                                                   Muslim League Kerala State Committee




                                     Table K.2: Classification of Ethnic Parties

 State               Ethnic Parties                                       State Parties (Election Commission)

 Andhra Pradesh      Lok Dal                                              Indian Union Muslim League
                     Nationalist Congress Party                           Lok Dal
                     Ntr Telugu Desam Party (Lakshmi Parvathi)            Muslim League Kerala State Committee
                     Samajwadi Janata Party                               Ntr Telugu Desam Party (Lakshmi Parvathi)
                     Shivsena                                             Rashtriya Janata Dal
                     Sikkim Sangram Parishad                              Samajwadi Janata Party
                     Telangana Rashtra Samithi                            Samajwadi Party
                     Telugu Desam Party                                   Shivsena
                                                                          Sikkim Sangram Parishad
                                                                          Telangana Rashtra Samithi
                                                                          Telugu Desam Party

 Arunachal Pradesh   Arunachal Congress                                   Arunachal Congress
                     Nationalist Congress Party

 Assam               All India Trinamool Congress                         All India Trinamool Congress
                                                                                               Continued on next page


                                                        51
                       Table K.2: Classification of Ethnic Parties (Continued)

State          Ethnic Parties                                  State Parties (Election Commission)

               Asom Gana Parishad                              Asom Gana Parishad
               Lok Dal                                         Autonomous State Demand Committee
               Nationalist Congress Party                      Indian Congress (Socialist)
               Plains Tribals Council Of Assam                 Janata Dal (United)
               Shivsena                                        Lok Dal
               United Minorities Front Assam                   Muslim League Kerala State Committee
                                                               Plains Tribals Council Of Assam
                                                               Rashtriya Janata Dal
                                                               Revolutionary Socialist Party
                                                               Samajwadi Party
                                                               Shivsena
                                                               United Minorities Front Assam

Bihar          All India Jharkhand Party                       All India Forward Block
               Jharkhand Mukti Morcha                          All India Jharkhand Party
               Lok Dal                                         Indian Congress (Socialist)
               Nationalist Congress Party                      Indian Conress (J)
               Shivsena                                        Indian Union Muslim League
               United Goans Democratic Party                   Janata Dal (United)
                                                               Jharkhand Mukti Morcha
                                                               Lok Dal
                                                               Muslim League Kerala State Committee
                                                               Rashtriya Janata Dal
                                                               Revolutionary Socialist Party
                                                               Rld
                                                               Samajwadi Party
                                                               Shivsena
                                                               United Goans Democratic Party

Chhattisgarh   Jharkhand Mukti Morcha                          Janata Dal (United)
               Nationalist Congress Party                      Jharkhand Mukti Morcha
               Shivsena                                        Samajwadi Party
                                                               Shivsena

Delhi          All India Trinamool Congress                    All India Forward Block
               Indian National Lok Dal                         All India Trinamool Congress
               Jammu & Kashmir National Panthers Party         Indian Congress (Socialist)
               Jharkhand Mukti Morcha                          Indian National Lok Dal
               Lok Dal                                         Indian Union Muslim League
               Nationalist Congress Party                      Jammu & Kashmir National Panthers Party
               Shivsena                                        Janata Dal (United)
               Uttarakhand Kranti Dal                          Jharkhand Mukti Morcha
                                                               Lok Dal
                                                               Rashtriya Janata Dal
                                                                                  Continued on next page



                                                 52
                           Table K.2: Classification of Ethnic Parties (Continued)

State              Ethnic Parties                                  State Parties (Election Commission)

                                                                   Rld
                                                                   Samajwadi Party
                                                                   Shivsena
                                                                   Uttarakhand Kranti Dal

Goa                Nationalist Congress Party                      Samajwadi Party
                   Shivsena                                        Shivsena
                   United Goans Democratic Party                   United Goans Democratic Party

Gujarat            Lok Dal                                         Indian Union Muslim League
                   Nationalist Congress Party                      Janata Dal (United)
                   Shivsena                                        Lok Dal
                                                                   Rashtriya Janata Dal
                                                                   Revolutionary Socialist Party
                                                                   Samajwadi Party
                                                                   Shivsena

Haryana            Haryana Vikas Party                             All India Forward Block
                   Indian National Lok Dal                         Haryana Vikas Party
                   Lok Dal                                         Indian Congress (Socialist)
                   Nationalist Congress Party                      Indian National Lok Dal
                   Shivsena                                        Janata Dal (United)
                                                                   Lok Dal
                                                                   Rashtriya Janata Dal
                                                                   Rld
                                                                   Samajwadi Party
                                                                   Shivsena

Himachal Pradesh   Lok Dal                                         Indian Congress (Socialist)
                   Nationalist Congress Party                      Lok Dal
                   Shivsena                                        Samajwadi Party
                                                                   Shivsena

Jammu & Kashmir    All India Jharkhand Party                       All India Jharkhand Party
                   Jammu & Kashmir National Conference             Jammu & Kashmir National Conference
                   Jammu & Kashmir National Panthers Party         Jammu & Kashmir National Panthers Party
                   Lok Dal                                         Janata Dal (United)
                   Nationalist Congress Party                      Lok Dal
                   Samajwadi Janata Party                          Rashtriya Janata Dal
                   Shivsena                                        Samajwadi Janata Party
                                                                   Shivsena

Karnataka          All India Trinamool Congress                    All India Trinamool Congress
                   Kerala Congress (Pillai Group)                  Indian Congress (Socialist)
                                                                                       Continued on next page



                                                    53
                         Table K.2: Classification of Ethnic Parties (Continued)

State            Ethnic Parties                                  State Parties (Election Commission)

                 Lok Dal                                         Indian Union Muslim League
                 Nationalist Congress Party                      Janata Dal (United)
                 Samajwadi Janata Party                          Kerala Congress (Pillai Group)
                 Shivsena                                        Lok Dal
                                                                 Muslim League Kerala State Committee
                                                                 Rashtriya Janata Dal
                                                                 Samajwadi Janata Party
                                                                 Samajwadi Party
                                                                 Shivsena

Kerala           Lok Dal                                         All India Forward Block
                 Nationalist Congress Party                      Indian Congress (Socialist)
                 Shivsena                                        Janata Dal (United)
                                                                 Kerala Congress
                                                                 Kerala Congress (M)
                                                                 Lok Dal
                                                                 Muslim League Kerala State Committee
                                                                 Rashtriya Janata Dal
                                                                 Revolutionary Socialist Party
                                                                 Shivsena

Madhya Pradesh   Indian National Lok Dal                         All India Forward Block
                 Jharkhand Mukti Morcha                          Indian Congress (Socialist)
                 Lok Dal                                         Indian National Lok Dal
                 Nationalist Congress Party                      Indian Union Muslim League
                 Shivsena                                        Janata Dal (United)
                                                                 Jharkhand Mukti Morcha
                                                                 Lok Dal
                                                                 Muslim League Kerala State Committee
                                                                 Rashtriya Janata Dal
                                                                 Revolutionary Socialist Party
                                                                 Rld
                                                                 Samajwadi Party
                                                                 Shivsena

Maharashtra      Lok Dal                                         All India Forward Block
                 Nationalist Congress Party                      Indian Congress (Socialist)
                 Shivsena                                        Indian Union Muslim League
                 Sikkim Sangram Parishad                         Janata Dal (United)
                                                                 Lok Dal
                                                                 Muslim League Kerala State Committee
                                                                 Peasant’S & Workers’ Party
                                                                 Rashtriya Janata Dal
                                                                 Rld
                                                                                    Continued on next page



                                                  54
                    Table K.2: Classification of Ethnic Parties (Continued)

State       Ethnic Parties                                  State Parties (Election Commission)

                                                            Samajwadi Party
                                                            Shivsena
                                                            Sikkim Sangram Parishad

Manipur     Federal Party Of Manipur                        Federal Party Of Manipur
            Kuki National Assembly                          Indian Congress (Socialist)
            Manipur People’S Party                          Janata Dal (United)
            Nationalist Congress Party                      Kuki National Assembly
                                                            Manipur People’S Party
                                                            Rashtriya Janata Dal
                                                            Revolutionary Socialist Party

Meghalaya   Hill State People’S Democratic Party            Hill State People’S Democratic Party
            Manipur People’S Party                          Manipur People’S Party
            Nationalist Congress Party                      Rashtriya Janata Dal
                                                            Samajwadi Party
                                                            United Democratic Party

Mizoram     Mizo National Front                             Janata Dal (United)
            Peoples Conference                              Mizo National Front
                                                            Peoples Conference
                                                            Rashtriya Janata Dal

Nagaland    All India Trinamool Congress                    All India Trinamool Congress
            Naga National Democratic Party                  Janata Dal (United)
            Naga Peoples Front                              Naga National Democratic Party
            Nationalist Congress Party                      Naga Peoples Front
                                                            Rld

Orissa      All India Jharkhand Party                       All India Forward Block
            All India Trinamool Congress                    All India Jharkhand Party
            Jharkhand Mukti Morcha                          All India Trinamool Congress
            Lok Dal                                         Biju Janata Dal
            Nationalist Congress Party                      Indian Congress (Socialist)
            Shivsena                                        Indian Conress (J)
            Sikkim Sangram Parishad                         Janata Dal (United)
                                                            Jharkhand Mukti Morcha
                                                            Lok Dal
                                                            Rashtriya Janata Dal
                                                            Revolutionary Socialist Party
                                                            Samajwadi Party
                                                            Shivsena
                                                            Sikkim Sangram Parishad


                                                                                   Continued on next page



                                             55
                     Table K.2: Classification of Ethnic Parties (Continued)

State        Ethnic Parties                                  State Parties (Election Commission)

Punjab       Lok Dal                                         All India Forward Block
             Nationalist Congress Party                      Indian Congress (Socialist)
             Shivsena                                        Janata Dal (United)
                                                             Lok Dal
                                                             Rashtriya Janata Dal
                                                             Rld
                                                             Samajwadi Party
                                                             Shiromani Akali Dal
                                                             Shivsena

Rajasthan    All India Trinamool Congress                    All India Forward Block
             Indian National Lok Dal                         All India Trinamool Congress
             Jammu & Kashmir National Panthers Party         Indian Congress (J) Trikha Group
             Lok Dal                                         Indian Congress (Socialist)
             Nationalist Congress Party                      Indian Conress (J)
             Shivsena                                        Indian National Lok Dal
             Sikkim Sangram Parishad                         Indian Union Muslim League
                                                             Jammu & Kashmir National Panthers Party
                                                             Janata Dal (United)
                                                             Lok Dal
                                                             Muslim League Kerala State Committee
                                                             Rashtriya Janata Dal
                                                             Revolutionary Socialist Party
                                                             Rld
                                                             Samajwadi Party
                                                             Shivsena
                                                             Sikkim Sangram Parishad

Sikkim       Sikkim Democratic Front                         Revolutionary Socialist Party
             Sikkim Sangram Parishad                         Sikkim Democratic Front
                                                             Sikkim Sangram Parishad

Tamil Nadu   Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam                       All India Forward Block
             Lok Dal                                         Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam
             Manipur People’S Party                          Indian Congress (Socialist)
             Marumalarchi Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam          Indian Union Muslim League
             Nationalist Congress Party                      Janata Dal (United)
             Pondichery Mannila Makkal Munnani               Lok Dal
             Shivsena                                        Manipur People’S Party
                                                             Marumalarchi Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam
                                                             Muslim League Kerala State Committee
                                                             Pattali Makkal Katchi
                                                             Pondichery Mannila Makkal Munnani
                                                             Rashtriya Janata Dal
                                                                                 Continued on next page



                                              56
                        Table K.2: Classification of Ethnic Parties (Continued)

State           Ethnic Parties                                  State Parties (Election Commission)

                                                                Revolutionary Socialist Party
                                                                Rld
                                                                Samajwadi Party
                                                                Shivsena
                                                                Tamil Maanila Congress (Moopanar)

Tripura         All India Trinamool Congress                    All India Forward Block
                Nationalist Congress Party                      All India Trinamool Congress
                                                                Janata Dal (United)
                                                                Rashtriya Janata Dal
                                                                Revolutionary Socialist Party
                                                                Tripura Upajati Juba Samiti

Uttar Pradesh   Indian National Lok Dal                         All India Forward Block
                Lok Dal                                         Indian Congress (Socialist)
                Nationalist Congress Party                      Indian Congress (J)
                Samajwadi Janata Party                          Indian National Lok Dal
                Shivsena                                        Indian Union Muslim League
                Sikkim Sangram Parishad                         Janata Dal (United)
                Uttarakhand Kranti Dal                          Lok Dal
                                                                Muslim League Kerala State Committee
                                                                Rashtriya Janata Dal
                                                                Revolutionary Socialist Party
                                                                Rld
                                                                Samajwadi Janata Party
                                                                Samajwadi Party
                                                                Shivsena
                                                                Sikkim Sangram Parishad
                                                                Uttarakhand Kranti Dal

West Bengal     All India Jharkhand Party                       All India Forward Block
                All India Trinamool Congress                    All India Jharkhand Party
                Jharkhand Mukti Morcha                          All India Trinamool Congress
                Lok Dal                                         Indian Union Muslim League
                Nationalist Congress Party                      Janata Dal (United)
                Samajwadi Janata Party                          Jharkhand Mukti Morcha
                Shivsena                                        Lok Dal
                                                                Muslim League Kerala State Committee
                                                                Rashtriya Janata Dal
                                                                Revolutionary Socialist Party
                                                                Samajwadi Janata Party
                                                                Samajwadi Party
                                                                Shivsena




                                                 57
Table K.3: Vote Shares for Religious and Ethnic Parties by Round
                                                            1987–1988       1999–2000
  Vote Share Hindu Upper Caste Parties (%)
  Mean                                                          10.92          17.16
  Std. Dev.                                                     12.69          12.76
  N district-religion cells                                      325            325

  Vote Share Hindu Scheduled Caste Parties (%)
  Mean                                                          3.20           8.18
  Std. Dev.                                                     5.96           10.12
  N district-religion cells                                     287             287

  Vote Share Muslim Parties (%)
  Mean                                                          2.29            1.63
  Std. Dev.                                                     7.34            7.17
  N district-religion cells                                     117             117

  Vote Share Ethnic Parties (%)
  Mean                                                           9.02          15.21
  Std. Dev.                                                     14.92          18.67
  N district-religion cells                                      729            729

  Vote Share State Parties (%)
  Mean                                                          11.04          27.21
  Std. Dev.                                                     15.53          16.65
  N district-religion cells                                      729            729
 Notes: Weighted mean, standard deviation and number of observations of the vote share data
 underlying Column 1 of Table 8.




                                            58
