                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       CAPITALIZATION AS A TWO-PART TARIFF:
                                THE ROLE OF ZONING

                                      H. Spencer Banzhaf
                                         Kyle Mangum

                                      Working Paper 25699
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25699


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2019


We thank David Albouy, Jan Brueckner, Bill Fischel, and Edson Severnini for helpful
discussions, and participants at the 2018 AREUEA-ASSA meetings, the 2018 World Conference
of Environmental and Resource Economists, the 2017 NBER Summer Institute, the South
Carolina Applied Microeconomics Day workshop, the 2016 Urban Economics Association
meetings, and seminar participants at the University of Alabama, Clemson University, the Federal
Reserve Board, the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the University of Houston, the
University of Kentucky, Marquette University, the University of North Carolina-Charlotte, the
University of Notre Dame, the University of Richmond, PERC, the University of Southern
California, and Syracuse University for useful comments. We gratefully acknowledge the Social
Science Research Institute (SSRI) at Duke University, and Pat Bayer, Chris Timmins, and
Eduardo Jardim, in particular, for assistance with accessing the real estate data. We thank Hal
Martin, Cody Reinhardt, Jacob Siegel, Ben Harrell, Bret Hewett, Vicky Sparks, and Alexander
Gordon for research assistance. We thank the Lincoln Institute of Land Policy for generous
financial support of this research. Banzhaf is additionally grateful to PERC for a Lone Mountain
fellowship to work on this project. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia, or the Federal Reserve System.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by H. Spencer Banzhaf and Kyle Mangum. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Capitalization as a Two-Part Tariff: The Role of Zoning
H. Spencer Banzhaf and Kyle Mangum
NBER Working Paper No. 25699
March 2019
JEL No. D45,H41,H73,Q51,R31,R52

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper shows that the capitalization of local amenities is effectively priced into land via a
two-part pricing formula: a “ticket” price paid regardless of the amount of housing service
consumed and a “slope” price paid per unit of services. We first show theoretically how tickets
arise as an extensive margin price when there are binding constraints on the number of
households admitted to a neighborhood. We use a large national dataset of housing transactions,
property characteristics, and neighborhood attributes to measure the extent to which local
amenities are capitalized in ticket prices vis-a-vis slopes. We find that in most U.S. cities, the
majority of neighborhood variation in pricing occurs via tickets, although the importance of
tickets rises sharply in the stringency of land development regulations, as predicted by theory. We
discuss implications of two-part pricing for efficiency and equity in neighborhood sorting
equilibria and for empirical estimates of willingness to pay for non marketed amenities, which
generally assume proportional pricing only.


H. Spencer Banzhaf
Department of Economics
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Georgia State University
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302
and NBER
hsbanzhaf@gsu.edu

Kyle Mangum
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
10 Independence Mall
Philadelphia, PA 19106
kmangum104@gmail.com




An appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25699
        Capitalization as a Two-Part Tariff: The Role of Zoning
                        H. Spencer Banzhaf and Kyle Mangum


1     Introduction

Tiebout (1956) famously argued that there is a market-like process for allocating local public
goods, with local jurisdictions supplying them to attract residents and households “voting
with their feet” to find the jurisdictions with a desirable mix of amenities. But this market
analogy raises the question of just what serves as a price. Tiebout’s simple model assumed
that non-distortionary head taxes serve as the price. As with a well-functioning market for
private goods, the head tax serves as a price on benefits, a price that optimally coordinates
the distribution of amenities. Households then sort into communities based on their differing
demands for those amenities. Households still must purchase housing, so there is a two-part
tariff: at the extensive margin, one must purchase a “ticket” to enter the community and
receive its benefits (the head tax), then one must purchase land and housing, with bigger
houses costing more at the intensive margin.
    Of course, in the real world, jurisdictions typically use property taxes, an ad valorem
tax. This would seem to imply there is no longer a two-part tariff in household sorting
processes but only the gross-of-tax price of housing. Accordingly, most economists working
with Tiebout models have ignored the role of tickets at the extensive margin. This choice has
empirical and theoretical implications. The workhorse models of housing demand, including
hedonic price regressions and structural models of locational choice, invariably assume prices
are proportionate in some bundle of housing services (see Taylor (2017) and Kuminoff et al.
(2013) for respective reviews). If housing is priced according to a two-part tariff, these models
are misspecified, with biased estimates of housing price and income elasticities and willingness
to pay for amenities.
    The implications for theory and welfare are equally serious. If locational sorting is rationed


                                                1
only by proportional housing prices, it would give rise to a potential “jurisdictional choice
externality,” in which poorer households try to buy the smallest house on the block in richer
neighborhoods (Fischel (1985), Calabrese et al. (2011)). This dynamic is problematic if
public goods are congested, so that serving an additional household either subtracts from the
benefit received by others or requires additional funding. An example might be education, in
which services are determined by per capita expenditures. Because too many people crowd
into a community to get a share of the amenity or tax base, Tiebout’s “market for public
goods” is anything but efficient. In fact, in a simulation model of Tiebout sorting, Calabrese
et al. (2011) find this problem is so severe that the congestion entirely negates any gain from
Tiebout sorting processes, so households are better off with a single homogeneous community.
   Hamilton (1975, 1976) extended Tiebout’s model to account for just such issues (see
Fischel (1985) and Fischel (2001) for discussion). He suggested that zoning and other land-
use restrictions can prevent such distortions by restricting access to a community. Hamilton
developed his argument using some very special cases, which in our view has masked the
potential generality of his results. In particular, Hamilton (1976) developed a model focused
on the fiscal transfers of the property tax, making it seemingly irrelevant for non-financed
amenities. Similarly, Hamilton (1975) developed a model with homogeneous communities
and no capitalization of amenities into housing prices. However, empirical work routinely
finds evidence of capitalization (Ross and Yinger (1999)), seemingly invalidating Hamilton’s
model.
   In this paper, we offer a broader perspective on the manner in which local amenities
may be capitalized. We first generalize Hamilton’s intuition using a model that includes
different kinds of land-use restrictions and exogenous amenities. This generalization allows
us both to isolate the key driving factors generating the tickets in two-part pricing and to
identify the implications for capitalization. We show that any local land use restriction that
places a binding constraint on the number of housing units in a neighborhood introduces
an extensive-margin price on housing units that mimics a head tax: each neighborhood


                                              2
will have its own “ticket” price for entry. In general, housing costs consist of a two-part
tariff, an entry ticket plus a per-unit cost for additional housing services. We also show that
amenities will be capitalized into housing prices but when zoning or other frictions restrict
the number of housing units, then amenities may be capitalized into the tickets instead of
housing services. In contrast, minimum lot sizes impose a two-part tariff only on individual
constrained households (those forced to purchase the minimum when they would otherwise
choose less). But they only impart an extensive margin pricing function on the neighborhood
when the restriction is binding on all households, as is the case in Hamilton (1975) and
Brueckner (1981), in which case it is the same as a constraint on the number of housing
units.
   Second, we empirically test our theory. Specifically, we generalize models of capitalization
by allowing public goods and amenities to affect both the “ticket” prices and the unit prices
of housing services. We propose to account for both through the following family of models:


                                pln   =   αn + βn h(xin ) + in


where n indexes neighborhoods, i indexes housing units, and h is the quantity of housing
services at unit i, a (possibly nonlinear) function of underlying attributes xin . The terms
α and β represent, respectively, the intercept/ticket prices and the slope shifters/housing
service gradient prices. Note this is not equivalent to the standard hedonic model with
neighborhood fixed effects, which log-transforms the dependent variable. Such models have
only one price variable per neighborhood (not two), are linear in parameters, and impose
proportionate pricing. This model has two pricing variables per neighborhood, is non-linear
in parameters (because of the non-linear restrictions in the interaction of the βs and h()),
and imposes proportionality only through the βs but not the αs.
   Taking this model to a large and comprehensive dataset of property values and attributes,
we first test for whether the αs are the same in all neighborhoods within a metro area. We
easily reject this hypothesis, finding that tickets are an important part of the housing price

                                              3
function, both statistically and economically. However, we recognize that this test depends on
our functional form assumption that prices are an affine transformation of h(). As Landvoigt
et al. (2015) and Epple et al. (2019) have recently emphasized, it is impossible to non-
parametrically identify a price function separately from a housing services function; however,
under the assumption of constant housing services functions, one can compare them across
time and space. Accordingly, our more general strategy is to compare patterns in αs and βs
across neighborhoods and cities, based on local amenities and land-use restrictions.
       To test for the more general pattern, we have compiled what we believe to be the most
comprehensive hedonic dataset ever assembled, combining breadth, depth, and granularity.
We have obtained virtually every housing transaction between 2005-2011 in over 100 urban
areas across the United States (about 13 million in all), complete with housing characteristics
(e.g., living area, land area, room partitions) and geocoding to the level of address and
latitude/longitude coordinates. This allows us to measure the price per unit of housing
services (flexibly defined) as well as the potential extensive margin pricing at a fine geographic
(“neighborhood”) scale. In particular, we have matched each house in the transactions
dataset to its elementary school attendance zone and obtained school-quality data for each
school. To our knowledge this is the first national-level study to use educational data at
such a fine and precise spatial scale. Other amenities include air pollution, hazardous waste
sites, crime, and measures of centrality. Finally, the Wharton residential land use regulatory
index (Gyourko et al. (2008)) is matched to the data at the city level (both metro area and
municipality).
       We find, as usual, that prices are higher in neighborhoods with higher amenities.1 Impor-
tantly, however, we find that the extensive margin component (the αs) comprises a substan-
tial share of the variation between neighborhoods. That is, neighborhoods are stratified by
a shifting of their price functions as much or more so than a tilting via the price per unit of
housing service. Testing our model, we find that, across two areas with low land-use restric-
   1
    The focus of our tests is variation in local amenities within metropolitan areas. Regional differences like
climate or labor market opportunities are swept up in nonparametric controls.


                                                      4
tions, amenities are relatively more capitalized into per-unit prices, whereas across two areas
with heavy land-use restrictions, they are relatively more capitalized into tickets. Moreover,
we find this pattern is particularly strong for land-use restrictions that one would expect
would be binding on the number of housing units in an area, as our model predicts.
   Our findings have three broader implications for the literature. First, in local public
finance, they provide a new interpretation of the long-running debate between the Tiebout-
Hamilton “benefit view” of the property tax and the Mieszkowski-Zodrow “new view” that
it is distortionary (e.g., Mieszkowski and Zodrow (1989), Fischel (1992), Ross and Yinger
(1999), Fischel (2001), Nechyba (2001), and Zodrow (2001)). A large literature has debated
the relative merits of these models and purported to empirically test one against another.
As discussed by Nechyba (2001), many of these tests are unsatisfying. Some argue that
“capitalization is everywhere,” with exogenous amenities and exogenous shocks to tax levels
priced into housing, and that such capitalization is consistent with the benefit view. Others
have argued that, because Hamilton’s (1975) model has a constant price everywhere, capital-
ization contradicts the benefit view. Unfortunately, the participants in this debate appear to
be talking past one another. The question is not whether public good levels are capitalized,
but how. In the absence of zoning, amenities will be capitalized into the per-unit price of
land and/or housing, as the demand for housing increases. But in the presence of zoning, the
increased demand to live in an area may be capitalized into the tickets. To our knowledge,
virtually all of the papers that have been interpreted as disproving the benefit view do so only
under maintained hypotheses that rule out such two-part pricing. This includes the model
of Carroll and Yinger (1994), which restricts the price of land to be uniform per square foot.
More recently, Hilber and Vermeulen (2015) and Lutz (2015) find that exogenous demand
shifters (local earnings and decreases in property tax burdens, respectively) increase housing
capital in more rural areas and increase housing prices in more urban areas, where housing
supply presumably is less elastic. These results are broadly consistent with our model, but
they do not account for the possibility of two-part tariffs. Our model would further predict


                                               5
effects on land prices in the more rural areas and at the extensive margin in the more urban
areas.
   A second implication of our work is that the very large literature on “hedonic” housing
prices routinely employs models that are fundamentally misspecified. This includes basic
hedonic models focused on recovering marginal values, as well as hedonic models employed
to find housing prices for use in discrete-continuous sorting models. Studies of willingness
to pay for local public goods and of how households sort across neighborhoods on the basis
of such goods might be reconsidered in light of the importance of capitalization into the
extensive margin (ticket prices), as well as the intensive margin (marginal cost).
   Third, our model relates to a growing literature on the regulatory costs of zoning. In
particular, the logic of our strategy parallels that of Glaeser and Gyourko (2003), who test
for differences in land at the intensive margin (a larger lot) and the extensive margin (an
additional lot), and the difference in those differences across tightly and loosely regulated
land markets. However, they do not interpret their findings in light of the debates over
the efficiency of residential sorting. Moreover, while they account for a single “ticket price”
at the extensive margin of a lot, they allow amenities to be capitalized only through unit
land prices; in contrast, the possibility of amenities being capitalized through ticket prices is
essential to our analysis. Finally, they do not derive these two measures from a single data
source, as we propose to do.
   Our paper also relates to recent work by Turner et al. (2014) and Albouy and Ehrlich
(2018). These papers estimate the effect of zoning on housing prices by decomposing it into
two components, the regulatory cost of zoning and the spatial externality (such as the utility
of additional green space). Turner et al.’s identification strategy focuses on jurisdictional
borders, relying on the idea that the regulatory cost of zoning falls only within a given
jurisdiction while the externality varies smoothly across jurisdictional boundaries. Their
model ignores the possibility of a fiscal transfer from congested public goods, which can be
internalized from zoning, creating a public benefit that also changes discretely at the border.


                                               6
Albouy and Ehrlich take a more structural approach, estimating the production function
for housing as implied by a spatial equilibrium model. This approach does not rely on
jurisdictional boundaries but ignores the possibility of ticket prices. In contrast, our model
allows for these effects but ignores the regulatory costs.
    In the remainder of this paper, we provide, in Section 2, a theoretical model of zoning
and non-linear prices, as well as simulations illustrating the model. Sections 3 discusses
additional implications of the model. Sections 4 and 5 describe our data and empirical
strategy, respectively. Section 6 presents our results. Section 7 concludes the paper.



2     Conceptual Framework

In a pair of influential papers, Hamilton (1975, 1976) argued that zoning could replicate
the head tax present in Tiebout’s (1956) model, thus internalizing the jurisdictional choice
externality. Hamilton (1975) offered a model in which the number of jurisdictions was large
relative to the population, so minimum lot sizes induce perfect sorting across communities,
which are internally homogeneous with respect to lot size and demand for amenities. (See
also Brueckner (1981) for an extension and more rigorous proof of Hamilton’s results.) In
contrast, Hamilton (1976) offered a model in which communities had an exogenously set
heterogeneous stock of housing, and fiscal transfers created a premium for smaller houses.
These papers have provided tremendously important insights and sparked fruitful debates.
But, in our view, the literature’s long focus on those special cases has underestimated the
generality of the insights while also obscuring the specific factors that generate tickets. In
this section, we generalize those models while isolating the key factors that generate tickets.
    First, to set a baseline for comparison, we consider a hedonic equilibrium with finite land
supply but no frictions to housing supply whatsoever. Then, to see the precise effects of land
use controls, we distinguish between two cases: restrictions constraining the total number
of lots (or housing units) and restrictions constraining the minimum size of lots (or houses).



                                               7
We argue that it is restrictions on the total number of lots that induces two-part pricing
with “tickets,” whereas minimum lot sizes do not generate tickets except in the special case
emphasized by Hamilton, where the two are equivalent. To emphasize that fiscal transfers
are not necessary to generate tickets, we focus on exogenous amenities in our theoretical
model and how they effect land prices under these three regimes of land use controls.
   Although we speak of “land use controls” for expositional purposes, we emphasize that
frictions can be quite varied and need not be limited to literal government policies on land
development. For example, merely having an established neighborhood with durable capital
in place and numerous small property owners may present a friction or transactions cost to
reconfiguration, even if some reconfiguration is permissible by the de jure land use regime.
   For simplicity, we abstract away from housing capital in the formal exposition of the
model, focusing only on the market for land. Below, we discuss how the model might gen-
eralize to pricing of housing more generally. We also consider such pricing in our empirical
work.


2.1     Hedonic Equilibrium with No Land-Use Controls

Consider a city with distinct neighborhoods indexed 1...n...N , as well as an outside option,
location 0. The outside option has a perfectly elastic supply of land available at a given price.
In the city, neighborhoods are ordered by a scalar-valued composite of exogenous amenities
and local public goods, Gn . Each neighborhood in the city has a fixed land area. To focus
attention on the (realistic) case where land restrictions prevent an optimal configuration of
lots, we take as given an initial situation where each neighborhood is carved in an arbitrary
number of lots, each of arbitrary size.
   On the demand side of the land market, a finite, countable set of heterogeneous house-
holds 1...i...I have preferences that are monotonic in G, land consumption h, and numeraire
consumption k. These preferences can be represented by a strictly increasing differentiable
utility function ui (k, G, h). Households choose the neighborhood and lot l which maximizes


                                               8
their utility, given a (possibly non-linear) price function over lot size in the neighborhood,
pln = pn (hln ). (Note because Gn is uniform within neighborhoods, we implicitly subsume its
effect on prices into the neighborhood-specific price function.) The equilibrium price func-
tion ensures that each lot is occupied. Given the utility function, it must be continuous and
increasing in h within a neighborhood, and at a fixed h increasing in G across neighborhoods.
This equilibrium represents the standard hedonic model. We assume for exposition that each
price function is differentiable in h, but this is not a technically necessary assumption.
   Now consider the possibility of assembling or subdividing lots, or portions of lots. De-
velopers serve as arbitrageurs who can buy land from existing lots and add land to other
lots, or create new ones. Consider first for purposes of comparison the case with no land
controls and malleable lots. An equilibrium price function must equalize the marginal value
of land at each lot within a neighborhood, otherwise developers would arbitrage the differ-
ence by re-allocating land from a lot where its marginal value is lower to one where it is
higher. Likewise, this marginal value must be equal to the average value of a lot (per square
foot). Otherwise, if it were higher, developers could make profits by assembling land so the
neighborhood had fewer, larger lots. Alternatively, if the marginal value were lower than the
average value, developers would subdivide lots to create more, smaller lots. Thus, without
land-use restrictions, the following two equilibrium conditions must hold:

                                  ∂pn
                                      |hln = βn for all l, n                                 (1a)
                                  ∂h
                                  ∂pn        pln
                                      |hln =      for all l, n                               (1b)
                                  ∂h         hl,n

for some constant βn > 0. The first condition is the equimarginal principle operating on the
intensive margin. The second is the free-entry condition at the extensive margin.
   Integrating Equation (1a) gives


                                      pln = αn + βn hln ,                                     (2)



                                               9
                 Figure 1: Pricing Under Consensus View of Capitalization




for some constant of integration αn . Dividing by square footage gives pln /hln = αn /hln + βn .
Equation (1b) then requires αn =0 (except in the special case where hln is a constant hn ).
Consequently, pn (hln ) = βn hln . That is, because of the no-arbitrage condition at the extensive
margin, there are no tickets in the community (for if there were, the average value of land
would be higher than the marginal value and developers would re-arrange land into more
lots). Instead, there is a single price per square foot in the neighborhood, βn . Additionally,
the price per square foot across neighborhoods must be strictly increasing in G, such that
(βn0 −βn )(Gn0 −Gn ) > 0 for Gn0 6= Gn . Otherwise, as utility is increasing in G, no households
would choose to live in the neighborhood with lower G and higher prices.
   This model represents the consensus view of hedonic pricing, with amenities capitalized
into the per-unit price of land or housing. Such a relationship is depicted in Figure 1. The
figure shows the value of lots as an increasing function of lot size. Neighborhood 1 (n=1) is
the community with lowest amenities. The slope of its price line depicts the price of land.
Neighborhood 2 has nicer amenities and Neighborhood 3 nicer still: their price lines are
steeper, indicating higher demand for land and hence higher prices per square foot.




                                               10
2.2    Regulation as a Transaction Cost on Reconfiguring Lots

We next relax the assumption of full malleability. In reality, there are numerous regulations
that effectively limit the number of lots in a neighborhood. One straightforward example
is the case of transferable development rights (TDRs), which set a quota on the number
of allowable lots and allow these quotas to be traded in the market (McConnell and Walls
(2009)). Another example, discussed by Hamilton (1976), is the case where low-income
housing or other diversity rules force a particular mix of small and large housing units in the
same neighborhood (and prevent arbitrage). More generally, one can imagine myriad rules
and restrictions locking in an older housing stock and division of land, now out of equilibrium
and preventing adjustment to current conditions (historical preservation, height restrictions,
difficulty obtaining permits, holdup problems, etc.). By preventing existing lots from being
subdivided or existing single family homes from being assembled into multi-dwelling units,
such frictions restrict the number of housing units. Consequently, by making housing units
scarce per se, they induce a two-part tariff, as we will show. To simplify the exposition, in
the remainder of this section, we will speak of constraints on the number of lots, but the
broader implication for housing units applies.
   Consider again our case with exogenous G (and hence no fiscal transfers). If some neigh-
borhood n has a relatively high value of Gn , so that there is a high demand for living there,
it will have a high per-unit cost of land. Even so, there is nothing to guarantee that the price
clearing the land market results in the number of lots being equal to the constrained number.
There may be “too many” small lots. In general, there are now two equilibrium conditions to
meet, market clearing in the number of lots as well as in total land, and one price alone can-
not guarantee both conditions are met. To the contrary, the additional quantity constraint
on lots creates a shadow price on lots per se.
   Consider some neighborhood n > 0 with a binding constraint on the number of lots but
no other land-use restrictions. Conditional on the number of lots, equilibrium condition (1a)
still is satisfied, i.e., ∂pn /∂hln = βn , otherwise developers could increase their profits by


                                                 11
redistributing land from one lot to another (without changing the number of lots). Thus,
Condition (2) also is satisfied, so pln = αn + βn hln for some constant of integration αn .
However, equilibrium condition (1b) is no longer satisfied. Instead,


                                           ∂pn /∂hln < pln /hl,n .


The marginal value of land at the intensive margin is lower than its value at the extensive
margin, so developers would like to shrink the lots to create new ones if they could, but they
are restricted from doing so.2 As a consequence, the average value is shrinking in the lot
size, which requires a constant term αn > 0 in the price function, or ticket. The ticket is the
shadow value of the constraint on the number of lots.
      Moreover, we normally would expect ticket prices to be increasing in G. As a starting
point, consider an equilibrium in which Gn = Gn+1 and binding constraints on the number
of lots create tickets in both neighborhoods. Now imagine an increase in Gn+1 . Unless land
demand is strongly complementary to G, we would not expect much increase in land demand
from current residents in n + 1. But with higher G and no increase in land prices, we would
expect more people to want to enter n + 1 (and fewer to enter n). This will increase the
ticket price in n + 1 relative to n. However, we cannot rule out a second-order effect through
changes in the sorting equilibrium: as the population characteristics change in n + 1, land
demand may increase enough to increase land prices, and hence feedback on the desire to
enter the community, depressing ticket prices. Nevertheless, we conjecture that the first-order
effect dominates and that, in the presence of restrictions on the number of lots, G will be
capitalized into tickets, a conjecture ultimately testable in our empirical section.
      Hamilton (1976) provides one explanation for why such lock-in induces something like a
head tax: fiscal transfers. Hamilton’s logic is depicted in Figure 2. The horizontal axis shows
the lot size, and the vertical axis shows the net-of-tax value of a lot. The point labeled n=1
represents a homogeneous community of all small lots; likewise the point n=3 represents
  2
      Glaeser and Gyourko (2003) analyze this issue at the metro level.


                                                      12
                          Figure 2: Pricing Under Hamilton (1976 )




a homogeneous community of all big lots. The dashed line connecting them illustrates a
standard price function through the origin, as depicted in Figure 1. N =2 represents a
neighborhood with mixed housing bundles, but in which the quantity of each type is fixed by
zoning or other restrictions. Now, a small lot in n=2 has an advantage over an equal-sized
lot in n=1 because it enjoys the tax base of the larger lots. Hence, it is more expensive.
By the same token, the large lot in n=2 has a disadvantage relative to an equal-sized lot
in n=3 because it must subsidize the public goods for residents who are pulling down the
tax base. Hence, it is less expensive. The crucial consequence of all this is a tilting of price
function for land within the second neighborhood: even if the marginal price of a square foot
of land is constant within a community, as illustrated here by the straight lines connecting
the points, the average cost (i.e., total cost divided by the lot size) is not constant. Prices
must be computed with a neighborhood-specific intercept (i.e., tickets) as well as a per-unit
cost of land.
   Hamilton’s paper and subsequent discussion have given the impression that fiscal transfers
are necessary for this result. In fact, they are not. The transfers merely provide one reason
why more people would like to crowd into the community and why (barring the constraint)



                                              13
arbitrage would lead to more dwelling units. But with the constraint on the number of
dwelling units, they cannot, so there is a scarcity value on lots per se. It is this scarcity at
the extensive margin – on the number of units – as well as on land at the intensive margin,
which gives rise to the two-part tariff, with or without fiscal transfers.


2.3    Regulation as Minimum Lot Sizes

Consider finally the case where the city adopts land-use controls in the form of a minimum lot
size h and where this restriction is binding at least at some lots in at least some neighborhoods,
but not necessarily all. The case where it is never binding is obviously equivalent to the fully
malleable case. The case where it is binding on all households is effectively a constraint on
the number of lots, which is like the previous sub-section but with lots of homogenous size.
   Although such lot size restrictions may affect density in equilibrium, they are not binding
on density, in the sense that the equilibrium number of lots is less than the total land area
divided by h. Moreover, developers still can re-arrange land to ensure conditions (1a) and (1b)
are met. (If h is not binding at all lots, developers can re-allocate land to increase profits.)
Thus, we still have pn (hn ) = βn hn . Thus, there are no tickets in the community-level price
function.
   However, consider this scenario from the perspective of a constrained household. Condi-
tional on living in neighborhood n, a household maximizes utility subject to the minimum lot
size constraint. Ignoring the non-negativity constraint on consumption k, which we assume
does not bind, and dropping the household index i, the problem can be written as:


                      max u(k, Gn , hn ) + λ(y − k − βn hn ) + µ(hn − h)                      (3)
                      k,hn



The Kuhn-Tucker conditions pertaining to the household’s choice of h are

                                         ∂u
                                            = λβn − µ,                                        (4)
                                         ∂h


                                               14
                                µ(hn − h) = 0,      µ ≥ 0,     (hn − h) ≥ 0.                               (5)

       For those households for whom the constraint does not bind, we have in Condition (5)
µ = 0, (h − hn ) > 0. For these households, the situation obviously is identical to the case
with no land use controls. For those households for whom the constraint does bind, we have
in Condition (5) µ > 0, (h − hn ) = 0. For these households, it is useful to re-write the
above constrained optimization problem using the following shadow pricing scheme (Neary
and Roberts (1980)):


                        max u(k, Gn , hn ) + λ(y  fn − βn )h − k − β
                                             e + (β                fn hn ).                                (6)
                         k,hn


The first-order condition related to the household’s choice of h is:

                                                 ∂u e f
                                                    = λ βn .                                               (7)
                                                 ∂h

That is, the problem in Expression (3) where the household must buy h at a price per square
foot of βn is equivalent to one where it freely chooses to purchase h at a subsidized price per
square foot β                                                              fn − βn )h ≤ 0 to
            fn and where “virtual income” is adjusted by the fixed amount (β

compensate for the subsidy and leave real income unchanged.3 To see the equivalency of the
problem when the constraint binds, note the first-order conditions (4) and (7) are the same
if we just let λ         fn = β − µ/λ. In words, the marginal utility of income is unchanged
               e = λ and β

by the combination of a lower price and lower income, and the shadow price per square foot
is equivalent to the actual price, adjusted downward by the marginal utility of relaxing the
constraint (i.e., µ) converted into dollar units by λ. As the problems are equivalent, the
consumer chooses h = h. Figure 3 compares the primal and dual problems. Given prices
   3
    Note that, because h is a minimum purchase requirement, we have β      fn < βn . This is in contrast to the
more common rationing constraint in which there is an upper bound on the purchase. In the case of a rationing
constraint, the household’s problem is equivalent to facing a higher shadow price and an augmented income
to cover the additional expenditure and maintain utility. In the case of the minimum purchase requirement,
the inequality in the constraint is reversed and so are the sign of the change in the price and the lump-sum
adjustment to income.



                                                      15
              Figure 3: Optimization with Constraint and with Shadow Values




p, an unconstrained household would choose h∗ and achieve utility level u. The constraint
requires the household to consume at least h, creating a wedge between the slopes of p and
the indifference curve, of course lowering utility. However, there is a lower price pe supporting
the indifference curve at that point. With that lower price (and with income adjusted down
to maintain this lower utility level), the consumer would freely choose h.
   This dual shadow-pricing formulation of the problem is instructive because it shows why
a minimum purchase requirement is equivalent to a two-part tariff (Wilson (1993)). Because
β
fn < β, the price function becomes less steep. But income also is adjusted, with the budget
                                fn − βn )h, conditional on choosing the community. Note
constraint shifted downward by (β
                                               fn − βn )h to enter the community followed
this is equivalent to paying a fixed fee αn = (β
by a lower price per square foot. However, while this mimics a two-part tariff on particular
households, the equilibrium pricing function does not require a ticket to ration access to the
neighborhood. That is, the per-unit land price alone can still clear the market.
   This individual-level analysis also clarifies in what sense the minimum lot sizes in Hamilton
(1975) induce a head tax. In that paper, Hamilton presents a special case in which the



                                               16
constraint is (just) binding on everybody in a neighborhood, so all housing demands collapse
to a single point (see also Brueckner (1981)). In that case, households can be modeled as
maximizing utility subject to a two-part tariff, as in Expression (6), but they also can be
modeled as being subject to a standard price, as in Expression (3). Both are valid, because
either price function is consistent with a single data point. Figure 4 illustrates this situation,
with three communities each with homogeneous lot sizes. The solid lines, the same as those
in Figure 1, fit the data, but so do the dashed lines, which all have the same slope but
different tickets. Hence, one can characterize the difference in neighborhood housing prices
either with land prices or with tickets. In the more general case where the constraint binds
for only some households in the neighborhood, the equivalence is still there for those who are
constrained but not for the unconstrained households. Thus, if we are to assume everybody
in the community faces the same price function, then there are no tickets into the community.
Consequently, the price function continues to take the same form as the case with no land
use restrictions, and G continues to be capitalized into prices, though the values of βn will
differ. In other words, minimum lot sizes can be thought of as inducing a two-part tariff on
constrained households, but not on the community as a whole (unless they are binding on
everybody).
   Whether βn increases or decreases in this scenario is an empirical question, even abstract-
ing from any effects of lot size restrictions on amenities such as green space and congestion
(Glaeser and Ward (2009), Ihlanfeldt et al. (2007)). On one hand, the restriction per se re-
duces the utility a household can achieve in the neighborhood, reducing land demand at the
extensive margin; on the other hand, by its nature, it requires that more land be consumed
by the constrained households, which is equivalent to a reduction in supply faced by the
unconstrained households. If neighborhoods are sufficiently different and if a large number
of people are at the constraint, we would expect housing prices to increase, as we find in our
simulations below.




                                               17
                          Figure 4: Pricing Under Hamilton (1975)




2.4    Simulations

We illustrate these predictions with three policy simulations. For the three policy scenarios,
we simulate an equilibrium using a neighborhood pricing function of the form pn = αn + βn L.
Crucially, we examine when a ticket (nonzero αn ) is necessary to clear the market assigning
households to lots within neighborhoods.
   We consider a city with two neighborhoods, each with land area fixed at 3,333 units and
with G1 = 1 and G2 = 1.5. An outside option (alternative city) is available with a fixed land
price at $12,000 per unit and G0 = 0. We simulate 10,000 households i with utility functions


                                ui = (1 − θi )ln(z) + θi ln(h) + φi G.                       (8)


Substituting the budget constraint and price function for z yields the indirect utility functions


                   vi = max (1 − θi )ln(yi − αn − βn hn ) + θi ln(hn ) + φi Gn .             (9)
                         n,hn



In our simulations, we allow heterogeneity in income and tastes, with yi ∼ u(40000, 100,000),
θi ∼ u(0.2, 0.4), and φi ∼ u(0.1, 0.9).


                                                 18
                       Table 1: Summary Statistics from Simulations

           Attribute       Neighborhood       Scenario 1 Scenario 2 Scenario 3
                                 1                 3,075      4,037     4,036
           Housing Units         2                 6,323      4,416     4,036
                                 1                  1.08       0.83       0.83
           Avg Lot Size          2                  0.53       0.75       0.82
                                 1                19,956     25,045    19,990
           Price of Land         2                38,713     43,889    21,419
                                 1                     0          0     6,439
           Price of Ticket       2                     0          0    20,156
                                 1                69,719     60,778    62,432
           Mean Income           2                70,213     79,052    79,229
                                 1                  0.31       0.29       0.30
           Mean θ                2                  0.29       0.30       0.30
                                 1                  0.29       0.44       0.46
           Mean φ                2                  0.64       0.67       0.69



   In the first scenario, there are no land use controls. In the second, we introduce a
minimum lot size in the city (i.e., in n = 1, 2) of 0.75 units, designed to bind on some but
not all households. In the third scenario, we replace the minimum lot size restriction with a
restriction on the maximum number of lots (calibrated to be the same as the number of lots
in Neighborhood 1 in the second scenario’s equilibrium). Table 1 and Figures 5-7 summarize
the outcomes across the three scenarios. In the figures, the horizontal axis indicates the size
of the lot and the vertical axis indicates its value. The dots represent the lower and upper
bounds of the support over h in each community, plus a 1-in-20 sample of lots in between.
   Table 1 and Figure 5 show that, in Scenario 1, the price of land is almost twice as high
in Neighborhood 2 as in Neighborhood 1 and there are of course no ticket effects. The table
also shows that households with higher φ (i.e., higher tastes for public goods) sort into the
high-G neighborhood, as we would expect. The total number of residents is 9,398, or almost
the entire population, with about two-thirds living in the high-G neighborhood.
   In Scenario 2, the minimum lot size reduces the total population in the city to 8,453
and especially reduces the density in the high-G neighborhood. Land prices increase in



                                              19
                               Figure 5: Simulation 1: No Land-Use Controls




NOTES: The figure plots housing values to lot size for the simulated equilibrium under no land-use restrictions. Each point
represents a housing unit, and lines are drawn for each community, extending through the vertical axis for visual reference.



both neighborhoods. Moreover, the heterogeneity in lot sizes decreases, as can be seen in
Figure 6 (where the vertical line indicates the minimum lot size), but it does not collapse
to zero, with the lot size restriction remaining non-binding on about 35% of households in
Neighborhood 1 and 8% of households in Neighborhood 2. (Indeed, average lot size actually
falls in Neighborhood 1, as migrants from Neighborhood 2 and the constraint on low-demand
types increases the price for unconstrained households.)
    Finally, in Scenario 3, we see the introduction of entry tickets, as the extensive margin
price is now necessary to satisfy the the condition on the number of lots in additional to
equimarginality. At these parameters, we also see land prices falling and the difference
between prices in the two neighborhoods collapsing, but in general, this will depend on
preferences and incomes of the households in the economy.




                                                             20
                                  Figure 6: Simulation 2: Minimum Lot Size




NOTES: The figure plots housing values to lot size for the simulated equilibrium under a common minimum lot size
constraint, depicted by the vertical solid line. Each point represents a housing unit, and lines are drawn for each community,
extending through the vertical axis for visual reference.




                            Figure 7: Simulation 3: Maximum Number of Lots




NOTES: The figure plots housing values to lot size for the simulated equilibrium under a restriction on the quantity of units in
each neighborhood. Each point represents a housing unit, and lines are drawn for each community, extending through the
vertical axis for visual reference.



                                                              21
2.5    Housing Structures

For simplicity, we have been allowing land to represent housing services, entering the utility
function directly. In this sub-section, we briefly extend the model to show that the intuition
still holds when households demand housing services more generally.
   Suppose that housing services are produced from land and capital inputs, that land prices
continue to have a price at the extensive margin (α) and at the intensive margin (pL,n ), and
that the price of physical capital (bricks, etc.) is constant at pK . Suppose in particular that
housing services are produced according to a CES production function:


                                        h = (Lρ + K ρ )1/ρ .                                    (10)


Then, by cost-minimization, the cost of producing a house of size h is


                                              ρ/(ρ−1)       ρ/(ρ−1) (ρ−1)/ρ
                          c(h) = αn + h · (pL,n          + pK      )          ,                 (11)


recognizing that the price must be paid at the extensive margin as well as for construction.
In this case, the price function remains linear in housing services h, with the unit price of
h increasing in the unit price of land (pL,n ). Significantly, the model is like the simpler
land-only model, with an extensive margin for a housing unit αn and a unit price of housing
                           ρ/(ρ−1)     ρ/(ρ−1) (ρ−1)/ρ
services βn , where βn = (pL,n       + pK     )          . The only difference is that those services
are produced by a bundle of land and capital.
   Taking the case of no land-use controls as in Section 2.1, αn = 0, so housing services
are simply priced by βn . Moreover, as discussed above, an increase in G will increase land
prices, so capitalization will continue to take the form of Figure 1 when there are no land-use
restrictions. Just as land becomes more expensive per-unit, so too do housing services. On
the other hand, in the presence of restrictions on the maximum allowable number of lots, we
would continue to expect G to be capitalized into α.
   In practice, of course, we do not observe “housing services” per se, but rather a set of

                                                  22
indicators like living area, lot size, bedrooms, and bathrooms, which could have a mixed
interpretation as inputs and outputs. Accordingly, in our empirical test of the model, we fol-
low the standard practice of flexibly estimating a housing services function from the observed
hedonic variables x.
   We also acknowledge the possibility that the production function for housing could be
more complicated that this CES example, giving rise to non-linearities in h. Also, in the
presence of land-use restrictions, land cannot be optimally allocated as it would in the unre-
stricted cost minimization problem, so the price of housing even in this simple model would
be convex in housing services, conditional on a given lot. Finally, if there are fixed costs in
housing production, there might be a cost at the extensive margin for a housing unit. A
fixed cost is not what we have termed a ticket price, however. A fixed cost results from
the housing production technology and need not be systematically related to neighborhood
amenities, whereas a ticket is a capitalization effect that arises in the locational equilibrium
when the (unconstrained) quantity of houses demanded exceeds the constraint.
   In general, we cannot non-parametrically identify a non-linear price function of p(h)
separably from a non-linear housing services function h(x), a point recently emphasized by
Epple et al. (2019) and Landvoigt et al. (2015). Notably, we do not literally observe the
limit of housing prices as lot sizes or dwelling areas shrink to zero. However, our goal is more
modest: to characterize how such a composite function varies across neighborhoods with
varying G, and how this variability differs by land-use restrictions–namely whether they shift
up the whole function by a constant or tilt up the slope on average. Significantly, if what we
identify as tickets in our model were driven by construction costs or were merely helping fit
a non-linear price function, we would not expect these patterns in capitalization of amenities
by land-use restrictions.




                                              23
3       Implications for Empirical Models of Housing and

        Location Choice

If land-use restrictions induce tickets, it would have important implications for empirical
estimation of a wide range of economic models of housing and locational choice. Before
moving onto an empirical test of our model, in this section, we discuss some of the modeling
implications of capitalization via two-part pricing.


3.1     The Standard Hedonic Price Regression is Mis-specified

Hedonic price regressions are the most common approach to modeling housing markets, and
by far the most common approach to hedonic regressions is to estimate a model with logged
prices as the dependent variable and with neighborhood fixed effects:


                                            ln(pin ) = β̂n + ĥ(xi ),                                        (12)


where pin is the value of house i in neighborhood n and xi is a vector of hedonic variables
for house i (lot size, square footage, bathrooms, etc). That is, one regresses logged prices
on neighborhood dummy variables to capture the local “price level” β̂n and an estimated
hedonic quantity index ĥ(xi ).4 See e.g., Sieg et al. (2002) for discussion. This model is of
course equivalent to
                                   pin = exp(β̂n )exp(ĥ(xi )) = β̃n h̃(xi ).                                (13)

where β̃ = exp(β̂). That is, it is equivalent to a model with a price proportionate to a housing
services function.
    4
     Yinger (2015) offers a more general approach to estimating the functional form of the pricing function
that results from a sorting equilibrium but still relies on proportional pricing (e.g., P = p · h) without a ticket
effect.




                                                        24
       Suppose, however, that the true data-generating process is


                                            pin = αn + βn h(xi ).


Compared with the true data-generating process, the standard model has only half the esti-
mated neighborhood coefficients (N vs. 2N ). What might initially appear to be a ticket in
Equation (12) is revealed in Equation (13) to be a log-transformed slope. Of course, where
ĥ = 0, exp(ĥ) = 1 and the price function does have an intercept. The crucial point, however,
is that β̂n shifts the price function proportionately, transforming the slope as well as the
intercept. With only N coefficients, it cannot separately identify ticket and slope effects.
       To explore this issue, we conduct a simple numerical example using a two-neighborhood
economy, where one neighborhood has a high g and one a low g. The first is more expensive,
through αn or through βn , or both to varying degrees. To ground the example in empirical
relevance, we calibrate the neighborhood price differences and derive a scalar-valued index of
housing services using the national real estate data described in detail in Section 4.5 We set
the high-g neighborhood to be 72 percent more expensive at the median-sized property, and
consider five scenarios in which the price difference between neighborhoods at the median
housing service is 0, 25, 50, 75, and 100 percent because of the difference in ticket prices. In
the first case, α1 = α2 , and in the last β1 = β2 .
       Having generated property values in the two neighborhoods, we then estimate a (naive) log
pricing model ln(pin ) = β̂n + φ̂ln(hi ), analyzing its residuals and its counterfactual predictions
for the consumption of housing services. Table 2 reports a summary of these results. First,
                                            ˆ in )). The first row shows the mean value of the
panel A shows the residuals of pin − exp(ln(p
residual by neighborhood, and the subsequent rows show the mean residual for three bins of
   5
    For the between-neighborhood price differences, we take the ratio of the 75th percentile neighborhood to
the 25th percentile across metro areas and then take the median of this ratio arose metro areas in our data,
which we find to be 1.72. For housing services, we take the national distribution of lot size and living area,
trimming the upper and lower one percent tails and forming a grid of property sizes in between. We then set
h = 33.51 + 0.35 · lot area + 129.65 · living area, where the coefficients derive from a regression of prices on
these two attributes.



                                                      25
house sizes (the first quartile, the middle two quartiles, and the fourth quartile). The first
point to notice is the pattern in the residuals generated by the proportional pricing model.
As mentioned earlier, it is not that the model forces the two neighborhoods to have the
same intercept but that it forces the intercept to be related to the slope. Of course, least-
squares regression correctly predicts the average (log) price but does so by tilting the price
functions: the low-g neighborhood down and the high-g neighborhood up. This is because
the regression assumes all properties in the high-g neighborhood are more expensive by a
common factor. Thus, while the mean residual is zero (sometimes not exactly because of
the log transformation), it varies systematically by g and h. In the low-g community, the
residuals are systematically negative for small properties and positive for large properties.
In the high-g community, the opposite is the case, with the residuals being positive for
small properties and negative for large ones. Looking across columns of the table, we see
that the larger is the importance of the ticket to the between-neighborhood price gaps, the
larger are the magnitudes of the residual error. For example, when tickets comprise the
full share of capitalization in the last set columns, the model overpredicts small properties
by 4.26 percent in the low g neighborhood and overpredicts by 4.76 percent in the high g
neighborhood. Conversely, it overpredicts large properties by 3.45 and underpredicts by 3.35
percent in the low and high neighborhoods, respectively.
   This tilting can be seen graphically in Figure 8, which illustrates the 100 percent ticket
case. These patterns motivate a simple, reduced form testable implication for the presence
of tickets: if neighborhood prices vary because of tickets, we will find the pattern in the
residuals of the log pricing model as exhibited in Figure 8.


3.2     Implications for Empirical Modeling

3.2.1   Consequences of Mis-specification of the Pricing Function

One common application of hedonic models is to estimate the marginal willingness to pay
for amenities. Following Rosen (1974), households set their marginal willingness to pay for

                                             26
               Table 2: Simulation: The Log Price Model in the Presence of Tickets
    Ticket Share                        0               0.25                0.5               0.75                1
    Neighborhood g:             Low         High    Low     High    Low           High    Low     High    Low         High


                                                       Residuals (%)
    Mean                        0.00        0.00    0.00    0.00     0.01          0.01   0.03    0.03     0.05       0.05
    Mean, Size p0-p25           -0.80       0.47     0.47   -0.96    1.73         -2.30    3.00   -3.56   4.26        -4.76
    Mean, Size p25-p50          0.21         0.03    0.08    0.27   -0.05          0.48   -0.18    0.66   -0.30        0.81
    Mean, Size p75-p100         0.39        -0.52   -0.61   0.42    -1.58          1.38   -2.53   2.35    -3.45       3.35

                                     Counterfactual Prediction Errors (%)

    Mean                        -0.01        0.05   4.13     7.28   10.08     15.98       18.80   26.59   32.07       39.74
    Mean, Size p0-p25           0.47        -0.88   7.23    3.99    16.76     10.99       30.56   20.81   51.32       34.39
    Mean, Size p25-p50          -0.14       -0.01   3.58     7.47    8.95     16.36       16.86   27.05   28.97       40.13
    Mean, Size p75-p100         -0.25       1.11    2.15    10.16   5.66      20.18       10.92   31.43   19.06       44.30
NOTES: The table reports results from estimation of a log price model on simulated data for two neighborhoods distinguished
by their amenity value (low or high). The sets of columns refer to simulations in which the extent of capitalization occurring
through the ticket varies from 0 to 100 percent.




                       Figure 8: The Log Price Model in the Presence of Tickets




                                                               27
an amenity equal to the derivative of the price function with respect to that amenity. Of
course, if the price function is misspecified, so too will be estimates of marginal willingness
to pay. The preceding simulation, as exhibited in Figure 8, implies that the standard model
is biased in a particular way. Because it ignores capitalization at the ticket but exaggerates
capitalization into housing services, it will underestimate the marginal willingness to pay
at small properties and overestimate it at large ones. This pattern may be particularly
important when considering the distributional welfare effects of educational, environmental,
and urban policies.
       Another common application of locational choice models is in discrete-continuous models
of household sorting (see e.g., Bayer et al. (2009), Kuminoff (2012), and Sieg et al. (2004) for
examples, and Kuminoff et al. (2013) for a review).6 In practice, these models first estimate
a log-price hedonic model, then treat those prices as a neighborhood characteristic, along
with amenities, that drives the discrete choice of location. This price function then afflicts
the models with the same misspecification issues just discussed.
       Often, estimated models are used to make predictions of locational equilibria in counter-
factual situations. The flip side of distorting a price index is to distort the quantity index
associated with an given level of expenditure. And without explicitly recovering tickets, the
effective income adjustment is not made. The counterfactual predictions of these models for
housing demand and where it is consumed (e.g., in which neighborhood) will be distorted
accordingly. With the housing services/neighborhood quality misspecification pattern shown
in Figure 8, analyzing distributional effects may be especially problematic.
       We illustrate the potential pitfalls by using the estimated models of Table 2 to make
counterfactual predictions of housing services demand. In panel B of Table 2, we use the log
pricing model to project how much h a household spending p in the high-g neighborhood
would consume if switching to the low-g neighborhood and vice versa. For simplicity, we
assume Cobb Douglas utility so that the household is assumed to have constant expenditures
   6
    A notable exception is the method of Bayer et al. (2007). This approach derives a choice probability of
each individual property, which can in principle be decomposed into its respective two-part pricing.


                                                    28
across neighborhoods. (This is not essential to our point but is convenient because it yields
arithmetic expressions for housing demand without simulating an actual model with partic-
                                                                                      pj −αk
ular utility parameters.) A household spending pj would consume hk =                    βk
                                                                                               if moving to
neighborhood k.
                                                                                                ln(pj )−(β̂k )
       The projected consumption in the log pricing model, however, is ĥk = exp(                     φ̂
                                                                                                               ).
The proportional pricing model confuses the intercept and slope into one coefficient, under
projecting the value of housing services in both neighborhoods (i.e., making φ̂ too low),
and compensates by spreading the neighborhood coefficients apart, meaning it overpredicts
the counterfactual amount of housing services consumed for both neighborhoods. In other
words, the projection believes housing per unit is cheap in the low-g neighborhood, and so
it overpredicts consumption for households relocating there, but while the projection treats
services in the high-g neighborhood as expensive, it ignores the expenditure on the ticket.
Visually, in Figure 8 this is the effect of the log price projection lines spreading apart faster
than do the true price lines. The magnitude depends on the initial property size in an inverse
way between the two neighborhoods. The projection bias is larger for small properties in the
low-g neighborhood–in the 100 percent ticket case, for example, going from 51 percent for
small properties to 19 for large–but the bias rises from 34 percent for small properties to 44
for large in the high-g neighborhood.
       These results are for simulations in which the distribution of housing services h is the
same in both neighborhoods. As alternatives, we repeat the exercise for situations in which
the low-g neighborhood are smaller on average and one in which they are larger on average.7
The patterns are similar in both cases to the base simulation, and are available upon request.
   7
    Theory is ambiguous as to whether a high-G neighborhood would have larger or smaller properties.
Roughly speaking, if income sorting dominates (and housing is a normal good), the housing in the high-
G neighborhood will be larger, but if the price effect dominates, it will be smaller, as residents of better
neighborhoods economize on home size. Our data exhibit each, with the ratio of median property sizes
between the more and less expensive neighborhoods running the gamut from 0.05 to 20.




                                                    29
3.2.2   Tickets and the Price and Income Elasticities of Housing

As accounting for tickets would imply different prices and effective incomes, it would be
expected to affect estimated price and income elasticities of housing demand. Insofar as price
elasticities are identified off of between-neighborhood variation in prices, it is likely that the
elasticities are underestimated when tickets are ignored. If high-g neighborhoods have larger
houses (or higher-quality houses) than low-g neighborhoods, and if the between-neighborhood
price differences are overestimated by the standard hedonic model–i.e., “too much slope,” as
shown in Figure 8–then when taking %∆h/%∆β, the denominator in the elasticity formula
is “too big” using the standard approach. The same is true if price elasticities are identified
off of within-neighborhood variation in the high-g neighborhoods (but the opposite in low-g
neighborhoods). This pattern may help explain the low price elasticities estimated by, e.g.,
Sieg et al. (2004).
   By the same token, when calculating the income elasticity of housing demand by taking
%∆h/%∆y, the denominator would be too small if tickets are ignored, so estimated income
elasticities will likely be overestimated. Because they reduce everybody’s income by the
same amount, tickets increase the percentage difference between the rich and poor within a
neighborhood. On the other hand, the presence of tickets would add to to importance of
accounting for unobserved tastes, especially in vertically differentiated models. Since Epple
and Platt (1998), the literature has noted that there is too much income variation within
neighborhoods and too little between neighborhoods to explain sorting patterns by income
alone, so differences in tastes are required to fit the data. Higher tickets and lower per-
unit prices in the high-G neighborhoods would amplify that point, since they imply that
the poor cannot escape the high costs of the high-G neighborhoods by purchasing a small
house. In other words, the two-part pricing model suggests that poor are paying even more
for their housing bundle, so even stronger differences in tastes would be required to explain
their sorting into the high-G neighborhoods. In contrast, in the low-G neighborhoods, larger
houses are more expensive than predicted by the standard model (Figure 8), so again, even


                                               30
stronger differences in tastes would be required to explain the rich sorting into them.



4         Data

We next seek to measure the presence and extent of ticket-style capitalization and test
whether it varies with land use frictions in the way the model predicts. The data we use for
this empirical work begin with a large national database of transactions. We divide these
transactions by metropolitan area (“city”) and sub-divide cities into neighborhoods, then
link these housing data to a rich set of national public goods at the neighborhood level. In
this section, we describe the data in more detail.


4.1        Housing Data

The housing data come from the real estate analytics firm CoreLogic.8 The data merge two
assemblages of public information: (1) records of transactions on the property deed (such
as a sale or lien), including transaction dates, parties, values, and loan information; and
(2) county tax assessor information, which includes information on property characteristics
such as lot size, living area, year of construction, bedrooms, bathrooms, etc.9 The data
also include latitude and longitude coordinates of the property, which we use to match the
properties to their neighborhood.
        We have data on nearly 13.2 million transactions from 2005-2011 at 105 large US metro
areas.10 We clean the data of non-arms-length transactions and those with nominal prices,
properties that transact multiple times on the same day, and transactions involving par-
    8
     The data were made available to us via the Social Science Research Institute (SSRI) at Duke University.
We are particularly indebted to Pat Bayer and Chris Timmins, as well as Eduardo Jardim, Gary Thompson,
and Joshua Smith for technical assistance in accessing the data.
   9
     These data were subject to the legacy collection method of overwriting tax assessor data each year, so
this information is observed only for the final year of data – either 2011 or 2012, depending on the county –
and would be obsolete if a property underwent a major renovation such as an addition of bedrooms.
  10
     Dataquick, predecessor collector of the CoreLogic data, began collecting the deeds and assessor records
prior to 2005 for most cities, but our public school information datas to 2009-2010, so we restrict our sample
around those years. Note that the timeframe spans both “hot” and “cold” market periods in most metro
areas.


                                                     31
tial property sales, subdivisions of parcels, and sales of vacant land. These cuts leave us
with market rate transactions of occupiable properties. We are additionally interested in the
property characteristics, so we further clean the data of properties with missing or obvious
misreporting (e.g., land parcels and or living areas less than 500 square feet.) in the assessor
file. We also drop two neighborhoods as having lot and dwelling area sizes that are outliers
relative to their cities. These steps lead to a final estimation sample of 10,329,393 transac-
tions. Table A1 reports summary statistics by metro area for the housing price and attribute
variables.
    As an initial check of the feasibility of the first stage model, we verify that there is
sufficient heterogeneity in housing stock attributes within neighborhoods to estimate a land
or housing services price. In the extreme case (e.g., Hamilton 1975), properties are stratified
completely by neighborhood and perfectly homogeneous within. We find this is far from the
case in the actual data. In Appendix Table A2, we decompose the variance of housing stock
attributes like lot size and living area within and between neighborhoods. For this test, we
use the full set of properties (not only those that transact in our sample window) and place
these properties into municipalities to decompose variance. On average, four-fifths of the
within-city variance in lot size or living area occurs within neighborhood. Property vintage
is similarly distributed broadly within neighborhoods as well as between.
    Finally, we obtained construction cost estimates from business information firm RS Means.11
These data provide typical estimates of residential construction costs per square foot of living
area, by size and quality of house, for each year and for most metro areas in our transactions
record. We will use these as one method of decomposing physical capital from land values,
as described in more detail below.
  11
     RS Means provided, for a fee charged to Georgia State University, a subset of data electronically, and
as well as access to their physical library of historical estimates books. We digitized these records by hand;
we thank Bob Mewis of RS Means for help in coordination and Bret Hewett and Vicky Sparks for research
assistance.




                                                     32
4.2       Amenities and Public Goods

Because our focus is on neighborhood-level pricing, we gather data on important amenities
that vary across neighborhoods within metropolitan areas: education, distance to the city
center, crime, and environmental quality. In contrast, attributes such as climate or labor
market opportunities generally vary more between cities than within cities and will be ab-
sorbed in our model with city dummies. We match each property to its US census block
using the latitude and longitude coordinates in the housing data and shapefiles from the U.S.
Census Bureau. We then assign to blocks values of the amenities and then finally aggregate
blocks back up to neighborhoods in the final analysis.12
       Among the attributes we consider, public school quality is the one that changes most
sharply at discrete boundaries. Accordingly, we define neighborhoods by elementary school
attendance boundaries. The are 20,353 such neighborhoods represented in our final transac-
tions dataset. We map the blocks to neighborhood boundaries via two methods. First, we
have collected a national set of school zone maps, with 4th grade school attendance bound-
aries for use in GIS software, through the School Attendance Boundary Information System
(SABINS) (SABINS (2011)).13 The SABINS maps are not a complete partitioning of the
U.S., but we were able to place 60.3% of Census blocks, comprising 69% of our housing
transactions, into their 2010 school attendance boundary. For the remaining unmatched ob-
servations, we first assigned the blocks to their school district boundaries and then to the
nearest school within the district, as in Downes and Zabel (2002).14 Finally, using crosswalks
provided by SABINS to the Common Core data, for each school we also have measures of
4th grade school quality, including math test scores and reading test scores. We use the
percent of students in each school who pass their state’s performance test, and convert these
  12
     We match attributes to blocks rather than the properties themselves so that the amenity dataset is not
specifically tied to the (proprietary) housing transactions dataset. Thus, we are able to share the amenity
dataset with other interested researchers.
  13
     These data and additional documentation are available at https://www.sabinsdata.org/.
  14
     Recent work by Reinhardt (2019) analyzing this method in areas with precise boundary information
suggests such a procedure works well and creates little measurement error.




                                                    33
percentages to z-scores by state.15
       To measure neighborhood centrality within the metro area, we take the straight line
surface distance (i.e., great circle distance), in miles, of the block latitude/longitude to the
tallest structure in the metro area as a proxy for the city center. If there is more than one
principal city in the metro area (e.g., San Francisco and Oakland, California), we use distance
to the closest.
       We also obtained measures of environmental quality available from the U.S. Environmen-
tal Protection Agency (EPA). First, as a measure of air pollution, we obtained the number of
high-ozone days (exceeding the National Ambient Air Quality Standards) for each monitor
in the US in 2009 from the US EPA. Distances from each monitor to each of over 11 mil-
lion US Census blocks were computed, and each Census block was given an inverse-weighted
average of the three nearest monitors. We then aggregated up these block-level data to our
neighborhoods. Second, as a measure of undesirable land use, we obtained the number of
sites listed under the Comprehensive, Environmental, Response, Cleanup, and Liability Act
(CERCLA, commonly known as Superfund) within 3 kilometers of each block centroid to
account for point-source environmental disamenities. Again, we averaged these blocks up to
neighborhoods.
       Finally, we obtain crime statistics from the Federal Bureau of Investigation’s Uniform
Crime Reports database from each local jurisdiction in the US, taking the sum of property and
violent crime rates per 10,000 residents. For each block, we take an inverse-distance-weighted
average of the three closest reporting jurisdictions in the metro area (a procedure also used
by Bishop and Murphy (2011)). We then average across blocks to obtain a neighborhood
level measure of crime.
       Table A3 in the appendix reports summary statistics for our amenity variables by city.
Many of these amenity variables are correlated with one another at the neighborhood level.
This motivated our parsimonious selection of amenity attributes; even so, correlation is re-
  15
       Teacher-student ratios are also available but for only 58% of schools.



                                                        34
flected in our estimated weights on individual amenities. This collinearity is not a significant
problem in our context, however, as our main goal is to derive an index of local amenities,
not to derive willingness to pay estimates for each separate attribute.


4.3    Zoning Data

As an indicator of the restrictiveness of zoning Z, we use the Wharton residential land use
regulatory index (WRI) (Gyourko et al. (2008)). These data have been widely used in peer-
reviewed work for similar purposes. This index is based on surveys of local jurisdictions.
We first use the metro-wide measure of zoning since the municipality with zoning/regulatory
authority in most cases does not correspond to the school attendance boundary. In our
view, the individual jurisdictions that respond to the survey are best thought of as a random
sample representing their municipality, when appropriately weighted using sampling weights
given by Gyourko et al. (2008). Appendix Table A3 includes the metro-level measure of the
WRI for cities in our sample. As an alternative to the metro-wide index, we also place the
school attendance boundaries in their corresponding municipality (by Census Place) rather
than use the metro-wide average. This more precisely measures the regulatory environment
for the neighborhood, although doing so significantly restricts the sample size because of
non-responding municipalities and may introduce more measurement error.
   The WRI is an aggregate of a variety of indicators, so in principle one can split land-
use controls into those affecting minimum lot sizes and the number of lots. However, the
message of Gyourko et al. (2008) is that rarely do cities seem to be substituting one type of
regulation for another; rather, they either regulate a lot or a little on a variety of margins.
Thus, the consensus in the literature using the WRI is that these subindices should not be
drawn too finely. Accordingly, we will use the overall WRI in our main analysis. However,
given our interest in contrasting restrictions on extensive margins to those of purchase of the
intensive margin, we also will consider a lot size restrictions index separately from an “other
regulations” measure constructed by subindices stripped of explicit density restrictions.


                                              35
    To gauge whether the WRI captures effects of regulations on housing, in Appendix Table
A2, we compare within-neighborhood variance in property attributes to local regulation
indices. We first decompose the variance to obtain the share of attribute (e.g., lot size)
variance occurring within versus between neighborhoods in a municipality, and then pool
the municipalities to run a regression of within-neighborhood variance on their WRI. We
find that regulations to some extent homogenize the stock of housing within neighborhoods:
a one-standard-deviation increase in regulation reduces within-neighborhood heterogeneity
in property characteristics by about one-tenth of a standard deviation (depending on the
attribute). Nevertheless, even in regulated areas, there is sufficient within-neighborhood
variance in the attributes to elicit a housing services price.
    Finally, one of our tests will augment the zoning data with estimates of housing stock
growth from the U.S. Census Bureau.



5     Testing for Capitalization as a Two-Part Tariff

Section 3 suggested some testable implications of the existence of tickets. Our main strategy
is first to recover the pieces of the two-part tariff pricing function (α and β) and then to
describe the relationship between these prices and local amenities and how they vary with
zoning.


5.1       Recovering Prices

The first step is to recover the “ticket” and “housing services” prices for each neighborhood.
The basic hedonic regression (in levels) is


                              pcnit
                                    = αcn + βcn hc (Li , xi ) + cnit                    (14)
                               Ict

where pcnit is the transaction price of property i, located in neighborhood n of city c, oc-



                                                36
curring at time t. Ict is a time deflator from the FHFA.16 The αcn and βcn terms are the
variables of interest: respectively, the ticket and housing service prices. The housing service
function is hc (L, x) (which may vary by city), a function of land (L) and of a vector of capital
characteristics x.
       Selecting the appropriate housing services function h(·) is a challenge both conceptually
and practically. Conceptually, it is difficult to know precisely what constitutes “housing
services” to households. Presumably, it includes land, living area, structure age (through
quality, maintenance and aesthetics), and room partitioning (bedrooms, bathrooms, other
rooms), but the exact functional form is unknown and is probably highly nonlinear. Thus, to
estimate α and/or β in levels, the function h( ) either must be estimated or defined a priori
by the econometrician. However, as we argue in more detail below, we can estimate patterns
in α and β across neighborhoods under weaker assumptions.
       We approach housing services in several ways. The first two approaches constrain βcn to
differ only for land while conditioning on the physical capital characteristics of the property:

                                 pcnit
                                       = αcn + βcn Li + hc (xi ) + cnit .                                (15)
                                  Ict

Here, we consider two variants of the control hc (xi ). One variant assigns a house with charac-
teristics xi in city c into the discrete categories for which we have estimates of the replacement
cost of construction materials. We then assign hc (xi ) to be this replacement cost value and
subtract it from the left hand side of the estimating equation. Similar approaches to isolat-
ing land prices have been used by Glaeser and Gyourko (2003), Glaeser and Gyourko (2005),
Davis and Palumbo (2008) and others. We call this the “replacement cost” model. The other
variant estimates hc () with flexible hedonic functions of the observed x. In particular, we use
linear and quadratic terms for living area, dummy variables for age of structure (in decadal
  16
    Our analysis at this stage is on cross-sectional property values, but of course these transact at different
times, so we want to consider a constant index. As an alternative to the FHFA index, we also used a deflator
estimated with our own data, finding similar results. We estimated pcnit = Ict (αcn + βcn hc (xi )) + cnit
using non-linear regression on a subset of the data to recover Iˆct , which we then use to adjust the dependent
variable in the remaining data.


                                                      37
bins), and dummies for the number of bedrooms, bathrooms, and/or total rooms (depending
on the available information in each city). We call this the “hedonic” model.
       These specifications allow local public goods to be capitalized into land prices as well as a
ticket price. An obvious practical advantage of this assumption is ease of estimation: the lot
size is observed, so we can simply make it an explanatory variable. Moreover, these forms are
conceptually attractive in that land is the only truly immobile factor, so land capitalization
is closest to the Ricardian sense (as in Scotchmer (1985)). However, this assumption rules
out capitalization occurring in the physical structure of the property, which in reality is part
of what comprise housing services. It assumes, for example, that a good school district is
capitalized into a four-bedroom property (more fit for a family with children) and smaller
two bedroom (more fit for a household without children) in the same way if they are on the
same-sized parcel of land.
       Therefore, we also consider more general models of housing services. The next approach
walks back the structure of the first two, ignoring the capital characteristics entirely, so
that hc (Li , xi ) = Li . Clearly, this approach potentially has an omitted variables problem.
However, in addition to the advantage of parsimony, this formulation may be preferable to
the first two if amenities are capitalized into housing characteristics x as well as land, and if
lot size is correlated with housing services. In that case, it may be better to omit a researcher-
defined h(x) and simply take L as a proxy for hc (L, x). We call this approach the “land”
model.
       The remaining approaches allow for a flexible function of the property attributes, both
land and capital, to form a housing services function. Whereas the models above can be es-
timated on a city-by-city basis, this variant requires estimating a generic function h(Li , xi ; δ)
(where δ is a parameter vector describing housing services as a function of observables xi ).
Crucially, this function is consistent across cities, making it more challenging computation-
ally.17
  17
    The model requires joint estimation of 2N pricing parameters (a ticket and slope for each neighborhood),
plus the δ parameters. Moreover, the model is nonlinear because the slope parameters are interacted with the


                                                    38
    We first estimate the following equation with non-linear constraints on a small national
subsample of the data:18


                                 pcnit
                                       = αcn + βcn h(Li , xi , δ) + cnit ,
                                  Ict

where h(L, x, δ) is a flexible function parameterized by δ. From this initial estimate, we
obtain a consistent estimate of h(), which we denote ĥ. We then use the estimated ĥ to
impose that function on the remaining data and estimate α and β using


                                   pcnit
                                         = αcn + βcn ĥ(Li , xi ) + cnit .
                                    Ict

We call these the “estimated services” models.
    We consider three functional forms for h(). The first and most lightly parameterized
uses the natural log of living area and lot size and their interaction (three elements in δ).
The second uses lot size and indicator variables for room partitions, including interactions
between bedrooms and baths (26 elements in δ). The third extends the log lot size/living
area polynomial to allow for vintage effects (i.e., structure age) in intercept and value per
square foot of living space, and indicators for bathrooms (25 elements in δ).19 Table A4 in
the appendix reports some statistics on the fit of these models. They deliver very similar
predictions of h(L, x, δ), though the last provides a marginally better goodness of fit.
function h(x, δ). For a model with K parameters in h(), this imposes (K − 1)(N − 1) nonlinear restrictions.
Because the scale and origin are not identified, the model is normalized by setting the slope parameter of
one neighborhood to one and omitting the constant from h(). In practice, we found it most expedient to
iterate between the linear subsets of the model–estimate the intercepts and slopes for a guess of δ, and then
update δ using the new estimates of intercept and slope and so on, before proceeding to a nonlinear simplex
estimation routine.
   18
      We conduct a stratified sampling procure to generate the national subsample. This routine randomly
selects two neighborhoods from each tercile of the price distribution for each metro area, then randomly
selects the lesser of 120 or half the properties from within the neighborhood. This preserves a sufficient
number of properties that the selected neighborhoods can remain in the main estimation. The resulting
sample contained 62,250 properties from 612 neighborhoods (six neighborhoods from each of the 102 metro
areas that survive to the second stage estimation).
   19
      A practical consideration is that covariance in the observed housing attributes made it difficult to sep-
arately identify many parameters at once, and so parsimony was important for reliable convergence. For
instance, it was difficult to obtain convergence for a model with indicators for bedrooms and a polynomial
in living area, since these are correlated in the data.


                                                      39
    Taking our model literally, under the functional form assumptions for h(), we can identify
the price function p(h), which we then assume is an affine transformation p = α + βh. More
generally, we cannot separately identify nonparameterically a generic price function p() from
a housing services function h(). We only know there is some composite p(h()). However,
following the logic of Epple et al. (2019) and Landvoigt et al. (2015), we can still identify
how between-city differences in G shift this function and whether the shift occurs more, on
average, in intercept effects (α) or slope effects (β) with differences in regulation Z.


5.2     The Pricing of Local Public Goods

The second step is to relate these two components of pricing to local public goods and zoning.
This involves using the price parameter estimates from the first stage and our measures of
local amenities in neighborhoods. We estimate the following model using non-linear least
squares:


                                    α̂cn = ac + (1 + aZ Zc )γ 0 gcn + να                                  (16a)

                                    β̂cn = bc + (b0 + bZ Zc )γ 0 gcn + νβ .                               (16b)


That is, we measure the relationship of both price components (α and β) to an index of local
amenities G = γ 0 g, which is estimated from the data with a cross-equation restriction forcing
it to be the same for both components. The ac , bc terms represent city dummies, which
play a dual role. First, as usual, they capture city-wide characteristics in housing prices such
as climate and labor-market conditions as well as the direct effects of land-use restrictions.
Second, because we estimate housing services functions hc ( ) separately by city, we cannot
separately identify differences in the scale of these services from the mean β in the city. Next,
the b0 term captures the different way G is normalized into slopes (in dollars per 1000 square
feet) relative to intercepts (dollars per lot).20
  20
     Note that we cannot separately identify a0 , b0 , and the vector γ to scale, so we set a0 = 1. Additionally,
we cannot identify G to location separately from ac , bc , and b0 , so γ omits a constant term.


                                                       40
    The aZ , bZ terms are the main variables of interest: They measure the interaction of
local public goods with city-level land use restrictions Z. Our model predicts that places in
which land use is heavily restricted will have more of their local public goods capitalized into
ticket prices and less into the housing services slope. Hence, we expect aZ > 0, bZ < 0. Our
approach relies on a differences-in-differences approach to identification. We do not seek to
measure and are not able to identify the average effect of regulation on either component
of housing prices. Rather, Equations (16a) and (16b) ask, among neighborhoods in more
regulated cities, are prices more differentiated by G via α or β than among neighborhoods
in less regulated cities?
    As mentioned above, we treat Z both as a scalar (an overall measure of land use restric-
tions) and as a vector with two parts, an index of minimum lot size and restrictions that
might constrain the number of lots. We will test the sensitivity of the second stage to al-
ternative geographic levels of regulation, as well as non-regulatory proxies for neighborhood
land frictions.



6     Results

We first explore the data for regularities that would be consistent with the presence of tickets
without directly accounting for neighborhood amenities. We then proceed to the formal test
of amenity capitalization via tickets.


6.1    Residuals in the Proportional Pricing Model

Section 3 illustrated how ticket capitalization would bias the semilog price model of hous-
ing services: residuals would be downward sloping in h() for high-price neighborhoods, but
upward sloping in h() for low-price neighborhoods (see Figure 8). We test for this pattern
in the price data for our sample of cities. First, we estimate the standard log-price model
with neighborhood dummies and a flexible function of property attributes, recovering the


                                              41
                            Table 3: Residuals from Log Price Hedonic Model

              Quality Ranking Method:               Raw Median Price            Estimated Coefficient
                                                          1                              2

              Residuals by Neighborhood Quality Ranking (NQR)
              NQR X Small Properties           0.279                                       0.248
                                            (0.0007)                                     (0.0007)
              NQR X Large Properties          -0.240                                      -0.232
                                            (0.0007)                                     (0.0007)

              Large Property Intercept                      0.660                          0.639
                                                           (0.0006)                      (0.0006)
              Constant                                      -0.339                        -0.323
                                                           (0.0004)                      (0.0004)
NOTES: The left-hand-side variable is the residual from the semi log hedonic model. Standard errors in parentheses. Source:
Authors’ calculations using housing transactions data described in Section 4.



projected prices and the residual. (Recall that in this case, unlike our αs, the dummies
capture proportionate effects.) As a descriptive exercise, we then regress these residuals on
how “large” the property is (indicated by a dummy for whether or not it is in the top half
of the within-neighborhood price ranking) and how “nice” the neighborhood is (indicated by
its between-neighborhood price ranking) and the interaction of the two. This brings the test
illustrated by Figure 8 to actual data spanning multiple regions of the country.
    The results are reported in Table 3. The first column ranks neighborhoods by raw median
prices, whereas the second column ranks them by the estimated coefficient on the neighbor-
hood dummy variable in the log-price hedonic. In both cases, we see the pattern predicted by
Figure 8: the residual on small properties grows in the neighborhood ranking–i.e., over predic-
tion in inexpensive (presumably low-g) neighborhoods–while the residual for large properties
shrinks in the price ranking–i.e., over prediction in expensive (presumably high-g) neighbor-
hoods. This is not a sufficient test of capitalization, as we have introduced no information
on amenities, but the pattern in residuals indicates that neighborhoods are stratified in part
by shifts to the pricing function: tickets are present. As discussed in Section 3, this serves
as a cautionary tale for use of proportional pricing (including log-transformed) models of
neighborhood pricing.

                                                            42
 Table 4: Tests of Equivalence in Intercept and Slope Parameters: Counts of Metro Areas

 Model:                 Replace Cost         Hedonic       Land                         Estimated Services:
                                                                     Land, Area        Land, Rooms          4 + Vintage, Bath
                                1                2           3           4                  5                       6
 Metro Count                   96               104         104         103                103                     103

 Coefficient: αn
 p-value < 0.01                93               97          99             89                 98                      96
 p-value > 0.01                3                 7           5             14                  5                       7

 Coefficient: βn
 p-value < 0.01                94               102         101            97                 97                      101
 p-value > 0.01                2                 2           3              6                  6                       2
NOTES: The figures in the table are counts of cities whose statistical test of equivalence for the α (intercept) and β (slope)
parameters across neighborhoods within the city fall within the specified p-values. See Sections 4 and 5 for detailed definitions.
Source: Authors’ calculations using housing transactions data described in Section 4.



6.2       Recovered Housing Price Components

Next, we test whether the components of the housing price function, the intercept and slope
terms, α and β, are important for neighborhood price heterogeneity. That is, we test the null
hypothesis that the intercepts are the same (but not necessarily zero) across all neighborhoods
within each metro area, and similarly for the equivalence of the estimate slope coefficients.
Rejecting the former hypothesis is consistent with local pricing via tickets and the latter for
slopes.
       In Table 4, we report counts of metro areas with statistically significantly different esti-
mates of α and β. We find statistical evidence for pricing via both dimensions. In nearly all
cities, we reject the hypothesis that all neighborhoods have the same housing price intercept
at standard p-values, and likewise for the slope parameters.21
       We view this as a test of the minimal necessary implications of our model, as evidence
that some form of neighborhood pricing occurs through each component of the housing price
  21
    In most cases, failure to reject the null results from an apparent lack of statistical power. For example,
the the hedonic-adjusted model (column 3), the cities we fail to reject equivalence of α are Columbia, SC,
Huntsville, AL, Mobile, SC, Myrtle Beach, SC, Tulsa, OK, Denver, CO, and Saint Louis, MO. Only the last
two major metro areas have a large number of neighborhoods to compare. Also, the failure-to-reject cities
exhibit failure in both coefficients and across all models, indicating poor precision in the recovery of Equation
(14) more so than a rejection of the capitalization model.



                                                               43
function. However, we also acknowledge that this test of particular values of the αs and βs is
based partly on functional form restrictions. Accordingly, next we consider how the αs and
βs shift with differences in differences in amenities and frictions to configuration.
   Table A5 in the appendix reports summaries of the first stage estimates by metro area.


6.3     The Pricing of Local Public Goods

6.3.1   Metro Level Regulation

Our basic hypothesis is that the capitalization of amenities will occur more in tickets (at the
extensive margin) and less in housing services (at the intentensive margin) where land-use
restrictions are higher. As a descriptive way of thinking about this, we first look at the
correlation between α and school test scores across neighborhoods within a city and likewise
the correlation between β and test scores. We then plot each city’s correlation coefficient
against its WRI. Figure 9 displays the results of this exercise. The top two figures are the
correlations for α and β, respectively, using the “hedonic model” in the first stage, in which
we control for structural housing characteristics but allow capitalization of G only into land.
The bottom two figures similarly use the housing services model with capitalization into land
and living area. Both models tell the same story: in areas with high regulation, there is a
higher correlation between school quality and tickets, and a slightly lower correlation between
school quality and the price of land and/or housing services. This pattern is consistent with
our model.
   More formally, our main empirical test of the model is through the regression model of
(16a), (16b), using estimates from the first stage model, (15). The results from the second
stage regressions are presented in Table 5. All the reported specifications use the FHFA index
to deflate prices in the first step and use heteroskedastic-robust standard errors. Each column
of the table, and similar tables that follow, uses a different definition of housing services, as
described above.
   The first two columns present the specifications putting capitalization into land but con-

                                               44
Figure 9: Within-Metro Correlation of School Quality to Estimated α, β to Metro Regulation
                                                  Hedonic Model




                          Estimated Services Model: Land, Living Area




Source: Authors’ calculations using housing transactions data, SABINS attendance zone data, and school test scores data,
described in Section 4.




                                                            45
trolling for capital characteristics, what we have termed the construction cost (column 1)
and hedonic (2) methods. The top panel shows the coefficients decomposing α and β. The
primary coefficient of interest, az is positive, at 0.33 for the replacement cost and 0.39 for the
hedonic method, and statistically different from zero. This indicates that, as conjectured,
more highly regulated metropolitan areas have neighborhoods that differ by intercepts. This
is precisely what our model predicts. On the other hand, the coefficient on land slope capi-
talization, bz , is slightly negative, which would indicate a downward tilting to the land-slope
in more regulated areas with more ticket capitalization, although this is very imprecisely es-
timated and not robust across specifications, so we do not draw firm conclusions from these
point estimates.
       The next panel reports coefficients on the index of amenities. While we do not present
these as estimates of willingness to pay, it is reassuring that the coefficients are sensible: test
scores are a “good” and increase prices, whereas distance from the central city, environmental
pollution, and crime are disamenities, depressing prices.22 At the bottom of the table, we
report the standard deviation and interquartile range of our estimated G index, γ 0 g.
       The third column uses the most parsimonious definition of housing service, the land-
only model without any controls for capital. Under this method, we find the regulatory
interaction term az to be 0.14 and still statistically significant. The scale coefficient converting
the amenities index between intercept shifts and prices per square foot of land, b0 , is a
negative at point estimate, although not statistically significant from zero. This creates
some counterintuitive interpretations of magnitude, but given the potentially severe omitted
variables problem in this specification, we do not take the point estimate too literally. This
specification is our least preferred.
       Finally, columns 4 to 6 present the specifications in which housing services were derived
from an index estimated in an initial stage. While these introduce much greater flexibility
  22
    Because the underlying variables are on different scales, the coefficient sizes cannot be directly compared
with one another. In unreported regressions, we find the school quality component accounts for two-thirds
to four-fifths of the variance in the index, and about 80 percent of the variance is between neighborhoods,
within metro areas.


                                                      46
   Table 5: Second Stage Regression of Tickets and Slopes: Metro Level Regulation Index
 Model:                    Replace Cost       Hedonic         Land                         Estimated Services:
                                                                          Land, Area      Land, Rooms        4 + Vintage, Bath
                                 1                2             3             4                5                     6
 N                             19,543          19,892        19,889         19,893           19,912               19,881
 A: Price Decomposition Coefficients
 aZ                              0.328          0.390         0.144           0.335            0.242                 0.265
                               (0.037)         (0.037)       (0.016)         (0.057)          (0.023)               (0.029)
 b0                              0.017          0.026         -0.011          0.044            0.016                 0.014
                               (0.035)         (0.034)       (0.019)          (0.05)          (0.022)               (0.028)
 bZ                             -0.005          -0.001        0.000           0.003            0.003                 0.000
                               (0.028)         (0.028)       (0.016)         (0.044)          (0.019)               (0.024)

 B: Local Amenities Coefficients, γ
 Test Scores: Math           29,494.50       24,636.71     48,182.32       13,535.36         36,673.12            24,018.57
                             (1142.83)        (909.69)     (1014.55)        (917.98)           (930.8)             (837.04)
 Dist. to CBD                -1,277.64         -869.98        -98.80         178.77          -1,991.23               48.06
                              (59.12)          (44.12)       (52.33)         (47.14)           (57.19)              (43.49)
 CERCLA Sites                -3,987.70       -2,986.66     -18,407.25        -836.33          1,226.10            -4,976.05
                             (1715.85)       (1405.37)     (2028.91)       (1727.41)         (1754.07)            (1599.67)
 Ozone                        -647.06          -569.09       -685.79          -75.36         -1,167.11              -235.91
                              (82.12)          (65.48)       (95.62)         (83.85)           (84.45)              (79.18)
 Crime                          0.70             -2.33        -11.84           -5.26             -0.25                -7.01
                               (0.54)           (0.42)        (0.58)          (0.53)            (0.48)               (0.48)

 Composite Local Amenity Index, γ 0 g
 Std. Dev.           103,256.30       71,501.14             49,508.18      21,740.93        159,884.10            25,938.09
 Interquartile Range  34,125.99       30,156.31             65,059.39      21,924.29         46,854.17            33,735.01
NOTES: Huber-White standard errors in parentheses. Observations are weighted by the inverse of the variance of the
first-step estimator. Outliers more than five standard deviations from the mean are excluded, and neighborhoods per
specifications will vary accordingly. Source: Authors’ calculations using housing transactions data, SABINS attendance zone
data, local amenities data, and WRI land use regulation data, all described in Section 4.




                                                             47
to the capitalization function, they return very similar results as the previous specifications.
The az estimates range from 0.24 to 0.34, indicating an important role for tickets shifting the
capitalization function between neighborhoods, even when capitalization per unit of service
can come via an amalgamation of capital and land.
       To interpret their magnitude, the coefficients can be converted to the share of a price
                                                                                                      ∂p
difference between neighborhoods (with different G) that is attributable to tickets,                  ∂G
                                                                                                           =
     1+az Z
1+az Z+b0 h+bz Zh
                  .   The denominator is the total effect on housing prices for a marginal change
in G, whereas the numerator is just the portion through tickets. This value will depend on the
amount of housing services h as well as the level of land-use regulation Z. In Panel A of Table
6 we report the value at the median lot size in the data and at three levels of regulation. The
implied ticket share of between-neighborhood price differences ranges from 0.69 to 0.88 for
low-regulation cities and 0.79 to 0.94 in high-regulation cities. To the extent we can identify
ticket levels using our functional form, this finding underscores the importance of tickets for
explaining capitalization in a variety of regulatory environments. More importantly, going
down the three rows, we also see that the values are increasing, indicating that tickets play
an increasingly important relative role for explaining capitalization as land-use regulations
tighten.23
       Panel B of the table interprets the results by posing the question, what is the change in
ticket value from a low-G neighborhood to a high-G neighborhood in lightly regulated cities
compared with highly regulated cities? To operationalize a calculation, we use a change from
the 25th percentile of estimated G distribution to the 75th percentile in a city with z = −1
compared with a city with z = 1. To normalize to regional price differences, we present the
change in ticket values between neighborhoods as shares of the value of properties of small,
medium, or large size (25th , 50th , or 75th percentile of housing services, respectively). In a
lightly regulated city, moving to a higher-G neighborhood will increase ticket expenditure
  23
    In column 3, using the point estimates of the land-alone housing services function, the implied shares
are actually greater than one and decreasing in regulation. This is because the point estimate of the scaling
coefficient, b0 , is negative, which as noted we treat with some skepticism.



                                                     48
                  Table 6: Implied Pricing Patterns: Metro Level Regulation Index
  Model:                  Replace Cost        Hedonic      Land                       Estimated Services:
                                                                      Land, Area     Land, Rooms         4 + Vintage, Bath
                                  1               2          3            4               5                      6

  A: Implied Ticket Share of Price Changes [i]
  Low Reg. (Z=-1)              0.800           0.754       1.103        0.685             0.880                  0.878
  Med. Reg. (Z=0)              0.887           0.838       1.088        0.751             0.891                  0.906
  High Reg. (Z=1)              0.939           0.881       1.078        0.789             0.898                  0.924

  B: Increase In Ticket Price, Low G N’hood to High G N’hood
  (Share of Property Value, by Regulatory Regime and Property Size [ii])
  Low / Small                  0.087           0.095       0.199        0.048             0.079                  0.076
  Low / Med.                   0.086           0.088       0.184        0.047             0.077                  0.075
  Low / Large                  0.077           0.074       0.161        0.046             0.073                  0.072
  High / Small                 0.186           0.246       0.285        0.101             0.136                  0.138
  High / Med.                  0.182           0.226       0.262        0.100             0.133                  0.136
  High / Large                 0.162           0.186       0.227        0.096             0.126                  0.132
                                                                            ∂p
NOTES: This table uses point estimates from Table 5. [i] Derived using ∂G      = 1+a Z+b1+a zZ
                                                                                                         where h(·) is measured at
                                                                                    z    0 h(·)+bz Zh(·)
the median level of housing service. [ii] The increase in ticket value, from change across inter-quartile range of composite
amenity index, expressed as a proportion of the value of a property offering housing services at the 25th (small), 50th
(medium), or 75th (large) percentiles. Housing service percentiles are calculated at the metro level, and the table reports the
average across metro areas. Source: Authors’ calculations using estimates from Table 5.



at a rate of 5 to 20 percent of the property value, depending on the specification (and 5 to
10 in our preferred specifications). In a highly regulated city, the change is about twice as
large–the higher-G neighborhood will have a more expensive ticket representing an additional
10 to 25 percent of the value of the property. Naturally, the ticket expenditure makes up
a smaller proportion of larger properties offering more housing service. Thus, in virtually
all cities, the differences in entry ticket cost between neighborhoods comprise a substantial
portion of the differences in housing expenditure, and importantly, this pattern is especially
strong in highly regulated cities.


6.3.2      Municipal Level Regulation

Next, we allow land-use regulations to vary at the municipal level rather than the metro
level. The advantage here is that most regulations are actually imposed by the municipality,
so we gain a more geographically precise measure of what the regulatory regime actually is.
For example, the city of Los Angeles and the city of Santa Monica have separate regulatory


                                                                 49
authority within the same metro area. The primary disadvantage is that this precision comes
at a substantial loss of the sample because not every municipality within the metro area is
covered by the WRI survey. Additionally, if survey responses from individual jurisdictions
are noisy measures of the underlying regulatory stringency, using micro-level data rather
than group averages will increase measurement error.
   Empirically, the exercise is very similar to the metro level regressions, except that now
we must consider the potential direct effects of regulation on prices via tickets or slopes. In
the main model, metro-level fixed effects accounted for the direct effects of regulation. In
principle, we could use municipal level fixed effects, but in practice the number of municipal-
ities makes this computationally intractable in a nonlinear model. Instead, we account for
direct effects by allowing the submetro level of regulation to shift the metro level intercept
by introducing one more coefficient to each equation, so that the specification is now, for
jurisdiction j,


                         α̂cjn = ac + a1Z Zcj + (1 + a2Z Zcj )γ 0 gcjn + να                (17a)

                         β̂cjn = bc + b1Z Zcj + (b0 + b2Z Zcj )γ 0 gcjn + νβ ,             (17b)


where a1Z and b1Z now capture the direct effects of regulation in j and, as before, a2Z and b2Z
capture the effects of regulation on the capitalization of G.
   Table 7 reports the results with columns ordered as before. The results are qualitatively
similar to the metro level results. The main coefficient of interest, a2Z , which captures the
extent to which G is capitalized into tickets more in higher-regulation areas, is positive
and statistically significant in all models. Comparing it with aZ in Table 5, we see it is
somewhat lower in magnitude at the municipality level than at the metro level, except for
the land-only model (column 3). The coefficient b2Z , which captures the extent to which G
is differentially capitalized into unit housing services in higher-regulation areas, continues to
be small in (absolute) magnitude and statistically insignificant. The direct effect of zoning,



                                                 50
measured by coefficients a2z , b2z , is seen to increase housing prices via both the extensive
and intensive margin, consistent with the literature on the effect of regulation on housing
supply (e.g., Glaeser and Gyourko (2003), Quigley and Raphael (2005), Saiz (2010), Saks
(2008)), although our approach is less suitable than others for making causal statements on
the direct effects. (We are focused on the within-city phenomenon of regulation shifting the
neighborhood price functions.)
   Table 8 again helps interpret these coefficients. As in the metro level zoning model, tickets
are quantitatively important, accounting for two-thirds or more of the change in prices from a
change in G. Generally, the magnitude of the ticket share increases with regulatory intensity.
(However, in some models, the point estimate on bZ is also positive, so the ticket share of
                 ∂p
the derivative   ∂G
                      falls slightly with increased Z. Yet the estimated values of b2Z are not
statistically different from zero, so we are reluctant to draw conclusions from these cases.) In
Panel B, we see that price increases from such a change in G are eight to 27 percent higher in
more regulated cities at a fixed house size and are higher as a proportion for smaller houses
at a fixed level of regulation. These patterns are consistent with our predictions.
   Overall, the municipal level results are consistent with that of the metro level regression.
Capitalization via tickets is important everywhere, but especially so in highly regulated
environments.


6.3.3   Multiple Regulatory Indices

The WRI is an aggregated index of many forms of regulation. Most of these make the process
of constructing new housing more burdensome (e.g., length or number of review processes)
or otherwise more expensive (e.g., taxes and impact fees) and may reduce the amount of
new units constructed, ceteris paribus. But one subindex index stands out: Restrictions on
the minimum allowable lot size. This is a literal constraint on the amount of land consumed
per housing unit and has been the focus of much of the fiscal zoning literature. In the
theory section, we distinguished between minimum purchase requirements, which induce a


                                               51
            Table 7: Second Stage Regression of Tickets and Slopes: Municipal Level
 Model:                    Replace Cost       Hedonic         Land                         Estimated Services:
                                                                          Land, Area      Land, Rooms        4 + Vintage, Bath
                                  1               2             3             4                5                     6
 N                              9,355           9,500         9,498         9,505            9,513                 9,498
 A: Price Decomposition Coefficients
 a1Z                             0.124          0.192         0.098           0.040            0.053                 0.061
                               (0.014)         (0.023)        (0.01)         (0.009)          (0.005)               (0.007)
 a2Z                             0.111          0.219         0.278           0.136            0.051                 0.199
                               (0.018)         (0.027)       (0.024)         (0.049)          (0.008)               (0.031)
 b1Z                            -0.239          -0.041        0.005           0.133            0.035                 0.129
                               (0.348)         (0.382)       (0.218)         (0.534)          (0.308)               (0.494)
 b0                              0.020          0.032         -0.016          0.069            0.015                 0.026
                               (0.053)         (0.049)       (0.031)         (0.071)          (0.025)               (0.037)
 b2Z                            -0.003          -0.002        0.000           0.013            0.000                 0.007
                               (0.017)         (0.018)       (0.026)         (0.054)          (0.008)               (0.029)

 B: Local Amenities Coefficients, γ
 Test Scores: Math           33,157.45       29,613.24     49,067.07       12,703.37         44,385.45            24,190.21
                             (1557.32)       (1246.19)     (1366.43)       (1264.26)         (1312.54)            (1078.69)
 Dist. to CBD                -1,477.01       -1,103.30         -36.71        -381.67         -2,380.08              -369.75
                              (103.88)         (82.33)        (71.18)        (95.04)           (96.97)              (74.15)
 CERCLA Sites                -8,867.64       -2,336.09     -13,991.75       7,162.30         -4,115.51              -707.67
                             (3641.41)       (2914.63)     (3338.04)       (3210.57)         (3491.71)            (2714.54)
 Ozone                       -1,260.24       -1,219.47      -1,110.02        -239.44         -1,930.36              -438.22
                              (186.97)        (146.01)       (154.94)       (176.89)          (189.34)             (146.31)
 Crime                          8.67             4.02           -5.99          -4.92             6.42                 -5.87
                               (1.15)           (0.83)          (0.9)         (0.91)            (0.95)               (0.76)

 Composite Local Amenity Index, γ 0 g
 Std. Dev.           119,879.00       90,274.98             45,259.44      33,329.09        191,426.70            37,336.53
 Interquartile Range  41,580.40       33,939.00             59,721.51      19,853.39         56,223.41            32,676.97
NOTES: Huber-White standard errors in parentheses. Observations are weighted by the inverse of the variance of the
first-step estimator. Outliers more than five standard deviations from the mean are excluded, and neighborhoods per
specifications will vary accordingly. Source: Authors’ calculations using housing transactions data, SABINS attendance zone
data, local amenities data, and WRI land use regulation data, all described in Section 4.




                                                             52
                            Table 8: Implied Pricing Patterns: Municipal Level
  Model:                  Replace Cost       Hedonic      Land                       Estimated Services:
                                                                     Land, Area     Land, Rooms         4 + Vintage, Bath
                                 1               2          3            4               5                      6

  A: Implied Ticket Share of Price Changes [i]
  Low Reg. (Z=-1)              0.836           0.752      1.194        0.672             0.897                  0.847
  Med. Reg. (Z=0)              0.870           0.806      1.135        0.659             0.900                  0.836
  High Reg. (Z=1)              0.898           0.845      1.104        0.650             0.902                  0.828

  B: Increase In Ticket Price, Low G N’hood to High G N’hood
  (Share of Property Value, by Regulatory Regime and Property Size [ii])
  Low / Small                  0.135           0.132      0.141        0.058             0.118                  0.081
  Low / Med.                   0.132           0.122      0.131        0.058             0.115                  0.080
  Low / Large                  0.117           0.103      0.116        0.056             0.110                  0.078
  High / Small                 0.170           0.212      0.269        0.079             0.132                  0.127
  High / Med.                  0.166           0.197      0.249        0.078             0.129                  0.125
  High / Large                 0.147           0.166      0.218        0.076             0.122                  0.121
                                                                          ∂p          1+a2
                                                                                         ZZ
NOTES: This table uses point estimates from Table 7. [i] Derived using    ∂G
                                                                             = 1+a2 Z+b h(·)+b2 Zh(·)   where h(·) is measured at
                                                                                  Z    0      Z
the median level of housing service. [ii] The increase in ticket value, from change across inter-quartile range of composite
amenity index, expressed as a proportion of the value of a property offering housing services at the 25th (small), 50th
(medium), or 75th (large) percentiles. Housing service percentiles are calculated at the metro level, and the table reports the
average across metro areas. Source: Authors’ calculations using estimates from Table 7.



two part tariff on constrained individuals within a neighborhood, and quantity restrictions on
the maximum number of lots, which induce an extensive margin price to the neighborhood
at large. We next apply our empirical test of ticket capitalization to separate indices of
regulatory difficulty and of minimum lot size. Our theory predicts greater interaction effects
for the former than for the latter.
       In particular, we re-estimate the second stage (Equations (17a) and (17b)) but with two
regulation indices: one an adjusted-WRI “other regulations” index purged of restrictions on
minimum lot size and one for the existence of minimum lot size requirements, an indicator
function.24 We focus on the municipal level regression, despite the loss of sample size, in
favor of using the more precise survey response for the minimum lot size subindex, although
the metro level results are quite similar. It is worth noting that while most subindices
  24
    Variants of this sub-index, including the level of the minimum lot size (in acres) and the existence of
minimum size larger than some threshold, return similar results. The full WRI generated by Gyourko, Saiz,
and Summers (2008) uses as input subindex an indicator function for minimum lot sizes larger than two
acres.



                                                                53
are correlated within cities (i.e., cities tend to regulate highly or not and do not appear
to substitute one form for another, as explained by Gyourko, Saiz, and Summers (2008)),
minimum lot size is nearly uncorrelated with the other regulations index.
   Table 9 reports results from these models. Panel A reports the pricing function decom-
position coefficients. The positive coefficient of aother regs indicates that cities with greater
regulatory burden exhibit more capitalization via tickets. Minimum lot size requirements,
however, do not induce more ticket-based capitalization, as the alotsize coefficient is actually
negative and typically imprecisely estimated across specifications. This result is consistent
with the prediction of the theory in Section 2. It is the general regulatory burden driving
the ticket capitalization results found earlier and not minimum lot sizes explicitly.


6.3.4   History as Friction: Path Dependence

As we noted at the outset, land-use restrictions need not be confined to government regula-
tions. Anything that prevents the addition of housing units by subdividing lots or by building
multiple units on a lot could create tickets, including historical development patterns that
get locked in over time. Accordingly, we might expect relatively more capitalization of G into
tickets in older cities, which developed a long time ago, and more capitalization in housing
services in more recent cities. To test this possibility, we re-estimate Equations 17a and 17b,
using county-level growth rates in the housing stock from 1980-2010 instead of the WRI,
controlling for those growth rates in levels as well as city dummies. We use county-level data
here so that we can match jurisdiction boundaries over the thirty-year period. The larger
spatial average and longer time window also reduce concern about the simultaneity of growth
and ticket prices.
   Table 10 displays the results, in the first panel for a model using the log of the 1980-2010
growth rate in the housing stock. (For brevity, we omit reporting coefficients on our γ 0 g index
here, but they are available upon request.) The second panel displays results for a dummy
variable indicating whether the county had a growth rate of more than 50 percent in its


                                               54
Table 9: Second Stage Regression of Tickets and Slopes: Multiple Regulatory Indices, Mu-
nicipal Level Regulations
 Model:                      Replace Cost        Hedonic          Land                           Estimated Services:
                                                                               Land, Area       Land, Rooms         4 + Vintage, Bath
                                    1                2              3              4                 5                      6
 N                                9,355            9,500          9,498          9,505             9,513                  9,498
 A: Price Decomposition Coefficients [i]
 aother regs           0.150        0.319                          0.397            0.221            0.070                   0.270
                     (0.022)      (0.035)                        (0.035)          (0.059)            (0.01)                 (0.04)
 alotsize             -0.061       -0.058                         -0.029           -0.111            -0.024                 -0.036
                     (0.019)      (0.023)                        (0.053)          (0.057)           (0.009)                (0.048)
 b0                    0.014        0.032                         -0.011           0.063              0.015                  0.026
                     (0.051)      (0.051)                        (0.064)          (0.078)           (0.026)                (0.051)
 bother regs           0.000       -0.003                          0.000           0.010              0.001                  0.009
                     (0.017)      (0.022)                        (0.033)           (0.06)           (0.009)                (0.036)
 blotsize              0.002       -0.001                         -0.006           0.004             0.000                   0.000
                      (0.02)      (0.023)                        (0.072)          (0.055)           (0.009)                (0.047)

 B: Local Amenities Coefficients, γ
 Test Scores: Math             35,220.38        31,209.92      50,492.89        13,669.47          45,469.93              24,859.45
                               (1691.29)        (1399.78)      (2496.43)        (1478.52)          (1380.41)              (1430.61)
 Dist. to CBD                  -1,439.73        -1,085.87          -10.13         -421.19          -2,395.42                -359.88
                                 (105.8)          (84.41)         (64.36)          (95.7)            (99.92)                (74.87)
 CERCLA Sites                  -9,319.44        -2,251.85      -13,901.55        7,184.76          -3,983.71                -806.06
                               (3759.68)        (2961.35)      (3383.22)        (3386.75)          (3558.06)              (2762.69)
 Ozone                         -1,220.18        -1,144.50       -1,011.87         -314.16          -1,910.19                -416.33
                                (196.89)         (151.76)        (164.73)        (192.01)           (195.66)               (153.29)
 Crime                             8.78             4.12            -4.83           -5.12              6.44                   -5.65
                                  (0.99)           (0.81)          (0.88)          (0.93)             (0.96)                 (0.77)

 Composite Local Amenity Index, γ 0 g
 Std. Dev.                    117,259.50        89,145.48       45,375.08       36,535.36         192,717.20              36,904.26
 Interquartile Range          42,708.70         34,969.40       59,416.25       21,263.28          57,031.90              33,038.80
NOTES: Huber-White standard errors in parentheses. Observations are weighted by the inverse of the variance of the
first-step estimator. Outliers more than five standard deviations from the mean are excluded, and neighborhoods per
specifications will vary accordingly. [i] The coefficients measuring direct effects are suppressed for readability, but are available
on request. Source: Authors’ calculations using housing transactions data, SABINS attendance zone data, local amenities
data, and WRI land use regulation data, all described in Section 4.




                                                                55
housing stock.25 The key variable of interest is a2growth , which we expect to be negative (less
capitalization into tickets in counties with a younger housing stock). We find this pattern
holds for both panels except column 3 (land-only) and for the final column, where it is not
statistically significant.
       The next two panels replicate the first two models but include land-use regulations
through the WRI as well as housing growth. This could be important to distinguish, as
low growth could be the result of restrictive land regulations. Again, the patterns we have
found hold up. The variable aZ , which represents, as in our base models, how the WRI index
affects capitalization of G into tickets, is positive and statistically significant in all models.
In itself, it is higher than in our base models as well, but we also see that capitalization into
tickets is reduced in younger counties, as in the first two panels, again accept for columns 1
and 2.


6.4       Tickets and Price Appreciation

Having established that, cross-sectionally, prices between neighborhoods differ more in in-
tercepts in heavily regulated areas and more in average slope in lightly regulated areas, we
extend our analysis to examine the role of each part (tickets and slopes) in housing price
dynamics. In this last exercise, we ask, when housing markets cycle, is it the extensive or
intensive margin prices that fluctuate?
       To study the components’ cyclical dynamics, we expand our sample of housing transac-
tions to 2000 (or the first available year, no later than 2003) until 2011. We mark the periods
of high and low prices for each metro area using the FHFA index, splitting the data by the
quarter of maximum three-year price growth. Using the metro level break point in price
growth–typically around 2004–prices are “low” before and “high” after. Data periods after
the Great Recession are also included as “low” if prices stabilized after declining–a point
arising around 2009-2010, if at all. These additional data requirements limit the available
  25
    Besides integer convenience, 50 percent is approximately the median growth rate by counties: the un-
weighted growth rate is 43 percent while the population-weighted growth rate is 57 percent.


                                                  56
   Table 10: Second Stage Regression of Tickets and Slopes: Growth in the Housing Stock
                Model:       Replace Cost       Hedonic       Land                        Estimated Services:
                                                                         Land, Area       Land, Rooms        4 + Vintage, Bath
                                   1                2           3            4                 5                     6
                A: Log County Growth Rate
                a1growth         -0.209          0.037        0.012          0.039            -0.154                 0.000
                                (0.019)         (0.012)      (0.007)       (0.007)           (0.007)                (0.006)
                b1growth         -0.977          -0.200       -0.458        -0.371            -0.171                 -0.759
                                (1.272)         (0.516)      (0.284)       (0.654)           (0.399)                (0.784)
                a2growth         -0.270          -0.046        0.044        -0.116            -0.297                  0.023
                                 (0.03)         (0.019)       (0.01)       (0.039)            (0.02)                (0.015)
                b0               -0.005          0.021        -0.003         0.062             0.016                 0.014
                                (0.023)         (0.026)      (0.018)        (0.06)            (0.02)                (0.027)
                b2growth         -0.022          0.002        0.006          0.006            -0.004                 -0.002
                                (0.023)         (0.024)      (0.014)       (0.036)           (0.017)                (0.017)

                B: I(High County Growth Rate)
                a1growth         -0.287          0.018        -0.057         0.030            -0.188                 -0.029
                                (0.018)         (0.032)      (0.013)       (0.016)           (0.007)                (0.011)
                b1growth         -0.556          -0.083       -0.300        -0.216            -0.211                 -0.453
                                (0.614)         (0.735)      (0.371)        (0.73)           (0.438)                (0.518)
                a2growth         -0.413          -0.116        0.055        -0.524            -0.364                 -0.071
                                (0.028)         (0.038)      (0.029)       (0.053)            (0.02)                (0.041)
                b0                0.018          0.016        -0.017         0.030             0.015                 0.016
                                (0.028)         (0.032)      (0.023)       (0.041)           (0.019)                (0.028)
                b2growth         -0.021          0.004        0.012         -0.003            -0.004                 -0.006
                                (0.032)         (0.041)      (0.031)        (0.06)           (0.024)                (0.041)

                C: Log County Growth Rate, w/ zoning
                a1growth         -0.205          0.044        0.013          0.040            -0.146                 0.001
                                (0.019)         (0.012)      (0.007)       (0.007)           (0.006)                (0.006)
                b1growth         -0.843          -0.217       -0.458        -0.331            -0.166                 -0.750
                                (1.185)         (0.508)      (0.283)       (0.617)           (0.391)                (0.778)
                a2growth         -0.332          -0.091        0.038        -0.198            -0.329                  0.002
                                (0.042)         (0.027)      (0.011)        (0.06)           (0.025)                (0.018)
                a2z               0.635          0.720        0.221          0.886             0.420                 0.444
                                (0.079)         (0.073)      (0.026)       (0.162)           (0.047)                (0.051)
                b0                0.004          0.031        -0.003         0.090             0.017                 0.017
                                (0.043)         (0.041)      (0.022)       (0.093)           (0.029)                (0.036)
                b2growth         -0.030          0.004        0.007          0.009            -0.004                 -0.003
                                (0.032)         (0.032)      (0.015)       (0.049)            (0.02)                 (0.02)
                b2z              -0.011          -0.004       -0.001         0.005             0.003                 -0.001
                                (0.056)         (0.052)      (0.026)       (0.105)           (0.038)                (0.042)

                D: I(High County Growth Rate), w/ Zoning
                a1growth         -0.274          0.094        -0.061         0.024            -0.180                 -0.032
                                (0.018)         (0.035)      (0.013)       (0.016)           (0.007)                (0.011)
                b1growth         -0.547          -0.111       -0.297        -0.202            -0.206                 -0.452
                                (0.617)         (0.724)      (0.371)       (0.714)           (0.434)                (0.517)
                a2growth         -0.482          -0.333        0.015        -0.631            -0.418                 -0.161
                                (0.035)         (0.043)       (0.03)       (0.067)           (0.023)                (0.046)
                a2z               0.397          0.600        0.233          0.543             0.295                 0.441
                                (0.044)         (0.053)      (0.026)       (0.077)           (0.028)                (0.046)
                b0                0.027          0.019        -0.017         0.037             0.015                 0.018
                                (0.036)          (0.04)      (0.025)       (0.051)           (0.022)                (0.033)
                b2growth         -0.026          0.005        0.014          0.004            -0.005                 -0.007
                                (0.041)          (0.05)      (0.033)       (0.074)           (0.027)                (0.047)
                b2z              -0.004          -0.002       -0.003         0.003             0.002                  0.001
                                (0.035)         (0.041)      (0.027)       (0.063)           (0.024)                 (0.04)
NOTES: The stock variable is the change in the housing stock units at the county level from 1980-2010. Panels A-D refer to different
specifications of high versus low growth (at the county level), and whether regulations (at the metro level) are included in the regression. Source:
Authors’ calculations using housing transactions data, SABINS attendance zone data, local amenities data, and WRI land use regulation data, all
described in Section 4.




                                                                        57
                                  Table 11: Tickets and Price Appreciation
                                 Property Size        Raw            Components
                                 (lot percentile)             Ticket    Land     Capital
                                 25th                 0.40     0.10     0.02      0.27
                                 50th                 0.37     0.08     0.05      0.28
                                 75th                 0.37     0.07     0.05      0.27
NOTES: The table reports appreciation rates in total and the percentage points accounted for by each component, using the
hedonic pricing model (specification 2 in Tables 5 to 10). The figures are averages across metro areas. The components add up
to the first column, subject to rounding.
Source: Authors’ calculations using housing transactions data and SABINS attendance zone data described in Section 4.



metro areas to 97. We then run an un-deflated version of Equation (14). Here, we use the
hedonic method to adjust for capital so we can decompose appreciation into tickets, land
slopes, and capital prices. Finally, we use the estimated coefficients to project prices for
standardized properties at the 25th , 50th , and 75th percentile of the lot size distribution for
each metro area.
       The first column of Table 11 shows that the average neighborhood exhibited 40 percent
price appreciation, roughly the same across properties of different size.26 The next three
columns report the appreciation (in percentage points) accounted for by tickets, land, and
capital, respectively. Note that these are all scaled by the low period property value so that
they have the same denominator for each property size and therefore sum to the first column
(subject to rounding error).
       In properties of each size, the appreciation in capital price (i.e., the value assigned to
square footage, bedrooms, baths, etc.) averages about 27 percent, a majority of the observed
price increases, which range from 37 to 40 percent. Most of the remainder occurs in the
neighborhood ticket prices, with tickets comprising a larger share of changes in the smaller
properties and land values a larger share in larger properties.
       Our previous analysis on capitalization emphasized the cross sectional stratification of
neighborhoods, but this simple exercise shows that tickets are not fixed anchors immune to
cyclical dynamics. This offers another angle by which tickets are important for understand-
ing the housing price function. For instance, ticket appreciation could be relevant for the
  26
       We trim extreme outliers in neighborhood appreciation to avoid skewness affecting the means.



                                                             58
submarket cyclical dynamics described in Landvoigt et al. (2015).



7       Conclusions

This paper addresses how local public goods are capitalized–whether through ticket prices at
the extensive margin or the slope of the land/housing price function at the intensive margin.
We find some evidence of both. Importantly, we find empirically that more restrictively reg-
ulated cities exhibit more capitalization in ticket prices. Hence, regulation seems to amplify
a two-part tariff to the capitalization of local amenities. These findings suggest that ticket
price differentiation is under appreciated in the literature.
      Our main contribution has been to increase our understanding of how capitalization of
amenities “works” in the presence of zoning (and, vice versa, how the effect of zoning depends
on amenities). Beyond this basic point, our work has four further implications. First, it lends
additional insights into why the semilog hedonic model could be a preferred functional form
in empirical work, as well as the limitations of this specification.27 The concavity of this
functional form may help capture the “tilting” induced by tickets. Nevertheless, by forcing
capitalization to be proportionate to prices, such hedonic functional forms are misspecified
in the presence of tickets. This may bias the hedonic estimates of the willingness to pay for
amenities, most certainly so for applications interested in the heterogeneity of willingness to
pay by demographic groups consuming different housing bundles. The exercise we report in
Table 3 suggests this concern is not just academic.
      Second, tickets would have important implications for the distributional welfare effects
of gentrification. Suppose an area receives an exogenous increase of amenities, leading to
increased housing costs. As the literature has already recognized, if the marginal bidder
moving in during gentrification increases housing prices by more than poorer incumbents’
willingness to pay for the increased amenity, incumbent renters could be made worse off (see,
e.g., Banzhaf et al. (2019)). Capitalization into tickets is likely to augment this effect. The
 27
      See Kuminoff et al. (2010) for discussion of hedonic specifications.


                                                       59
increased housing costs enter as a lump sum effect, rather than proportionate to housing,
making the gentrification effect even more regressive.
   Third, many structural sorting models adopt a discrete-continuous framework in which
households first choose a community and then a continuous quantity of housing. At the
choice of community, households trade off housing prices against amenities (and, in some
applications, wages) (Kuminoff et al. (2013)). Invariably such studies assume housing services
are purchased solely on a per-unit basis, without tickets (typically by first estimating a
semilog hedonic model to recover community-specific price indices). Our model suggests
per-unit housing prices are lower in high-G communities and that the difference in them
across communities is lower than often assumed, whereas “virtual income” (income gross
of ticket payments) is lower in the high-G communities, at least where there are land-use
regulations. We conjecture that these adjustments would affect estimates of housing price and
income elasticities of demand, as well as have implications for the implied sorting patterns
by income and unobserved tastes. Future work might incorporate tickets into a structural
model to test this hypothesis, perhaps with simulations as a first step.
   Finally, our model and findings have implications for old debates between the “new”
and the “benefit” views of the property tax – debates about whether the gross-of-tax price
of housing simulates a market for public goods, as Tiebout (1956) envisioned. Previous
tests of one model or the other often have conflated questions of whether amenities should
be capitalized into housing prices with questions as to how they should be. We generalize
Hamilton’s (1975, 1976) models to show that they should be capitalized into ticket prices in
the presence of zoning, especially when it constrains the number of lots in an area. In the
presence of congested publicly provided goods, efficiency requires pricing access to the goods
per se – not just land – to close the commons (Fischel 1985, Banzhaf 2014). In our view,
most local public goods and amenities are congestable. Air quality, for example, typically
taken for a pure public good, is congestable (hence rivalrous) in the context of community
choice, because adding more people into a spatial area likely will reduce local air quality


                                             60
through traffic congestion, etc. Or to put it another way, as more people crowd into an area,
maintaining constant air quality may require more expensive formulations of gasoline, more
expense on roads to maintain traffic flow, and so forth (Banzhaf (2014)).
   Our results are consistent with the notion that zoning creates the ticket price necessary for
efficient pricing of congested public goods. Nevertheless, we emphasize that the existence of
such capitalization is far from sufficient evidence that public goods are allocated optimally. In
particular, our model predicts capitalization into ticket prices in the presence of restrictions on
the number of lots, regardless of whether the public good is congested, but such pricing is only
optimal in the presence of congestion. Thus, while we cannot pass judgement based on our
work alone, we suggest that future work evaluating the normative aspects of spatial sorting
should consider two-part pricing. Tickets may approximately deliver per capita pricing and
prevent over congestion. Yet, normative evaluations should also consider that tickets price
out lower income households who would otherwise be willing to trade housing services for
public goods.



References

Albouy, D. and Ehrlich, G. (2018). Housing productivity and the social cost of land-use
  restrictions. Journal of Urban Economics, 107:101 – 120.

Banzhaf, H. S. (2014). The market for local public goods. Case Western Reserve Law Review,
  64(4):1441–1480.

Banzhaf, S., Ma, L., and Timmins, C. (2019). Environmental justice: The economics of race,
  place, and pollution. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 33(1):185–208.

Bayer, P., Ferreira, F., and McMillan, R. (2007). A unified framework for measuring prefer-
  ences for schools and neighborhoods. Journal of Political Economy, 115(4):588–638.




                                                61
Bayer, P., Keohane, N., and Timmins, C. (2009). Migration and hedonic valuation: The case
  of air quality. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 58(1):1–14.

Bishop, K. C. and Murphy, A. D. (2011). Estimating the willingness to pay to avoid vio-
  lent crime: A dynamic approach. American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings,
  101(3):625–29.

Brueckner, J. K. (1981). Zoning and property taxation in a system of local governments:
  Further analysis. Urban Studies, 18(1):113–120.

Calabrese, S. M., Epple, D. N., and Romano, R. E. (2011). Inefficiencies from metropolitan
  political and fiscal decentralization: failures of Tiebout competition. Review of Economic
  Studies, 79(3):1081–1111.

Carroll, R. J. and Yinger, J. (1994). Is the property tax a benefit tax? the case of rental
  housing. National Tax Journal, 47(2):295–316.

Davis, M. A. and Palumbo, M. G. (2008). The price of residential land in large US cities.
  Journal of Urban Economics, 63(1):352–384.

Downes, T. A. and Zabel, J. E. (2002). The impact of school characteristics on house prices:
  Chicago 1987-1991. Journal of Urban Economics, 52(1):1–25.

Epple, D. and Platt, G. J. (1998). Equilibrium and local redistribution in an urban economy
  when households differ in both preferences and incomes. Journal of Urban Economics,
  43(1):23–51.

Epple, D., Quintero, L., and Sieg, H. (2019). A new approach to estimating hedonic equilib-
  rium models for metropolitan housing markets. Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

Fischel, W. A. (1985). The economics of zoning laws: A property rights approach to American
  land use controls. JHU Press.



                                            62
Fischel, W. A. (1992). Property taxation and the Tiebout model: Evidence for the benefit
  view from zoning and voting. Journal of Economic Literature, 30(1):171–177.

Fischel, W. A. (2001). Municipal corporations, homeowners, and the benefit view of the
  property tax. In Oates, W., editor, Property Tax and Local Public Finance, pages 33–77.

Glaeser, E. L. and Gyourko, J. (2003). The impact of building restrictions on housing
  affordability. FRBNY Economic Policy Review, pages 21–39.

Glaeser, E. L. and Gyourko, J. (2005). Urban decline and durable housing. Journal of
  Political Economy, 113(2):345–365.

Glaeser, E. L. and Ward, B. A. (2009). The causes and consequences of land use regulation:
  Evidence from greater boston. Journal of Urban Economics, 65(3):265–278.

Gyourko, J., Saiz, A., and Summers, A. (2008). A new measure of the local regulatory
  environment for housing markets: The Wharton Residential Land Use Regulatory Index.
  Urban Studies, 45(3):693–729.

Hamilton, B. W. (1975). Zoning and property taxation in a system of local governments.
  Urban Studies, 12(2):205–211.

Hamilton, B. W. (1976). Capitalization of intrajurisdictional differences in local tax prices.
  American Economic Review, 66(5):743–753.

Hilber, C. A. and Vermeulen, W. (2015). The impact of supply constraints on house prices
  in england. Economic Journal, 126(591):358–405.

Ihlanfeldt, K. R. et al. (2007). The effect of land use regulation on housing and land prices.
  Journal of Urban Economics, 61(3):420–435.

Kuminoff, N. V. (2012). Recovering preferences from a dual-market locational equilibrium.
  Arizona State.


                                             63
Kuminoff, N. V., Parmeter, C. F., and Pope, J. C. (2010). Which hedonic models can we
  trust to recover the marginal willingness to pay for environmental amenities? Journal of
  Environmental Economics and Management, 60(3):145–160.

Kuminoff, N. V., Smith, V. K., and Timmins, C. (2013). The new economics of equilibrium
  sorting and policy evaluation using housing markets. Journal of Economic Literature,
  51(4):1007–62.

Landvoigt, T., Piazzesi, M., and Schneider, M. (2015). The housing market(s) of San Diego.
  American Economic Review, 105(4):1371–1407.

Lutz, B. (2015). Quasi-experimental evidence on the connection between property taxes and
  residential capital investment. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(1):300–
  330.

McConnell, V. and Walls, M. (2009). Policy monitor: US experience with transferable
  development rights. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 3(2):288–303.

Mieszkowski, P. and Zodrow, G. R. (1989). Taxation and the Tiebout model: the differen-
  tial effects of head taxes, taxes on land rents, and property taxes. Journal of Economic
  Literature, 27(3):1098–1146.

Neary, J. P. and Roberts, K. W. (1980). The theory of household behaviour under rationing.
  European Economic Review, 13(1):25–42.

Nechyba, T. J. (2001). The benefit view and the new view: Where do we stand, twenty-five
  years into the debate? In Oates, W., editor, Property Tax and Local Public Finance, pages
  113–121.

Quigley, J. M. and Raphael, S. (2005). Regulation and the high cost of housing in california.
  American Economic Review, 95(2):323–328.




                                             64
Reinhardt, C. (2019). Accurate assignment of school quality to properties. Georgia State
  University.

Ross, S. and Yinger, J. (1999). Sorting and voting: A review of the literature on urban public
  finance. Handbook of regional and urban economics, 3:2001–2060.

SABINS (2011). School attendance boundary information system. Technical Report Version
  1.0, College of William and Mary and the Minnesota Population Center.

Saiz, A. (2010). The geographic determinants of housing supply. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 125(3):1253–1296.

Saks, R. E. (2008). Job creation and housing construction: Constraints on metropolitan area
  employment growth. Journal of Urban Economics, 64:178–195.

Scotchmer, S. (1985). Hedonic prices and cost/benefit analysis. Journal of Economic Theory,
  37(1):55–75.

Sieg, H., Smith, V. K., Banzhaf, H. S., and Walsh, R. (2002). Inter-jurisdictional housing
  prices in locational equilibrium. Journal of Urban Economics, 52:131–153.

Sieg, H., Smith, V. K., Banzhaf, H. S., and Walsh, R. (2004). Estimating the general
  equilibrium benefits of large changes in spatially delineated public goods. International
  Economic Review, 45(4):1047–1077.

Taylor, L. O. (2017). Hedonics. In Champ, P. A., Boyle, K., and Brown, T. C., editors, A
  Primer on Nonmarket Valuation, pages 331–393. Springer, second edition.

Tiebout, C. M. (1956). A pure theory of local expenditures. Journal of Political Economy,
  64(5):416–424.

Turner, M. A., Haughwout, A., and Van Der Klaauw, W. (2014). Land use regulation and
  welfare. Econometrica, 82(4):1341–1403.


                                             65
Wilson, R. B. (1993). Nonlinear Pricing. Oxford University Press, New York.

Yinger, J. (2015). Hedonic markets and sorting equilibria: Bid-function envelopes for public
  services and neighborhood amenities. Journal of Urban Economics, 86:9–25.

Zodrow, G. R. (2001). Reflections of the new view and benefit view of the property tax. In
  Oates, W., editor, Property Tax and Local Public Finance, pages 79–111.




                                            66
