                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          THE RELATIONSHIP DILEMMA:
                 ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE AND THE ADOPTION OF
                 CREDIT SCORING TECHNOLOGY IN INDIAN BANKING

                                        Prachi Mishra
                                   Nagpurnanand R. Prabhala
                                      Raghuram G. Rajan

                                       Working Paper 25694
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25694


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2019




We thank Nishant Vats and Khushboo Khandelwal for excellent research assistance, Sumit
Agarwal, Gurdip Bakshi, Federico Bandi, Akash Deep, Paul Ferraro, Laurent Fresard, Divya
Kirti, Deep Mukherjee, Satish Pillai, Kejal Sanghavi, Anand Srinivasan, Krishnamurthy
Subramanian, Sheng-Jin Xu, and seminar participants at ABFER, IMF, Johns Hopkins
University, Bank of Canada, University of Connecticut, University of Maryland, the ISB CAF
conference, and the UBC Summer Research Conference for helpful feedback. The views set out
herein are those of the authors. Unless explicitly stated, they do not necessarily reflect the views
of Goldman Sachs or any other institutions Dr. Mishra or the other authors are or were affiliated
with. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Prachi Mishra, Nagpurnanand R. Prabhala, and Raghuram G. Rajan. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Relationship Dilemma: Organizational Culture and the Adoption of Credit Scoring Technology
in Indian Banking
Prachi Mishra, Nagpurnanand R. Prabhala, and Raghuram G. Rajan
NBER Working Paper No. 25694
March 2019
JEL No. G21,O32,P5

                                         ABSTRACT

Credit scoring was introduced in India in 2007. We study the pace of its adoption by new private
banks (NPBs) and state-owned or public sector banks (PSBs). NPBs adopt scoring quickly for all
borrowers. PSBs adopt scoring quickly for new borrowers but not for existing borrowers.
Instrumental Variable (IV) estimates and counterfactuals using scores available to but not used by
PSBs indicate that universal adoption would reduce loan delinquencies significantly. Evidence
from old private banks suggests that neither bank size nor government ownership fully explains
adoption patterns. Organizational culture, possibly from formative experiences in sheltered
markets, explains the patterns of technology adoption.

Prachi Mishra                                            Raghuram G. Rajan
Global Macro Research                                    Booth School of Business
Goldman Sachs, Mumbai                                    University of Chicago
Prachi.mishra@gs.com                                     5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
                                                         Chicago, IL 60637
Nagpurnanand R. Prabhala                                 and NBER
The Johns Hopkins Carey Business School                  raghuram.rajan@ChicagoBooth.edu
100 International Drive
Baltimore, MD 21202
prabhala@jhu.edu
I. Introduction
What determines whether an organization adopts new technologies or new management
practices? Do competitive forces push uniform adoption rates across different types of
organizations? We examine these questions using as our setting the introduction of credit
scoring technology in retail lending in Indian banking.
    In contrast to developed countries such as the U.S. or Europe, where credit bureaus and
credit scoring have been around for several decades, credit bureaus obtained legal certitude in
India only around 2007 after legislation requiring banks to submit data to bureaus was passed.
The act of incorporating credit information from the bureau into a loan decision is a clear
marker of the adoption of the credit bureau technology in lending. We examine the differences
in the pace of adoption of this new technology across two types of banks, state-owned banks
(called public sector banks (PSBs) in India) and "new" private banks (NPBs), relatively modern
enterprises licensed after India's 1991 liberalization. For both types of banks, the usage of credit
bureaus represents a new and unfamiliar practice. Moreover, the value of adopting this practice
is unclear to both types of banks because Indian credit bureaus are subsidiaries of foreign
entities, with short operating histories in India.
    We analyze adoption using a comprehensive dataset on consumer loans and inquiries that
we obtain from a major credit bureau in India. The process for initiating credit inquiries is
straightforward. Banks submit an electronic request containing customer biographic and
demographic data. The bureau returns a report containing the credit score or a null report if
there is no match. Inquiries are a nearly free option for banks; banks pay a nominal fee of
$0.15-0.30 per inquiry, which is less than 0.04% of the average loan amount. Since the cost of
requesting a score is negligible compared to the expected loss from defaults, and at worst the
score can simply be ignored, the scoring technology is worth adopting if at all useful. Using a
random sample drawn from the bureau database of loans, repayment histories, and credit scores
for over 255 million individuals, we will see that credit scores are informative about credit risk,
so scores are useful in lending decisions. With this in mind, we look at the adoption of credit
scoring in retail lending decisions in India.
    In developed markets such as the U.S., it is routine for banks to check credit scores before
granting credit. However, in our sample, this is not the case. Several years after the introduction
of credit bureaus, we show that banks make a large number of loans without bureau credit
checks, even for customers for whom the bureau holds score data. In particular, there is a
significant gap in the use of credit scoring technology between the new private banks (NPBs)


                                                 1
and the state-owned public sector banks (PSBs). NPBs quickly move to inquiring with the
credit bureau while PSBs lag behind. The inquiry gap is narrowed somewhat when we correct
for differences in focus of activity such as government mandates on priority sector lending to
weaker sections. Nevertheless, the inquiry gap is still significant. For instance, in 2015, 88%
of all loans by NPBs are preceded by inquiries, double the rate of 44% for PSBs.
    Perhaps more interestingly, we find that the gap in bureau usage depends on the type of the
customer seeking a loan. For new applicants, PSBs are as quick to use credit bureau technology
as NPBs. In every year in our sample, PSB usage of bureaus exceeds 95% for new customers.
Thus, PSBs are not incapable of, or averse to, using new technology. Instead, PSBs seem to be
less willing to use the new technology for existing borrowers with whom they have a prior
lending relationship. For these borrowers, we find a significant gap even in 2015, the last year
of our sample, in which the bureau usage rate is 48% for PSBs compared to 90% for NPBs.
The reluctance to inquire for current borrowers persists close to 7 years after credit bureaus
open. However, this gap has narrowed over time.
    We consider the possibility that PSBs do not inquire because their clients have no bureau
data, and also the possibility that if the score data exists, it has little informational content for
PSBs -- because these banks have better information about past credit clients than may be
obtained through a credit inquiry. We find little support for either possibility. We find that a
large number of clients who are granted loans by PSBs without inquiry have valid credit scores
at the time the loan was made. Moreover, the point-in-time credit scores are reliably related to
ex-post delinquencies for both NPBs and PSBs. In fact, the relationship is as strong or stronger
for PSB customers as for NPBs.
    We then obtain point-in-time credit scores for PSB borrowers who were granted loans
without inquiry. The scores represent the real time information that PSBs would have seen had
they inquired with the bureau for the un-inquired loans. We quantify the information left on
the table by estimating the counterfactual loan decisions and the portfolio delinquencies had
the PSBs used the neglected credit scores. For a range of plausible counterfactual policy
functions on how the additional bureau data would be used if it were obtained, we find that the
greater use of credit scores reduces portfolio delinquency by 30 to 40 percent.
    It might appear that the slow adoption of the technology, and more specifically, slow
adoption for current borrowers, is because of the incentives induced by state ownership of
PSBs. While we cannot check this directly, we have a class of privately owned institutions, old
private banks (OPBs), which are of similar vintage and went through similar formative
experiences as India's public sector banks. However, OPBs were not nationalized in the waves
                                                 2
of nationalization in 1969 and 1980 that created India's public sector banks and thus remain
under private ownership. We find that the pattern of adoption by OPBs is similar to that of
PSBs rather than of the new private banks. Old private banks adopt credit scoring quickly for
new clients but are reluctant to inquire about existing clients. Whatever prompts this behavior,
it does not appear therefore to be state ownership. Nor does it appear to be size. OPBs are an
order of magnitude smaller than PSBs -- smaller banks do not seem more agile at adopting new
management practices.
   We conjecture that some persistent aspect of the organizational culture of these older banks
might explain the difference in adoption rates from that of the new private banks. The legacy
banks grew in an uncompetitive environment in which banks were protected from entry, which
diminished profitability concerns and let them go the extra mile for the existing clients. The
new private banks emerged in a more competitive era after India's economic liberalization. In
the post-reform environment, each transaction had to stand on its own merits. However, it also
appears that more intense competitive environment drives out uncompetitive practices over
time, which possibly explains why, over time, even the older banks inquire with bureaus more
frequently, even for their existing customers. Perhaps competition affects culture-determined
behavior, replacing it with more transaction driven behavior (see, for example, Boot (2000),
Eccles (1988), or Petersen and Rajan (1995) on relationship versus transaction banking).
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II gives some institutional background
regarding the Indian banking system. Section III describe the credit bureau dataset and gives
baseline descriptive statistics on the consumer credit market in India. Sections IV establishes
the basic empirical facts regarding credit bureau adoption such as the surprisingly common
practice of not using credit bureaus for all loans and the reluctance of PSBs to inquire before
making loans to existing borrowers. We conduct tests to rule out a number of plausible (and
important) empirical explanations for the differential rates of adoption. Sections V and VI
present instrumental variable and counterfactual estimates of the information left on the table
by not inquiring. Section VII presents results concerning old private banks. Section VIII
discusses the implications of our results for research on the adoption of new management
practices and new technology and the work on state-owned enterprises. Section IX concludes.




                                               3
II. Institutional Background
A. Indian Banking Sector
        Since independence in 1947, India has had a national banking market in which
"scheduled commercial" banks account for virtually all bank assets and liabilities. India’s
central bank, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), regulates the Indian banking industry. Entry
requires a license which is infrequently granted, so most bank growth has been through
expansion of the branch networks of incumbent banks. As of March 2015, the end of our sample
period, India had 96 major banks. These banks had 125,672 branch offices, INR 89 trillion
(US$1.4 trillion) of deposits, and INR 65 trillion (US$1 trillion) in credit outstanding. 2
    State-owned banks (called "public sector banks" in India or PSBs henceforth) include the
State Bank of India, which was taken over by the state in 1955 and other banks that were
nationalized in two waves in 1969 and 1980. PSBs account for about 71% of credit outstanding.
A second category of banks are new private sector banks (henceforth NPBs) that were licensed
after India’s economic liberalization in 1991. These banks have market shares in deposits and
credit of about 21%. India also has old private sector banks (henceforth OPBs), which were
entities deemed too small to be nationalized in 1969 and 1980. Our sample excludes 56 small
Regional Rural Banks and Local Area Banks serving small town and rural markets, and many
small co-operative banks. While over 100 foreign banks are licensed to operate in India, they
have small market shares with limited geographical footprints restricted to very large urban
areas. They are also not part of our study.


B. Origins of Public Sector Banks and New Private Banks
    India's public sector banks have been incorporated for much longer periods than they have
been state-owned. For example, India's largest bank, the State Bank of India, was founded as
Bank of Calcutta in 1806, and acquired its current name in 1955 when it came under state
ownership. Other PSBs are private banks that became state-owned through nationalizations of
private banks in 1969 and 1980. The nationalizations reflected India's tilt towards a mixed
economic model with extensive central planning and industrial licensing. Nationalized banks
were viewed as critical to help achieve plan priorities. Moreover, the formerly private banks




2See https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/Publications/PDFs/T_1010006F0329D7546D4986D609257186816.PDF.
The banks collectively employ over a million individuals of which about 830,000 are in the PSBs. INR 65=$1
around the end of our sample.


                                                     4
were seen as being overly focused on a few corporate entities to the exclusion of new entrants
and poorer customers. Nationalization was seen as a way of promoting greater inclusion.
    In the 1969 nationalization, the government took over all banks with aggregate deposits
exceeding INR 500 million, about 85% of the branch network. In the second round of
nationalization in 1980, the government took over banks with nationwide deposits exceeding
INR 2 billion, at which point 90% of the banking market was nationalized. After the second
round, a number of small banks, the "old private banks" or OPBs, still remained private. After
nationalization, personnel of the nationalized banks retained their jobs. However, bank
management processes changed significantly. Boards of directors were often staffed with
political appointees, and the government’s writ extended to nearly all aspects of bank
functioning. This included, for example, policies towards personnel such as recruitment, pay,
promotion, and job rotation across geographies and functions.
    In 1991, a significant economic crisis led the country to liberalize its economy and many
of its industrial and trade policies. The country's Banking Act was amended in 1993 to allow
new private banks (NPBs) to enter, subject to licensing by the RBI. Some of these NPBs were
carved out of former financial institutions engaged in development lending or from non-
banking financial companies while others developed organically. The NPBs inherited few
operating legacies, and typically started with a relatively blank slate while formulating their
operational procedures and growth strategies. 3 They had the normal problems of new entrants
in a market surrounded by incumbents, though economic growth also picked up in the post-
reform era, giving them room to expand.


C. Technology Adoption by Indian Banks
    The benefits of computerizing operations were recognized by all banks as early as the
1990s. However, PSB adoption of technology was slow due to union fears of job losses (Rishi
and Saxena, 2004). 4 After pressure from central bank committees (Rangarajan Committee,
1989; Narasimhan Committee, 1991), from customers used to better service at the new private
banks, and from interoperability issues in areas such as clearing, PSB unions signed
modernization agreements in October 1993 and March 1997. Nevertheless, adoption remained
slow. In 2001, only 9,777 out of 46,426 branches of PSBs had been computerized.


3 See Bandopadhyay, T., 2012, “A Bank For the Buck.” Jaico Publishing for an account of HDFC, one such bank.
4 These concerns about job losses from automation are the in the modern debate over AI. See, e.g., the address by
the famous investor Warren Buffett at https://finance.yahoo.com/news/warren-buffett-ai-good-society-
enormously-disruptive-203957098.html

                                                         5
    An entirely different path towards technology was followed by the new private banks
(NPBs) that entered after India's post-1991 economic liberalization. The NPBs faced a
liberalizing banking environment that allowed them to operate without the burdens of legacy
institutional, human, and regulatory constraints. For example, requirements that banks open 4
branches in underserved areas for every ordinary branch were relaxed and commercial
viability introduced as a criteria for branch expansion (Burgess and Pande, 2005). 5 Moreover,
NPBs did not have the physical branch infrastructure that the nationalized banks had, so
communications and information technology like ATMs were necessary for their rapid
growth. Thus, NPBs were open to, and adopted, technology in all aspects of banking, not just
backroom operations. They emerged as relatively modern enterprises within a decade after
their birth. Their technology intensive operations are reflected in their aggregate operating
ratios even at early stages in their existence. For instance, in 2001, the average revenue per
employee for NPBs was INR 75 million, about 5 times the INR 13-16 million for PSBs.


D. Establishment of Credit Bureaus in India
    In the U.S, three national credit bureaus, Equifax, Experian, and Transunion, hold vast
repositories of credit data and have long histories of operation (Avery, Calem, and Canner,
2003). 6 These bureaus now track consumer spending, repayment histories, identity
information, and over time, have added data such as court records. The Getting Credit section
of the World Bank Doing Business section shows that information sharing arrangements such
as credit bureaus are common in European countries but less so in developing countries
(Djankov, McLeish, and Shleifer, 2007). 7
    In India, bureaus have more limited operating histories. The oldest bureau in India,
Transunion CIBIL, was established in 2000 and began as a fledgling consumer bureau service
with 4 million records in 2004. Enabling legislation was finally passed as the 2005 Credit
Information Companies (Regulation) Act, or CICRA and went into effect on December 14,
2007. The Act requires financial institutions to submit lending and repayment data to bureaus.
As a result, the bureaus have been able to expand their operations significantly. For example,
as of March 2015, the database at Transunion CIBIL has about 472 million records for over
255 million individuals. Besides Transunion CIBIL, three other bureaus, Experian, Equifax


5 See, for instance, https://www.rbi.org.in/upload/notification/pdfs/55197.pdf
6 Equifax traces its origin to a single shop set up in 1899 and assumed its current name in 1979. Experian was
formerly TRW as part of an engineering and electronics company. It has been in operation since the 1960s and
assumed its current name in 1996. Transunion's history in consumer credit dates back to 1969.
7 See http://www.doingbusiness.org/data/exploretopics/getting-credit


                                                         6
(both owned by U.S. parents) and CRIF-Highmark (owned by an Italian parent), have been
licensed to operate in India.


E. Bank Use of Credit Bureaus
    Current regulations require lenders to submit data on new loans and repayments of existing
loans to bureaus. The bureaus compile and standardize lending data, develop analytical insights
into delinquencies, and assign scores. The Indian market poses unique challenges to the
bureaus. Primary among these is financial exclusion. Large segments of India's population
simply do not access the formal financial system for credit and do not have ways to build credit
histories (Agarwal et al., 2017). Moreover, legacy systems for identification feature multiple
permitted identity documents. Many are paper-based and hand-written, vary in the fields that
are collected and the languages they are printed or written in. Establishing a person’s identity
and attributing data to that person has not been easy, but the credit bureaus have tried-and-
tested algorithms for doing so. India has since moved to a single biometric based unique
identity card, the "Aadhaar" card. However, these data are not integrated into credit databases
and face legal challenges on the permissible end-uses even today.
    Given operational challenges on issues such as establishing clear customer identity, bank
managers may well be skeptical about the benefits of bureaus. Moreover, regulations do not
say whether or how banks should use the data in their lending process. Banks vary in the extent
to which they use bureaus, as we will show shortly. The variation in bureau usage and the
limited use of bureaus are also important policy concerns. For example, a committee formed
by India's central bank, the Aditya Puri committee, noted in 2014 that it is standard practice for
all banks to reference credit bureaus prior to lending but there was little empirical evidence on
the benefits of doing so. The committee recommended further study on this issue. 8


III. Data and Baseline Descriptive Statistics
A. Credit Bureaus
        Financial institutions submit monthly data on all new loans granted and repayment to
credit bureaus. The bureaus record these submissions and extensively cross-check submissions
for integrity. For a nominal fee, currently $0.15-0.30, these institutions can inquire with


8See https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/PublicationReport/Pdfs/APR220314FS.pdf, March 22, 2014. The circulars
pertaining to credit bureau usage include DBOD.No.BC.DL.(W)12/20.16.002(1) 98-99; DBOD No. DL. BC.
111/20.16.001/2001-02, Submission of credit information to CIB. June 4, 2002; RPCD.CO RRB.No.
32/03.05.33/2009-10, CIC (Removal of Difficulties) Order, 2008, October 20, 2009;

                                                     7
Transunion CIBIL about new applicants for credit. The bureau records these inquiries. Our
data are a random and anonymized subset of the loan and inquiry data from Transunion CIBIL,
which is India's oldest bureau.
         Once a bank makes an inquiry, the bureau cross-checks member identities through de-
duplication algorithms that account for variations in names and their representation from
India’s 22 official languages and the nature of identity documents. A match is returned only
when the degree of agreement based on 10 fields such as name, age, address, zip codes, phone
numbers, and family members staying in the same dwelling exceeds a threshold. If individuals
cannot be matched reliably, the bureau returns a null credit report. If a match is found, the
bureau returns a point-in-time credit score and a brief report.


B. Our Random Sample
    Our sample period ends in fiscal 2015, i.e., March 2015. As of this date, Transunion CIBIL
covers 1,840 member financial institutions and 255 million individuals who have 472 million
loan records. 9 The bureau started with the universe of all individuals covered and extracted a
1% sample at random, which was anonymized and provided to us for analysis on site. Any
individual in the random sample is retained for all the analysis regardless of whether the
individual had only inquiries, loans without inquiries, or loan granted after inquiries. We adopt
the bureau terminology of labeling each individual as a unique “FID.”


C. Inquiry and Trade Files
    The credit bureau data are organized into 3 files. The address file contains demographic
data from which we obtain the age and gender of the applicant. The inquiry file records all
inquiries made by member financial institutions with the bureau. There are two types of
inquiries. Active inquiries are for the purpose of potentially extending credit to borrowers.
Passive inquiries are for routine risk management purposes for existing accounts rather than
for granting credit. Our sample includes only the former. We do not know the type of loan for
which there is an inquiry since banks do not report this while inquiring. The third data file is
the trade file, which includes records of all new credit granted. This dataset includes an
indicator for the type of loan made such as agricultural or automobile loans. 10 For each credit

9
  The credit registry dataset is proprietary and not publicly available. We have no access to fields such as the
names of the individuals and banks, or their exact addresses, in these files. The bureau requires all analysis to be
performed on site with no remote access.
10
   Credit cards are not a significant source of credit in India and most activity in this area in our sample period is
due to foreign banks in metropolitan areas. For instance, as of September 2016, consumer lending accounts for

                                                          8
facility, the trade file includes the loan amount granted and an indicator for whether the
repayment is delayed.
    The bureau data are complete for recent loans but older loan data are populated only on a
best efforts basis because of substantial variations in the computerization and accuracy of older
bank records. However, CIBIL has been in existence from 2000, so these issues should be
relatively small for the regression analysis, which focuses on data after 2013.


E. Growth in India's Consumer Lending Market
    The Indian consumer credit market has been booming. Central bank statistics show that as
of fiscal year ending March 31, 2016, total bank credit outstanding in India was INR 78.9
trillion (US$ 1.2 trillion), or around 60% of India's GDP of US$ 2 trillion. 28.7% of total bank
credit is consumer credit. Consumer credit excluding agriculture is INR 13.9 trillion, or 17.63%
of total bank credit, and is growing rapidly at 15.8% per year. 11 Between 2015 and 2016, the
aggregate number of borrowers increased by 18.6% and is likely to grow even more
significantly as India remedies the high level of financial exclusion (Demirguc-Kunt, Klapper,
Singer, and van Oudhusen, 2015) through its "PMJDY" program that has brought in more than
300 million individuals into the banking system between 2014 and 2016 (Agarwal, Alok,
Ghosh, Ghosh, and Seru, 2017; Chopra, Prabhala, and Tantri, 2017).
    We see similar growth in lending in the credit bureau statistics on inquiries and loans in
Table 1. Consider an applicant who walks into a bank seeking a loan. The loan could be
rejected summarily without further processing. If the bank decides to move forward, it could
inquire from the credit bureau, or it could make a loan without an inquiry. We define an
inquired loan, that is, a loan preceded by inquiry, as a loan made by an institution to an
individual for which the institution made an inquiry at the credit bureau within a 180-day
window prior to the loan. A loan without inquiry is one where there was no such inquiry.
While we do not have data on applications that are summarily rejected, we do know the total
number of inquiries made by a bank and the loans made without inquiry. We call the sum of
the number of inquiries and loans without inquiry as filtered applications. It is a proxy for
applications but after any applications summarily rejected by banks without inquiry are
filtered out.


19.34% of total bank credit while cards comprise 0.70%. As of December 2017, there are 36 million credit cards
outstanding in India compared to 847 million debit cards (htpps://dbie.rbi.org.in)
11 See RBI's database on the Indian Economy (https://dbie.rbi.org.in). For comparison, in 2016, the total consumer

credit in the U.S. excluding real estate is $3.6 trillion, which is about 20% of GDP. Mortgage credit adds about $11
trillion, or another 60% of U.S. GDP. Source: FRB Release G.19.

                                                         9
     In Table 1, we report annual aggregates on filtered applications, inquiries, and loans for our
1% subsample. “Year” denotes the fiscal year ending on March 31, which is the financial year
end for all banks in our sample and for almost all Indian corporations. Between 2006 and 2015,
the 1% sample contains 4.33 million filtered applications and 2.97 million loans, of which 2.29
million loans are made without inquiry and 0.68 million loans are made after inquiry. The total
amount of new loans is INR 896 billion or about US$ 13.78 billion at $1 = INR 65. As Table
1 represents a 1% sample, the aggregate volume of new loans in the bureau data is $1.4 trillion.
     The data in Table 1 show that India's consumer lending market is booming. In 2006, the
1% sample contains 178,032 loans for an aggregate amount of INR 38.87 billion. In 2015, there
are 579,000 loans for an aggregate amount of INR 177 billion. Between 2006 and 2015, the
number of new loans granted increases at 15.2% per year. The growth in the amount disbursed
is even more impressive and is close to 20% per year. The growth reflects both the consumer
credit boom in India and also the better coverage of credit by bureaus as reporting technologies
become better integrated into the banking system. 12
     The data in Table 1 also show that bureau usage increases over time. The number of
inquired loans in the 1% sample (column 4) goes up 30-fold from 5,150 in 2006 to 177,439,
and inquired loan amounts (column 7) increase by about 40 times from INR 2.95 billion to INR
114.64 billion. The share of the overall loan amount inquired, reported in column 10, increases
from 7.60% in 2006 to 64.51% in 2015. However, over one-third of the amount -- and close to
71% of the number -- of new loans are made without a credit bureau inquiry, 8 years after
bureaus were legally enabled in India.


IV. Bureau Usage by Banks
     In Table 2, we partition the data into loans made by New Private Banks (NPBs) and state-
owned or Public Sector Banks (PSBs) that are majority owned by the central government.
Inquiries are systematically lower for PSBs compared to NPBs in every year of the sample. In
the final year of our sample, 2015, the data in Panel A of Table 2 indicate that PSBs inquire for
only 11.67% of the number and 41.38% of the amount versus 67.31% and 85.19%,
respectively, for NPBs. As an alternative metric, we define the variable “bureau usage” as the
number of inquiries divided by the number of filtered applications. Usage is thus the proportion

12
  It is not possible to get a precise decomposition of the two components. The bureau data reflect the flow of new
loans granted while the official RBI statistics are based on the stock of loans outstanding. That a good portion of
the bureau statistics reflects real lending growth is clear from the RBI Basic Statistical Returns, in which the
number of consumer and agriculture loan accounts increase by 63% from 65.29 million to 106.29 million while
the corresponding loan amount more than doubles from INR 5.27 trillion to INR 11.4 trillion.

                                                        10
of the filtered applicant pool that is inquired. In 2015, the last column of Table 2 indicates that
bureau usage is 27.12% for PSBs versus 85.43% for NPBs, which is about a 50 percentage
point gap in bureau usage between the two banks.
     There could be a variety of natural explanations for why PSBs use bureaus less that have
nothing to do with their organizational traits. Three explanations come immediately to mind:
a) PSBs make different kinds of loans. For instance, they may have greater numbers of
government-mandated loans in which they have less flexibility in using credit scores to inform
lending; b) PSB clientele are unlikely to be tracked by the credit bureaus; c) Bureau information
is irrelevant for PSBs, for instance because the internal information held by PSBs is special
and bureau data are not incrementally informative. We explore these possibilities next.


A. Priority Sector and Gold Loans
     Government mandates require Indian banks to lend a certain fraction of their portfolio to
entities such as farmers and the poor that are traditionally cut off from the formal credit market
(Banerjee, Cole, and Duflo, 2005; Burgess, Pande, and Wong, 2005). Such loans are called
priority sector loans. PSBs may be more likely than NPBs to meet these statutory obligations
with small ticket loans to farmers and financially excluded individuals who are less likely to
have credit data captured by bureaus. Even if banks conduct credit checks for such borrowers,
they may not have much ability to alter credit decisions based on scores, which may be one
reason why PSBs have low inquiry rates.
     A second source of variation in inquiries is lending against gold collateral, or gold loans.
PSBs may make more gold loans than NPBs. These loans may be less inquired because they
are safer; regulations require significant haircuts on gold collateral. Moreover, gold has a
special place in Indian culture as a means of saving and making intergenerational wealth
transfers. 13 Given a borrower’s attachment to pledged gold and the over-collateralization of
gold loans, these loans may also have low rates of inquiry. We thus reconsider inquiry and
lending data after excluding gold loans and priority sector loans
     The credit bureau dataset flags both priority sector and gold loans. Both types of loans are
indeed more common for PSBs. Over our sample period, 84.5% of the gold loans and 98.6%
of the priority sector consumer loan originations are by PSBs. 14 Both categories of loans also


13
   See http://www.gold.org/supply-and-demand/gold-demand-trends, accessed September 2015. India’s 2015
gold consumption is 668.5 tons, 27% of the world demand, compared to its 6-7% share of World GDP.
14
   Discussions with the credit bureau indicate that priority sector loans include agricultural loans and loans to
micro enterprises.

                                                         11
have low inquiry rates. For instance, only 1.80% of the sample of priority sector loans and
2.88% of gold loans were preceded by a bureau inquiry. We exclude both priority sector and
gold loans from further analysis. 15

B. Final Sample After Excluding Gold and Priority Sector Loans
     The remaining consumer loans in our 1% sample are housing loans, automobile loans, and
other retail consumer loans. It is reasonable to expect credit bureaus to be helpful for all three
categories of loan decisions. Retail consumer loans without collateral require diligence in
assessing borrower repayment capacity. However, in India, even collateralized loans are
dependent on the borrower’s repayment capacity because of difficulties in collateral
enforcement (Visaria, 2009; Vig, 2013). Banks can begin procedures only after 90 days of non-
payment, after which they must serve a notice period of 60 days, and another notice period of
30 days before repossession is initiated. Actions can be appealed and courts are so clogged that
even fast track courts with mandates to clear cases in 90 days can take years to arrive at
decisions.
     In Table 3, we present inquiry and lending data for the final consumer loan sample. We
partition the data into loans for new borrowers and prior relationship borrowers in Tables 3A
and 3B, respectively. Both NPBs and PSBs have limited information about new customers.
However, for existing customers, banks do have some prior data on them. For instance, loan
officers can rely on repayment histories, checking account activity, and other data that come
from customer-bank interactions. Banks typically have procedures to gather and use these
internal data, likely ingrained in its loan officers through internal training. The more accepted
such procedures, the less likely are banks to be receptive to outside data to inform lending for
existing customers.
     In Table 3A, we find that usage is lower for PSBs when a borrower has a prior lending
relationship with the bank. Even in 2015, towards the end of our sample period, Table 3A
shows that the bureau usage rate is only 48% for PSBs (Panel A), compared to 90% for NPBs
(Panel B), representing a 42% gap. In sharp contrast, Table 3B shows that for customers with
no prior relationship with the inquiring bank, there is a relatively minor difference in bureau
usage rates between PSBs (98.5%) and NPBs (99.7%).
     We also note in Table 3B that PSB usage of bureaus for new customers is above 98% right


15
  We note a small bias here. We exclude priority sector and gold loans but some inquiries remaining in our
sample may pertain to these types of loans. Given that less than 2% of agricultural loans are inquired and less
than 3% of gold loans are inquired, the bias will be small. The adjustment of the base bureau usage rates for
these differences is minor.

                                                       12
from 2006. Thus, PSBs adopt the credit bureau technology almost fully right from inception
for new borrowers. The low bureau usage by PSBs for customers with prior relationships is not
driven by aversion to new technology or ignorance of it. Instead, PSBs seem relatively
unwilling to inquire for customers with prior relationships even as they embrace the practice
of inquiring with bureaus for nearly all new borrowers. This asymmetry is the focus of our
investigation.


D. Bureau Usage Classified by Credit Score Buckets and Credit Score Availability
       One explanation for low bureau usage by PSBs is that fewer of their customers have bureau
records. Anticipating this, especially of prior relationship clients, they may inquire less. We
already reduce this possibility by eliminating priority sector and gold loans. We test this point
directly for the remaining loans by examining score data, which the bureau provides us for
fiscal years 2013 and 2014. The credit scores are historical "point in time" numbers that were
available to banks in real time when inquiries or loans were made.
       In Table 4, we classify filtered applications for both PSBs and NPBs by whether credit
scores are available and when scores are available, by credit score bucket. For inquired loans,
the credit scores are what the banks who inquire see. For un-inquired loans, the scores are what
the banks would have seen had they inquired. In India, scores of 750 or above are considered
excellent, those between 650 and 750 are good, and scores below 650 are fair to poor. 16 We
divide the score data for loans and inquiries in Table 4 into these three buckets.
       For new borrowers, Panel A in Table 4 shows that bureau usage is almost complete across
credit score buckets for both PSBs and NPBs. We find that PSB bureau usage rates equal
98.80%, 98.24%, and 98.33% for borrowers in the low, medium, and high credit score buckets.
For NPBs, the corresponding usage rates equal 99.61%, 99.36%, and 99.58%, respectively.
Panel B in Table 5 shows that there is more variation across credit score buckets for customers
with existing bank relationships, and this varies further between PSBs and NPBs. We see a
"U"-shape in inquiry patterns for PSBs. The most inquired are the low quality credits (65.41%),
the least inquired are the medium quality credits with scores between 650 and 750, for which
the inquiry rate is 54.54%, after which inquiry rates climb once again to 62.75% for high quality
credits. The inquiry patterns for NPBs are greater and flatter across credit score buckets
(97.61%, 96.51%, and 97.08% respectively).
       In Panel A of Figure 1, we plot the kernel-smoothed fraction of loans inquired against credit


16
     See, e.g., https://www.bankbazaar.com/cibil/cibil-credit-score.html.

                                                          13
scores. The curve for PSBs shows a similar dip as Table 5 at the middle score levels and then
a positive slope for high score applicants. We will suggest an interpretation of this pattern later.
    In Panel B of Figure 1, we plot the fraction of loan amounts applied for that are inquired at
each credit score. While the dip in the middle noted in Panel A is no longer perceptible, we
find that, as before, PSBs appear to inquire more for higher quality credits than for lower
quality credits.
    The relationship between scores and inquiry is relatively flat for NPBs in Panel A and Panel
B of Figure 1, with a slight dip for particularly high quality credits in Panel B suggesting that
NPBs, unlike PSBs, are slightly less likely to inquire for better credits.
    The asymmetry in bureau usage for PSBs and NPBs for their customers with and without
prior relationships exists even within the universe of unscored customers. Between PSBs and
NPBs, there is a relatively small difference in the fraction of the new borrower applicant pool
that is scored. For example, Table 4 Panel A indicates that 60,909 of the 94,730 filtered
applicants, or 64%, of PSB applicants have no credit scores compared to 95,249 out of 136,550,
or 69%, for NPBs. For clients with existing loan relationships, Panel B indicates 57% of PSB
applicants have no scores versus 41% for NPBs. These figures still do not explain the difference
in bureau usage rates between PSBs and NPBs. For example, within the pool of prior
relationship applicants, the bureau usage rates (the percentage of filtered applications subject
to inquiry) is lower for PSBs compared to NPBs both for scored applications (58.20% versus
96.88%) and for unscored applicants and (14.39% versus 64.35%). Interestingly, these figures
suggest bureau usage falls both for NPBs and PSBs for unscored customers relative to scored
customers – suggesting all banks have some sense of which customers are likely to have bureau
scores.


E. Chances of Getting a Loan
    Let us turn now from inquiry to the chances of getting a loan. First let us look at loan
granting rates, conditional on inquiry, or P (L|I), which we reported in the last but one column
in Table 4. We compare this data for customers with no prior relationship between PSBs and
NPBs. We find that PSBs grant fewer loans per inquiry than NPBs – to those with low scores
(7.42% vs 9.69%), medium scores (15.61% vs 28.43%), or high credit scores (16.67% vs
28.04%), and even to those with no scores (27.54% vs 38.23%). In general, conditional on
inquiry, the decisions of PSBs are notably more stringent than for NPBs for customers with no
prior relationships. As we will see, this is also reflected in ex post default outcomes.
    Turning to customers with prior relationships, the results in Table 4 show that both PSBs
                                                14
and NPBs seem to be (naturally) more willing to grant credit conditional on inquiry to clients
they have a prior relationship with than with clients that they have no experience about. In
Table 4 Panel B, we find that PSBs are again less likely to grant loans conditional on inquiry
than NPBs, i.e., have lower P (L|I) for anyone who is scored. These fraction of inquiries granted
for PSBs and NPBs are 15.40% versus 17.80% for those with low scores, 23.54% versus
37.01% for borrowers with medium scores, and 23.49% versus 36.81% for borrowers with high
credit scores, respectively. However, this pattern reverses for unscored clients, where PSBs are
relatively more inclined to grant loans conditional on inquiry compared to NPBs (58.67% vs
21.91%).
   In sum, conditional on inquiry, PSBs seem to be less willing to grant credit than NPBs,
except when they have a prior relationship with the client and the inquiry returns no score,
when they seem much more willing to grant credit.
   How about the total probability of getting a loan for anyone submitting a filtered application
for a loan? This is computed in the last column in Table 4 as the ratio of the loans with inquiry
plus loans without inquiry divided by the number of filtered applications. Panel A shows that
for clients with no prior relationships, since PSBs and NPBs inquire almost all applications,
the percentage of filtered applications that culminate in a loan is very close to the fraction of
inquiries that culminate in a loan.
   More interesting are the figures for loans granted to customers with prior relationships. We
see that 44.67% of applications from low score customers with a prior relationship with a PSB
are granted loans compared to 19.76% for NPBs. The fraction of low credit score applicants
getting a loan from PSBs is more than double that from an NPB. For medium score clients the
numbers are 58.30% vs 39.21%, for high score clients it is 51.99% vs 38.67%. For unscored
clients, it is an astounding 94.05% vs 49.74% or double the fraction for PSBs compared to
NPBs. Even though the PSBs are more circumspect in granting credit for loans they inquire
(except for loans that return no score), they also make many loans without inquiring for existing
clients. So the loans per filtered application are much higher.
   In sum, the bureau usage practices of PSBs relative to NPBs tilt their credit portfolios
towards un-inquired credits and those with lower credit scores, but primarily for those with
prior relationships.


F. Are Credit Scores Not Useful? Evidence from Delinquency Rates
   Credit scores are useful in markets such as the United States for predicting delinquency
(e.g., Gross and Souleles, 2002; Agarwal and Hauswald, 2010). Whether they are useful in
                                               15
India is less clear because the credit bureaus have limited histories of operation in India.
Perhaps PSBs believe that credit scores are uninformative about delinquency relative to the
internal information they hold or the institutional knowledge they may have from several
decades of operation in India. We now test this hypothesis by examining the relation between
ex-ante credit scores and ex-post delinquency rates. After checking this, we ask whether PSBs
have no need of the information contained in credit scores, especially for prior relationship
borrowers who are less likely to be inquired.


F1. Delinquency Rates and Credit Scores: Data and Definitions
       The credit bureau provides us loan repayment histories and credit scores for a limited period
of 36 months going back from September 2015. Repayment histories for loans made prior to
September 2012 are incompletely populated, so we restrict our analysis on delinquencies to
accounts opened in or after September 2012. We identify delinquent accounts using a field
called “days past due” (DPD), which is the number of days a borrower is late on payments.
This field is reported monthly because consumer loans in India are repaid through equated
monthly installments. A practical issue in India is that a positive but small DPD may reflect
transactional glitches such as delays in processing or bank errors rather than credit deficiencies.
To rule out such cases, we define a loan as being delinquent if the days past due is at least 90
days, which corresponds to the definition of non-performing asset used by India’s banking
system. 17 The variable LQ360 equals 1 if at least one of the available DPDs during the 360
days from opening the account exceeds 90 days. By focusing on delinquencies that occur soon
after the loan is given, we minimize the extent to which exogenous unanticipated
macroeconomic events subsequent to the granting of the loan affect delinquency rates.
       A loan is made after a financial institution uses both the information it has, and the
information available with the credit bureau (if the loan is inquired). If lenders use additional
private information for screening out applicants with higher true delinquency risk for a given
score, the measured rate of delinquency associated with any credit score should be lower than
if loans were randomly drawn from the population. Put differently, a loan made using greater
bank knowledge about the borrower should have lower delinquency rates, conditional on the
publicly available credit score, than a loan made using no bank-specific information. The
difference between the two will be small when the amount of bank private information is lower.




17
     See https://rbi.org.in/scripts/BS_ViewMasCirculardetails.aspx?id=7357#21

                                                       16
F2. Delinquency Rates and Credit Scores: Empirical Results
   Table 5 reports delinquency rates by credit score buckets. Credit scores predict ex-post
delinquency in our dataset. For instance, the data in Panel A show that the delinquency rate in
the low score bucket across all banks is 3.14% compared to 0.77% and 0.30% for the medium
and high score buckets, respectively. The difference between the delinquency rates in different
score buckets is significant. The t-statistic is 9.8 for the difference in delinquency rates between
low and medium score, and 7.3 for the corresponding difference between medium and high
score buckets. We see a similar downward sloped relation between scores and delinquency
rates individually for both public sector and private banks.
   Figure 2 depicts this relationship visually. In Panel A, we find that delinquency as measured
by LQ360 is greater when scores are lower. In Panel B of Figure 2, we find that PSBs do not
seem to have lower delinquency rates conditional on credit scores compared to NPBs, as also
suggested by Panel A of Table 5. The overall delinquency rate for the low score, medium score,
and high score buckets are 4.15%, 0.78%, and 0.34%, respectively, for PSBs, while it is 2.14%,
0.76%, and 0.25% for the corresponding buckets for NPBs. Regression results reported later
substantiate this finding. However, as we will see shortly, the difference is entirely driven by
loans with prior relationships. For new loans, the PSBs experience lower defaults in each credit
category.
   Equally interesting is to look across rows in Table 5. The act of inquiring is associated with
lower default rates, regardless of whether loans are scored or not, regardless of bank type or
the existence of prior relationship. For example, in Panel A, scored loans for PSBs have
delinquency rates of 1.29% when loans are made without inquiry compared to 0.51% when
loans are made after inquiry. For NPBs, the corresponding numbers are 2.90% and 0.64%. The
finding that inquiries are associated with lower defaults might indicate a complementarity
between the bank’s private borrower-specific information and the information obtained from
the credit bureau upon inquiry, which allows for a better decision to be made than with either
piece of information alone.
   A not-mutually-exclusive possibility is that loans made without inquiry are especially risky
because the act of not inquiring conveys information about the care with which the loan officer
undertakes due diligence. Indeed, inquiries are associated with lower delinquency rates even
for unscored loans. For example, in Panel A of Table 5, we find delinquency rate for unscored
loans, where the credit bureau does not have much information, is 1.95% for un-inquired PSB
loans compared to 0.78% for inquired loans, and 2.89% for un-inquired NPB loans compared
to 1.43% for inquired loans. That the rates of default are lower for inquired loans relative to
                                                17
un-inquired loans even in the unscored population suggests that the act of not inquiring, a
decision made by the loan officer, conveys information about the due diligence exercised on
the loan. The reduction in delinquencies from inquiring is not solely due to information
obtained by the bank from the bureau.
    There is more of interest in Table 5 concerning the information in prior borrowing
relationships. For unscored loans where the bank has a prior relationship (Panel B), the
delinquency rate is 1.12 percent for PSBs and 0.81 percent for NPBs, while for unscored loans
with no prior relationship (Panel C), the delinquency rate is 0.85 percent and 1.69 percent
respectively. Put differently, prior relationships tend to lower the quality of PSB loan decisions,
while it enhances the quality of NPB decisions, even in cases where the credit bureau adds little
information.
    This finding carries over to scored loans. For loans made by NPBs to the scored subsample,
the delinquency rate is lower for prior relationship borrowers compared to new borrowers. For
instance, the NPB delinquency rates for the low, medium, and high score buckets when lending
to prior relationships (Panel B) are 1.30%, 0.51%, and 0.19%, respectively, and 3.76%, 1.16%,
and 0.36%, respectively, for loans with no prior relationship (Panel C). So NPBs do seem to
acquire some information from prior relationships that helps them discriminate better.
    On the other hand, for PSBs, delinquency rates are greater for prior relationships even
conditional on credit scores. From Panel B, the delinquency rates for the low, medium, and
high score buckets for loans with prior relationships are 4.83%, 0.82%, and 0.38%,
respectively, while the rates are 2.70%, 0.65%, and 0.27%, respectively, for loans with no prior
relationship. This result suggests that the irrelevance of credit bureau data is unlikely to explain
the inward orientation of PSBs, or their reluctance to look at market data for prior relationship
borrowers. That PSB loan officers are not more lax than NPB loan officers for some regulatory
or technological reason can be seen in delinquency rates for loans with no prior relationships.
As Panel C suggests, across all categories, scored or unscored, PSBs have lower default rates
than NPBs.
    In sum, it appears that it is not necessarily just the complementarity of borrower-related
information held by the bank and borrower-related information with the bureaus that makes
inquired loans less risky. Rather, the act of not inquiring conveys information. Non-inquiry
could reflect active intent or passive attitudes of the loan officer. For instance, if the loan officer
is friendly with a client (or the client is her nephew), she may not want to inquire if she believes
the client will be particularly risky given observable risk characteristics. Indeed, since the act
of not inquiring indicates a willingness to forego ordinary due diligence, this sort of agency
                                                  18
problem in selecting who is inquired could result in un-inquired loans being riskier, even
conditional on underlying credit score, than inquired loans.
   An alternative explanation may be that loan officers may simply be lazy, and the act of
non-inquiry suggests the loan officer may be lax on other aspects of due diligence such as
income verification. However, if PSB officers are simply lax, why are they not lax vis a vis
new borrowers? The fact that default rates for PSBs are higher for borrowers with prior
relationships than for new borrowers, conditional on the underlying score, suggests an element
of active intent. Perhaps PSB loan officers genuinely believe they know their prior clients or
want to emphasize relationship building, perhaps there is corruption (though it is then puzzling
why their behavior with new borrowers would not involve corruption to the same degree). At
any rate, there do appear to be costly behavioral differences between PSB loan officers and
NPB loan officers vis a vis loan applicants with prior relationships.


IV. Regression Analysis
   We now substantiate the univariate inquiry and delinquency patterns reported in Tables 4
and 5 with regression analysis. The regressions let us correct for applicant characteristics, loan
characteristics (where necessary), and time period-specific unobservable effects.
   The applicant characteristics the specifications control for include applicant age and
gender, two demographic variables made available to us. The gender variable is motivated by
evidence that women take less risk (e.g., Dwyer, Gilkeson, and List, 2002) possibly due to less
overconfidence (Barber and Odean, 2001; Huang and Kisgen, 2012) or intrinsic biological
differences such as the blood chemistry of individuals (Sapienza, Zingales, and Maestripieri,
2009). We control for age by including log borrower age as a control. Young borrowers may
be riskier than older borrowers because they have less income, borrowing, and histories of
managing credit. We control for the type of loan (housing, auto, or consumer), as well as the
log of the loan amount in rupees.
   The dependent variable in the Table 6 specifications is an indicator of whether the filtered
application is inquired or not. In model [1], the explanatory variables include applicant
characteristics, quarter indicators, indicators for whether the bank is a PSB, and whether the
bank had a prior relationship with the borrower. In model [2], we further add an interaction
between the PSB and a prior relationship indicator. In models [3] and [4], we include indicators
for low, medium, and high scores and these indicators interacted with the PSB indicator.
   The estimated coefficient on public sector banks is negative and significant at the 1% level
in all specifications. The probability of initiating an inquiry by a PSB is between 14% and 25%
                                               19
lower than for NPBs after controlling for borrower and loan characteristics, and time effects.
We also find that on average, borrowers with past relationships are less likely to be inquired.
The indicators for high, medium, and low credit scores have positive coefficients in model [3],
indicating that scored populations are more likely to be inquired compared to the unscored
population, more so by PSBs given the positive coefficient on the interaction between the score
dummies and PSBs in model [4]. That is, all else equal, PSBs are more likely to inquire for
scored borrowers compared to ones without scores. We see that they are slightly more inclined
to inquire for low and high score borrowers than for borrowers with middle scores, as earlier
suggested by Figure 1.
   In Table 6, the specifications control for age and gender, two demographic variables made
available to us. Banks are more likely to initiate inquiries for male borrowers when credit scores
are not controlled for (models [1] and [2]). However, conditional on credit scores, males are
not likely to be inquired more compared to females (models [3] and [4]). We also control for
age by including log borrower age as a control. We find that conditional on credit scores, banks
inquire less for older borrowers.
   We next explore the relationship between inquiry and delinquency rates to assess whether
inquiries have informational value in explaining delinquency, or a loan being past due for at
least 90 days. While an OLS estimator gives similar results, we report the estimates of an IV
specification. The first-stage exclusion restriction is that the indicators for PSB and PSB
interacted with prior relationships affect delinquency rates only through inquiry. More
specifically, if PSB loan officers tend to avoid inquiry, especially for loans with prior
relationships, for instance, because some loan officers do not believe they need the information
or the organizational culture of PSBs imparts a pro-relationship bias towards borrowers with
prior relationships, we can instrument inquiries with the PSB indicator and also its interaction
with the prior relationship indicator. The coefficient for inquiry in the second stage delinquency
regression will then reflect the effect of inquiring on loan delinquency LQ360. We will discuss
possible alternative interpretations shortly.
   An important concern is that we do not quite know what information loan officers already
have when they inquire. One possibility is that they know the broad credit quality bucket of the
applicant – whether she is unscored, or has a low, medium, or high credit score. Some of the
evidence we have seen thus far suggests this possibility. If so, the act of inquiry establishes the
detailed credit score only, and to estimate the incremental impact of inquiring on delinquencies,
we must correct for the information that the loan officer already has. This is what we will do
in the regression analysis we present. If, however, the loan officer does not know the broad
                                                20
credit quality bucket of the applicant, then the coefficient estimate for the inquiry indicator will
underestimate the value of information obtained from inquiry. So for robustness, we also
estimate the first and second stage assuming the loan officer has no information on the applicant
beyond demographics. We obtain similar results. For brevity, we do not report these results.
       We report the results in Table 7. The first stage instruments are strong (models [1] and [3]
of Table 7). 18 Models [2] and [4] in Table 7 indicate that delinquency rates are significantly
lower for loans inquired with the bureau. Variants of this specification with or without loan
type or time period fixed effects, or with the second stage restricted to the same data as the first
stage, give similar results. The magnitude of the estimated effects suggests that on average,
conditional on several borrower and loan characteristics, inquired loans are associated with
approximately a one percentage point reduction in default rates compared to loans that are not
inquired. This is sizeable, given overall default rates of 1.34% for PSB loans and 1.27% for
NPB loans.
       Discussion We have seen thus far that PSBs are slower in using the new information
available from credit bureaus, primarily for customers with whom they had a prior relationship.
Over time PSBs increase the frequency of inquiry, even for clients with prior relationships. It
may well be that PSB managements decide to make inquiries compulsory over time for all loan
applications, thus removing loan officer discretion. It may be that loan officers themselves
learn from past experience of higher default rates in un-inquired loans, and move to greater
inquiry. Regardless of the reason, the slow pace of credit bureau adoption, or lending without
inquiry, by PSBs certainly seems to result in greater delinquencies for PSB loans.
       The estimated coefficient on inquiry in the second stage needs careful interpretation,
though. It is tempting to interpret it as the average “treatment” effect of inquiry – that is, the
value (in lowering delinquencies) of the additional information obtained from inquiry. Yet, the
interpretation depends crucially on why we think PSB loan officers do not inquire as much as
NPB loan officers. It is the average treatment effect if a random set of PSB loan officers simply
dispense with inquiry for prior clients, or if all PSB loan officers inquire a random subset of
their prior borrowers. One explanation for the former is if PSB loan officers simply do not
think the technology is useful, especially relative to the information they have from prior
relationships. Of course, PSB loan officers would vary in the extent that they think the
technology useful. If this is the factor prompting inquiry among PSB loan officers, it will have
nothing to do with the underlying quality of the loan. If so, PSB loan inquiry can be taken as


18
     The F-statistic for the exclusion restriction exceeds 15.

                                                           21
unrelated to the underlying quality of the applicant, and the selection effect is negligible. The
estimated coefficient on inquiry then reflects the information left on the table by their lack of
inquiry – the value added by the credit bureau.
   Alternatively, if PSB loan officers, based on their prior relationship, actively avoid
inquiring for those that they believe might be rejected based on the likely scores that might be
returned, then the act of not inquiring signals bad news and reflects some selection. Given the
earlier evidence that PSB loan officers do seem to be selective in whom among prior
relationship clients they inquire – typically those with higher credit quality that are likely to
return a strong score and not impede lending – the likely bias is that the coefficient
overestimates the incremental information provided by the credit bureau. What is clear,
however, comparing PSB performance on lending into prior relationships with their
performance on new loans, as well as with their performance relative to NPB performance on
prior relationships, is that altering loan making practices at the PSBs to prior clients would
reduce default rates.
       Finally, it may be that PSBs charge higher interest rates to compensate for the additional
risk they take from lending un-inquired to prior relationships. Unfortunately, we do not have
interest rates charged on loans but our discussions with bankers, as well as the data, suggest
this is not the right explanation. The information acquired through the small and relatively
cheap additional step of inquiring would be subject to free disposal. It is hard to think that if
PSB loan officers were maximizing value by lending to riskier credits and charging high rates,
they would not acquire that additional information. Value maximization through non-inquiry
also does not explain the increase in inquiries over time. Moreover, bureau usage rates for new
applicants are high from the outset – why would a similar strategy of value maximization
through non-inquiry work for them. These factors do not suggest that avoiding inquiry is a
strategy to exploit high spreads.


V. Counterfactuals
       By not inquiring enough, PSBs do not use credit score data that are available with
bureaus. What would the PSB credit outcomes be if they instead made used the data for the un-
inquired loans? We attempt to answer this question through counterfactual inferencing using
the credit score data available with the bureau but that the PSBs did not use. Specifically, for
un-inquired loans, the bureau supplies us point-in-time credit scores that would be seen by the
PSBs had they inquired. Under reasonable assumptions about how the data would have been
used by PSBs, we can estimate the counterfactual lending decisions and their outcomes under
                                               22
expanded bureau usage. The differences between the counterfactual outcomes and actual
realizations of un-inquired loans give us an estimate of the information left on the table by not
inquiring.
       To describe the methods more precisely, we introduce some notation. Let c identify a
borrower, Xc denote borrower characteristics, and Sc the borrower's credit score. Let IC be the
event of inquiry and NIC the non-inquiry for a loan, Lc be the amount of the loan to customer
C. We let pc (B, Xc, Sc) denote the composite NPB loan decision associated with bureau usage
and lending conditional on usage -- the composite total probability that a filtered inquired
application turns into a loan. Let LQc(B) the ex-post delinquency rate for the loan made by

bank type B ∈ {PSB, NPB}.
       How might PSBs have used the bureau information for un-inquired loans had they
instead inquired? Possible policy functions include an aggressive full inquiry policy in which
PSBs mimic what they do for their new borrowers, that is, they check scores for all customers.
In our view, this is an extreme assumption. It is perhaps more reasonable to model PSBs as
following the policies of NPBs in using bureaus. That is we model PSBs as using both the
inquiry practices (given filtered applicant characteristics) and the lending conditional on
inquiry used by NPBs in granting credit. This approach produces more conservative estimates
of the improvements in credit quality from expanded bureau usage compared to aggressive full
usage. We assume that changing the policy does not change the nature or quality of filtered
loan applications.
       A second question in the counterfactual estimation is how we should model the
delinquency rates after PSBs adopt NPB practices. We explore two possibilities. In one
approach, we keep delinquency rates at their current realizations for PSBs. In other words, any
reduction in delinquency rates would simply be because the PSB altered the probability of
granting a loan to that followed by an NPB. A second candidate for counterfactual delinquency
rates is the current NPB rate for similar loans. These rates are better approximations if, after
greater adoption of bureau technology, the underlying default rate of loans made also falls, for
example because PSBs improve their ex-post monitoring to NPB levels.
   One output of the counterfactual estimation exercise is the loan supply function Q(.),


                                QNI→I (PSB)= ∑ 𝑝𝑝c(NPB,Xc,Sc)× LC ×δc,NI,                     (1)




                                               23
   where the data comprise loans made by PSBs, δC,NI denotes a dummy variable that equals
1 if loan C is not inquired, and LC is the amount of loan C. In essence, for each non-inquired
loan that was made, we model the probability that the loan would be made using NPB decision
functions. Because 0 ≤ pc(.) ≤ 1, loan volumes in the counterfactual QNI→I (PSB) ≤ QNI (PSB).
   A second output of the counterfactual exercise is loan quality. If the delinquency rate is
unaltered, it is simply the current realization LQ360C


                      LQ360NI→I (PSB)= ∑ 𝑝𝑝c(NPB,Xc,Sc)× LC × δc,NI × LQ360C,                (2)


   If the loan management practices change, delinquencies migrate to the NPB rates, so


                 LQ360NI→I (PSB)= ∑ 𝑝𝑝c(NPB,Xc,Sc)× LC × δc,NI × LQ360C (NPB),               (3)


   Table 8 reports the counterfactual estimates for both the delinquency models discussed
above. We report two sets of estimates, one for prior relationship borrowers and another for
borrowers without a prior relationship. In both cases, we estimate the loan supply if PSBs
follow NPB decision-making rules in granting credit and two delinquency rates, one of which
is the current delinquency rate and another is the estimated delinquency rate based on NPB
lending data for similar borrowers. Table 8 thus reports three delinquency rates. One is the
actual delinquency rate for the portfolio of PSB loans made without inquiry. Counterfactual 1
is delinquency rate if the PSBs follow the NPB screening practices but the delinquency rates
remain as currently realized. Counterfactual 2 in Table 8 is the delinquency rate when the PSB
follows the NPB screening practices and the delinquency rates are the predicted realizations
based on NPB experiences for similar loans. All supporting regressions for the counterfactual
analysis are not reported here but are available upon request.
   We find that both the counterfactual delinquency rates decrease below the levels
experienced currently by PSBs for their un-inquired lending portfolio.            The baseline
delinquency rate in Table 8 is about 1.30%. Counterfactual 1 shows that if PSBs simply
followed NPB bureau usage practices, the delinquency rates decrease to 0.70% and 0.97% for
new relationships and for prior relationships, respectively. These estimates reflect the effects
of better ex-ante screening from switching to the more intensive credit bureau checks
conducted by PSBs. Counterfactual 2 in Table 8 shows that PSBs would experience a further
reduction of delinquency rates to 0.57% if the greater adoption of bureau usage is accompanied
by complementary shifts in loan management protocols. These estimates reflect the effect of
                                              24
both better ex-ante screening achieved through higher inquiry rates as well as potentially better
ex-post loan monitoring resulting in the NPB delinquency rates rather than the current
realizations.
    In proportionate terms, the greater adoption of credit bureaus produces improvements of
between 31% and 47% in delinquency rates. The gains are greater for borrowers with no prior
relationships, indicating that internal data partially but not fully offsets the advantages of
bureau inquiries. The gains from a shift to NPB delinquency rates add a further 13 to 40 basis
points, an additional gain of between 10% to 30%.


VI. Discussion of Results
    What might explain the lag in adoption of credit bureaus by public sector banks for clients
with whom they have prior relationships? We note that it is not that the PSBs are unfamiliar
with technology, or the information they get from it. PSBs seem perfectly capable of using
bureau data for new loan applicants. Furthermore, it does not seem they are avoiding inquiry
because of laziness. After all, they do inquire nearly all new applications.
    The PSBs appear to want to exercise discretion vis-a-vis their prior customers --they are
reluctant to subject old relationships to the discipline of market data. If the credit bureau returns
a score that conflicts with what the internal information indicates, it is harder for a loan officer
to justify the loan decision. For example, if the internal data on a prior relationship borrower
indicates that the borrower is of modest quality and the bureau returns a very low credit score,
it is hard for the loan officer to override the score without arousing suspicion, so better not to
inquire in the first place if it is not mandated. Conversely, if they do inquire, they are
constrained to make appropriate credit decisions – perhaps why delinquencies for inquired PSB
loans, even for those to prior relationships, is generally lower or commensurate with inquired
NPB loans. Of course, when a borrower is intrinsically high quality, loan officers might inquire
simply because they know how the answer will turn out. This is perhaps why PSB inquire more
for high quality credits.
    We saw a similar rationale for inquiry aversion, for instance, in the loan granting patterns
in Table 4. PSBs were significantly less likely to give a loan conditional on inquiry than NPBs
but only if the credit report returns a score. If the credit report returns “no score”, the PSBs
were more likely to grant a loan than NPBs, but only if the borrower has a prior relationship.
In other words, PSBs may be bound to stricter loan granting criteria based on credit bureau




                                                 25
information, which is why they may be reluctant to inquire in the first place. But if they do
inquire, and the credit bureau returns no information, they regain discretion.
    Examining the delinquency rates, we find that for loans to prior relationship clients that
are inquired and return “no score,” average delinquency rates for PSBs is 1.03% while the
corresponding rate for NPBs in 0.64% (Table 5, Panel B). In contrast, for loans to those without
prior relationships – where PSB loan officers have no reason to be accommodative – the PSB
delinquency rate of 0.71% is not just lower than the rate for those with whom it has had a prior
relationship, it is lower than the corresponding rate for NPBs of 1.52% (Table 5, Panel C). In
general, the fact that default rates for PSB loans to those with prior relations seem to be
uniformly higher than loans to new borrowers, the reverse of the case with NPBs, suggest PSB
discretion comes at a cost in terms of higher delinquencies.
    We do not know if there are benefits to inquiry aversion. Revealed preference suggests
there are not, or at least that the benefits are decaying over time. Over time, PSBs seem to be
moving to eliminate the discretion about whether to inquire, perhaps as their managements
learn from technology adoption that the bureau technology is useful. Of course, it may also be
that as information about clients makes its way to the credit bureaus, relationships become less
profitable, which is why PSBs are moving to inquire more. For instance, as banks are forced to
populate data on loan performance for their unscored clients, they may lose any ability to hold
on to the good ones amongst them. Since we don’t have data to measure any benefits of the
bank holding on to clients, we do not know if this is enough to offset higher delinquency rates.
    Finally, is what we see a consequence of corruption, a concern that plagues all lending by
public sector banks? Perhaps, but as indicated above, discretion may be used well rather than
misused if the loan officer is intent of maintaining strong client relationships that are profitable
in other ways, with the loan being the loss leader. Moreover, if they wanted to be corrupt, they
could exercise some “discretion” for the unscored new applicants. They do not seem to do that,
employing stricter criterion than even the NPBs. Instead, our preferred explanation is their
initial aversion to inquiring for clients with a prior relationship is their aversion to transactional
interactions where every transaction is evaluated on its intrinsic merits, and there is no room
for relationships (or even friendship). PSBs may be reluctant to lose their ability to help the old
customer, and give up discretion by adopting the new credit information technology. If this is
the explanation, the immediate question is whether PSBs do this because of their “public
sector" nature. Is there something associated with the state ownership of these banks that allows
them to take a longer term, less transactional, view?


                                                 26
VII. Old Private Banks
   Public sector ownership is a discrete variable and does not vary across banks in India.
However, another set of organizations, old private banks or OPBs, shed light on whether it is
ownership alone that drives the bureau adoption patterns of PSBs. We have 14 OPBs in our
sample. These banks have a median age of 89 years, which is similar to the median and mean
of 87 years for PSBs. The OPBs share similar formative experiences as the PSBs through the
earlier, less-competitive era, where the Indian economy grew slowly and there were significant
areas of oligopolistic rents the banks could exploit. The one difference is that OPBs escaped
nationalization in 1969 and 1980 because they were regarded as being too small. To the extent
that culture is a product of an organization's formative experiences, OPBs may share the inward
relationship orientation of banks. If so, we should find OPBs resembling PSBs, with whom
they share common formative periods and not NPBs, whom they resemble in ownership but
not formative experiences.
   OPBs also let us filter for bank size. OPBs, perhaps scarred by the nationalization of private
banks that grew too big, have remained small. For instance, in the 1% random sample between
2006 and 2013, OPBs have 35,838 total loans, which is about 10% of the number of loans made
by NPBs in the same period for the 1% sample. If OPBs behave like PSBs, it would appear that
size alone cannot explain the technology adoption behavior of PSBs.
   In Table 9, we present data on inquiry intensities for OPBs for the 1% random sample. As
before, we exclude agricultural, priority sector, and gold loans. Panels A, B, and C present the
data for all loans, new borrowers, and prior relationship borrowers, respectively. We find that
the inquiry behavior of OPBs differs sharply from NPBs and is close to PSBs. In fact, the rates
of usage of credit bureaus for OPBs are even lower than those for PSBs. For instance, for prior
relationship borrowers, OPBs have a bureau usage rate of 14.44% over the full sample period
(Panel B, Table 9), which is less than the 20.01% bureau usage rate for PSBs over the same
time period (Panel A, Table 3B). However, for customers with no prior relationship with the
inquiring bank, OPBs report bureau usage of 99.11% (Panel A, Table 9), or nearly full usage
for all borrowers. Therefore, like PSBs, OPBs are also slow in adopting new technology,
however, again only for existing clients.
   In Figure 3, we plot the fraction of loans made after inquiry against the log of bank age.
While there are two distinct clusters, reflecting the PSBs and OPBs at the older end and NPBs
at the younger end, the banks with intermediate age align along the straight line. It would appear
that bank age or culture is an important determinant of practice, even though the environment
has changed substantially.
                                               27
   The bottom line of this section is that we observe two types of organizations, PSBs and
OPBs, that are of similar vintage and that have similar legacy systems and cultures but are of
very different sizes and ownership. Given their similar behavior, it would appear that neither
size nor ownership solely explain their organizational practices related to the adoption of credit
bureau technologies. Shared formative experiences are perhaps a more important factor in
explaining the organizational responses to this new technology.


VII. Implications and Related Literature
       Our findings are relevant to several areas of research in economics and finance, in
particular the work on the adoption of better management practices but also the literature on
technology adoption, credit bureaus, and state-owned banks.
       Better Management Practices As Bloom and van Reenen (2010) discuss in their survey,
there is an astounding difference in productivity of enterprises between firms and countries,
which they attribute to non-adoption of modern management practices. Hsieh and Klenow
(2009) find that firms in emerging markets are less productive than firms in developed
economies. Experimental evidence on textile mills (Bloom, Eifert, Mahajan, MacKenzie, and
Roberts, 2013), in agriculture (Cole and Fernando, 2016), and on small and medium enterprises
in Mexico (Bruhn, Karlan, and Schoar, 2018) confirms this point and notes that using modern
management practices improves productivity.
       Our study complements the literature on better management practices in a number of
ways. First, we provide direct microeconometric evidence from the field on the (non-)adoption
of a new management practice, credit scoring in retail lending, which is a standard practice in
consumer lending in developed markets. Our evidence sheds light on the nature of the frictions
that impede adoption. The list suggested by Bloom and van Reenen (2010) and Bloom et al.
(forthcoming) include imperfect markets, ownership, regulations, and informational barriers.
Our evidence suggests that stasis is not necessarily a product of ownership or size; it can also
be a product of organizational cultures from firms' formative experiences. How organizational
culture can impact economic decision-making and outcomes is the focus of recent work in
economics and finance (Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2006, 2015); Graham, Harvey,
Popadak, and Rajagopal, 2017).
       Moreover, our evidence reveals a finer texture on the adoption question. In our study,
the new practice, scoring technology to improve lending outcomes, is adopted instantly for new
borrowers but banks are reluctant to use the same new technology for existing borrowers. The
frictions that impede adoption are relation-specific.
                                               28
        Credit Bureaus Both credit bureaus and credit registries have attracted considerable
academic and policy interest. One part of the literature emphasizes the role of bureaus in
alleviating information asymmetry, which has the potential to alter the flow of credit. Much of
the recent work exploits the richness of the bureau and registry data to assess questions such
as the transmission of monetary policy. 19
        Our study has a somewhat different focus relative to prior work on bureaus. We use
credit bureau data to gain a micro-level understanding of the credit decision practices of
different types of banks. A second difference is the context. While prior work draws bureau or
registry data from developed markets in which credit bureaus are well established, we study
the initial introduction of credit bureaus. Moreover, we focus on India, which is a large
economy that is undergoing a boom in the consumer lending market.
        Perhaps as importantly, we bring to light a point that has received limited attention in
prior theory and empirical work on bureaus, viz., banks do not use credit bureaus to inform all
their loan decisions. We show that the incomplete usage of bureau data leaves information on
the table, a finding that supports the focus of policy work, e.g., The World Bank's Doing
Business section that emphasizes the specialness of credit bureaus in instilling credit discipline.
        State-Owned Banks LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2002) note that state
ownership of banks is common across the world, possibly because state ownership of banks
lets them undertake developmental activities necessary for growth that private banks do not. In
practice, however, LaPorta et al. find that state ownership of banks has a reliable negative
correlation with development. Several empirical studies suggest that the anomaly is likely due
to the politically-induced distortions in credit flows (Sapienza, 2004; Khwaja and Mian, 2005;
Dinç, 2005, Cole, 2009). 20 As The Economist (September 2015) writes, a key question is ``...
the [state-owned] system’s ability to capitalize on its successes when it wants to innovate rather
than to catch up…” The ability of state-owned enterprises to absorb innovative technologies
is, of course, our main focus.
        The Adoption of Innovation The term "innovator's dilemma'' (Christensen, 1998) refers
to a pattern where incumbents are slow to introduce innovative products because the new

19
   See Artigas (2004), Djankov, McLiesh, and Shleifer (2007), or the credit section of World Bank’s doing
business survey at http://www.doingbusiness.org/data/exploretopics/getting-credit. The literature includes
Pagano and Jappelli (1993), Padilla and Pagano (1997, 2000), Brown, Jappelli, and Pagano (2009), Hertzberg,
Liberti, and Paravasini (2011), Karapetyan and Stacescu (2014), Jimenez, Ongena, Peydro, and Saurina (2012,
2014, forthcoming), and Ippolito, Peydro, Polo, and Sette (2016). See also Puri, Rocholl, and Steffen (2011).
20
   See Shleifer (1998), Caprio, Laeven, and Levine (2007), Estrin, Hanousek, Kocenda, and Svejnar (2009),
Megginson (2010), Karolyi and Liao (2010), and Dinç and Gupta (2011) or the special reports carried by The
Economist in 2012 ( “The Visible Hand,” http://www.economist.com/node/21542931) and 2015 (“The good, the
bad, and the ugly,” September 12, 2015)

                                                     29
products cannibalize current ones. This bias towards "status quo" results in incumbents losing
market shares to newer firms more open to innovation. Our study suggests a parallel to the
innovator's dilemma in the process adoption rather than the new product introduction space.


IX. Conclusions
       We study a subset of data held by a major credit bureau in India that records virtually
all consumer loans granted during the last decade by credit institutions operating in India.
The main focus of our study is the adoption of credit scoring by the banking sector in retail
consumer lending, specifically the differences in adoption between state-owned or public
sector banks (PSBs) and new private banks (NPBs).
       We show that there is a significant gap in adoption of credit scoring technology
between the two, even a number of years after the introduction of the technology. For
borrowers with prior relationships, PSB inquiry rates are lower than those for their private
peers, NPBs, who subject virtually all loans to credit bureau check. The difference does not
exist for new clients, so the inquiry difference for customers with prior relationships does not
appear to reflect a general aversion towards new technology adoption by PSBs.
       We test and rule out a variety of explanations for slow adoption. We also examine the
possibility that the credit bureau information is redundant for PSBs but do not find evidence
to support this viewpoint. Our tests suggest that by lending without inquiry, PSBs enhance
the risk of default. We conduct further tests on loans made without inquiry. For these loans,
we obtain data on the real-time credit scores that PSBs would have seen if they had inquired
instead of lending without inquiry. Under plausible assumptions about how the data would be
used in lending, we estimate counterfactual outcomes if the un-inquired loans were instead
inquired, and quantify the real-time improvements in credit quality generated from greater
adoption of the credit scoring technology.
       A potential explanation for the differences in behavior may lie in the distinctive
cultures of the two types of organizations. An organization that moves to a score-driven,
transaction orientation in lending has to remove discretion from the loan officer and cede it to
the scoring technology. Our findings suggest that PSBs are more reluctant to shift, perhaps
because it is disruptive of status quo, particularly for borrowers with whom the banks have
prior relationships, where internal data is more abundant and processes and human capital
have been built around its use. Is the adherence to status-quo a product of state ownership?
We find that old private banks, which are of similar vintage and have similar formative
experiences as PSBs but are smaller and continue to be privately held, behave similarly to
                                               30
PSBs. Perhaps shared formative experiences are thus an important organization trait in
explaining the responses to new technology. Over time, the behavior of state-owned banks
shows convergence towards that of their newer private bank counterparts, suggesting there is
pressure to adopt. Competition appears to drive out the status quo bias created by
relationships and replace it with arms-length transactional behavior typical of modern retail
lending practices in banks around the world.




                                           References
    Acharya, Viral, and Nirupama Kulkarni. 2016. Government Guarantees And Bank
Vulnerability During The Financial Crisis Of 2007 – 09: Evidence From An Emerging
Market, http://www.cafral.org.in/sfControl/content/Speech/8102016112959PMIB.pdf


   Agarwal, Sumit, Shashwat Alok, Pulak Ghosh, Soumya Ghosh, and Amit Seru. 2017.
Banking the unbanked: Measuring the success of JDY. Georgetown University Working
Paper. Available at https://ssrn.com/abstract=2906523


   Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt. 1992. A Model of Growth Through Creative
Destruction. Econometrica 60(2), 323-351.


   Avery, Robert, Paul Calem, and Glenn Canner. 2003. An Overview of Consumer Data and
Credit Reporting. Federal Reserve Bulletin 89: 47–78.


   Bandopadhyay, T. 2012. A Bank For the Buck. Jaico Publishing.


   Barber, Brad and Terrence O’Dean. 2001. Boys will be boys: Gender, overconfidence and
common stock investing. Quarterly Journal of Economics 116: 261-92.


   Banerjee, Abhijit, Shawn Cole, and Esther Duflo 2005. Bank financing in India: India’s
and China’s recent experience with reform and growth. Palgrave Macmillan UK, 138-157.


   Bertrand, M., Mullainathan, S., 2003. Enjoying the quiet life? Corporate governance and
managerial preferences. Journal of Political Economy 111: 1043–1075.


                                               31
   Bloom, Nicholas, and John van Reenen. 2010. Why do management practices differ across
firms and countries? Journal of Economic Perspectives 24 (1): 203-224.


   Bloom, Nicholas, Eifert, Ben, Mahajan, Aprajit, McKenzie, David and John Roberts. 2013.
Does management matter? Evidence from India. Quarterly Journal of Economics 128 (1):1-51


   Bloom, Nicholas, Brynjolfsson, Erik, Foster, Lucia, Jarmin, Ron, Patnaik, Megha, Saporta-
Ekstein, Itay, and John van Reenen. 2016. What drives differences in management?, American
Economic Review forthcoming.


   Brown, M., Jappelli, T., and M. Pagano. 2009. Information sharing and credit: firm-level
evidence from transition countries. Journal of Financial Intermediation 18:151–172.


   Bruhn, Miriam, Dean Karlan, and Antoinette Schoar. 2018. The impact of consulting
services on small and medium enterprises: evidence from a randomized trial in Mexico.
Journal of Political Economy 126(2): 635-687.


   Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Lorin M. Hitt. 2000. Beyond Computation: Information
Technology, Organizational Transformation and Business Performance. Journal of Economic
Perspectives 14: 23–48.


   Burgess, R., and Rohini Pande. 2005. Do Rural Banks Matter? Evidence from the Indian
Social Banking Experiment. American Economic Review 95:780–95.


   Burgess, Robin, Rohini Pande and Grace Wong. 2005. Banking for the Poor: Evidence
from India. Journal of the European Economics Association Papers and Proceedings 3 (2-3):
268-278.


   Caprio, G., Luc Laeven, and Ross Levine. 2007. Governance and bank valuation. Journal
of Financial Intermediation 16 (4): 584–617.


   Chandra, Amitabh, Amy Finkelstein, Adam Sacarny, and Chad Syverson. 2016.
HealthCare Exceptionalism? Performance and Allocation in the US Health Care Sector.
American Economic Review 106: 2110–2144.
                                               32
   Chari, V. V. and Hugo Hopenhayn. 1991. Vintage Human Capital, Growth, and the
Diffusion of New Technology. Journal of Political Economy 99(6): 1142-1165.


   Chopra, Yakshup, Nagpurnanand Prabhala, and Prasanna Tantri. Bank Accounts for the
Unbanked: Evidence from a Big Bang Experiment. 2017. Robert H. Smith School Research
Paper available at https://ssrn.com/abstract=2919091


   Cole, Shawn and A. Nilesh Fernando. 2012. `Mobile'izing Agricultural Advice:
Technology Adoption, Diffusion, and Sustainability. Harvard Business School Working Paper
available at https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2179008


   Cole, Shawn. 2009. Fixing market failures or fixing elections? Elections, banks, and
agricultural lending in India. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1: 219–250.


   Comin, Diego A., and Marti Mestieri. 2013. Technology Diffusion: Measurement, Causes
and Consequences. NBER Working Paper 19052.


   Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, Leora F. Klapper, Dorothe Singer, and Peter Van Oudheusen. 2015.
The Global Findex Database 2014: Measuring Financial Inclusion Around the World. World
Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 7255.


   Dinç, S. and Nandini Gupta. 2011. The decision to privatize: finance and politics. Journal
of Finance 66: 241–269.


   Dinc, S., 2005. Politicians and banks: political influences on government-owned banks in
emerging countries. Journal of Financial Economics 77: 453–479.


   Djankov, S., C. McLiesh, and A. Shleifer, 2007. Private credit in 129 countries. Journal of
Financial Economics 84: 299-329.


   Dwyer, Peggy D., James H. Gilkeson, and John A. List. 2002. Gender Differences in
Revealed Risk Taking: Evidence from Mutual Fund Investors. Economics Letters 76: 151–158.


                                             33
   Estrin, Saul, Jan Hanousek, Evzen Kocenda, and Jan Svejnar. 2009. The Effects of
Privatization and Ownership in Transition Economies. Journal of Economic Literature, 47,
699–728.


   Gopalan, Radhakrishnan, Abhiroop Mukherjee, Manpreet Singh. Do Debt Contract
Enforcement Costs Affect Financing and Asset Structure?. Review of Financial Studies 2016:
29 (10): 2774-2813.


   Hall, B. and B. Khan. 2003. Adoption of new technology. In D. C. Jones (Ed.), New
Economy Handbook. San Diego, CA Academic Press.


   Hertzberg, A., Liberti, J. M., & Paravisini, D. 2011. Public Information and Coordination:
Evidence from a Credit Registry Expansion. Journal of Finance 66(2): 379-412.


   Huang, Jiekun and Darren Kisgen. 2012. Gender and Corporate Finance: Are Male
Executives Overconfident Relative to Female Executives? Journal of Financial Economics
108: 822-839.


   Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter Klenow. 2009. Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China
and India. Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(4): 1403-1448.


   Ippolito, Filippo and Peydro , Jose-Luis and Polo, Andrea and Sette, Enrico. 2016. Double
Bank Runs and Liquidity Risk Management. ESRB Working Paper No. 8/2016. Available at
SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2565418


   Manuelli, Rodolfo E., and Ananth Seshadri. 2014. Human Capital and the Wealth of
Nations. American Economic Review, 104(9): 2736-62.


   Jappelli, T. and M. Pagano. 2002. Information Sharing, Lending and Defaults: Cross-
Country Evidence. Journal of Banking & Finance 26: 2017-2045.


   Jovanovic, B., and Y. Nyarko. 1996. Learning-by-doing and the Choice of Technology.
Econometrica 64: 1299-1310.


                                            34
   Jovanovic, Boyan and Lach, Saul. 1997. Product Innovation and the Business Cycle.
International Economic Review 38 (1): 3-22.


   Jiménez, Gabriel, Steven Ongena, José-Luis Peydró, and Jesús Saurina. 2012. Credit
Supply and Monetary Policy: Identifying the Bank Balance-Sheet Channel with Loan
Applications. American Economic Review 102: 2301-2326.


   Jimenez, Gabriel, Steven Ongena, Jose-Luis Peydro, and Jesus Saurina. 2014. Hazardous
Times for Monetary Policy: What Do Twenty-Three Million Bank Loans Say about the
Effects of Monetary Policy on Credit Risk-Taking?. Econometrica 82: 463–505.




   Karolyi, Andrew and Rose Liao. 2010. What is Different About Government-Controlled
Acquirers in Cross-Border Acquisitions? Johnson School Research Paper Series No. 24-2010.
Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1597125


   Karapetyan, Artashes and Bogdan Stacescu. 2014. Information Sharing and Information
Acquisition in Credit Markets. Review of Finance 18(4). 1583-1615.


   Khwaja, Asim and Atif Mian. 2005. Do Lenders Favor Politically Connected Firms? Rent
Provision in an Emerging Financial Market. Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (4): 1371-
1411.


   Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer. 2002. The
Regulation of Entry. Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (1): 1-37


   Liberti and Petersen. 2017. Information: Hard and Soft. Kellogg School of Management
Working Paper.


   McIntosh, Craig, and Bruce Wydick. 2004. A decomposition of incentive and screening
effects in credit market information systems. University of California at San Diego Working
Paper.




                                              35
   Megginson, William. 2010. Privatization and Finance. Annual Review of Financial.
Economics 2(1): 145-174.


   Padilla, A. Jorge and Marco Pagano. 1997. Endogenous communication among lenders
and entrepreneurial incentives. Review of Financial Studies 10 (1): 205-236.


   Padilla, A. Jorge, and Marco Pagano. 2000. Sharing default information as a borrower
discipline device. European Economic Review 44 (10), 1951-1980.


   Pagano, M. and T. Jappelli. 1993. Information sharing in credit markets. Journal of
Finance 43 (5): 1693– 1718.


   Petersen, Mitchell A., and Raghuram G. Rajan. 2002. Does distance still matter? The
information revolution in small business lending. Journal of Finance 57 (6): 2533-2570.


   Puri, Manju and Jorg Rocholl and Sascha Steffen. 2011. Global Retail Lending in the
Aftermath of the Financial Crisis: Distinguishing between Demand and Supply Effects.
Journal of Financial Economics 100 (3): 556-578.


   Rishi, M. and S. Saxena. 2004. Technological innovations in the Indian banking industry:
the late bloomer. Accounting History Review 14(3): 339-353.


   Rogers, Everett. 2003. Diffusion of Innovations. Free Press (5th Edition).


   Romer,    Paul.   1992.    Endogenous    Technological     Change. Journal   of   Political
Economy 98(5): 71-102.


   Sapienza, Paola. 2004. The effects of government ownership on bank lending. Journal of
Financial Economics 72: 357-384.


   Sapienza, Paola, Luigi Zingales, and Dario Maestripieri. 2009. Gender differences in
financial risk aversion and career choices are affected by testosterone. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 106: 15268-15273.


                                             36
      Skinner, Jonathan, and Douglas Staiger. 2015. Technology diffusion and Productivity
Growth in Healthcare. Review of Economics and Statistics 97 (5): 951-964.


      Solow, Robert. 1956. A contribution to the theory of economic growth. Quarterly Journal
of Economics 70 (1): 65-94.


      Townsend, Robert M. 1994. Risk and insurance in Village India. Econometrica 62(3): 539-
591.


      Visaria, Sujata. 2009. Legal reform and loan repayment: The microeconomic impact of
debt recovery tribunals in India. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1(3): 59-
81.




                                              37
                                                              Table 1
                                             Inquiries and Loans for the Full 1% Sample

The table reports data on inquiries made by banks with the credit bureau and loans made with or without credit bureau inquiries. The
data comprises a 1% random sample of all loan types excluding credit cards and all lending inquiries between 2006 and 2015 at a
major credit bureau in India. Filtered applications refer to the sum of the number of inquiries and the number of loans without inquiry.
Bureau usage is the ratio of the number of inquiries to the number of filtered applications. Amounts are in billion rupees. The exchange
rate at the end of our sample period is about US$1 = 65 rupees. Year refers to the fiscal year-end in March..

         # Filtered         #         Bureau      # Loans       # Loans     % Loans           Amount (INR Billion)            % Amount
Year    Applications     Inquiries    Usage      No Inquiry     Inquired   No Inquiry     Total  No Inquiry Inquired           Inquired
2006       190,264         17,382      9.14%       172,882        5,150       2.89%       38.87        35.92         2.95         7.60%
2007       262,929         89,557     34.06%       173,372       21,403      10.99%       43.07        33.24         9.83        22.81%
2008       351,470        210,844     59.99%       140,626       44,127      23.88%       49.19        30.83        18.36        37.32%
2009       292,356        168,980     57.80%       123,376       32,673      20.94%       43.82        29.04        14.78        33.72%
2010       273,642        122,321     44.70%       151,321       33,250      18.01%       61.54        36.35        25.19        40.93%
2011       345,195        157,033     45.49%       188,162       51,403      21.46%       94.67        55.39        39.28        41.49%
2012       457,643        203,545     44.48%       254,098       80,227      24.00%       105.12       51.03        54.09        51.45%
2013       593,863        271,330     45.69%       322,533      101,746      23.98%       133.27       59.43        73.84        55.41%
2014       712,092        351,892     49.42%       360,200      131,576      26.76%       148.70       60.84        87.86        59.08%
2015       850,010        448,434     52.76%       401,576      177,439      30.64%       177.73       63.08        114.64       64.51%
Total     4,329,464      2,041,318    47.15%      2,288,146     678,994      22.88%       895.97       455.16       440.82       49.20%




                                                                    38
                                                                            Table 2
                                            Inquiries and Loans for the Full 1% Sample: Classified by Bank Type
The table reports data on inquiries made by new private banks and public sector banks with the credit bureau and loans made with or without inquiring with
the credit bureau. The 1% random sample includes all loan types excluding credit cards and all lending inquiries between 2006 and 2015 at a major credit
bureau in India. Filtered applications refer to the sum of the number of inquiries and the number of loans without inquiry. Bureau usage is the ratio of the
number of inquiries to the number of filtered applications. Amounts are in billion rupees. The exchange rate at the end of our sample period is about US$1 =
65 rupees. Year refers to the fiscal year-end in March. For example, 2015 refers to the year ending March 2015.
                                                                  Panel A: Public Sector Banks

          # Filtered         #           Bureau         # Loans         # Loans        % Loans       Amount         Amount         Amount           %Amt
Year
         Applications     Inquiries      Usage         No Inquiry       Inquired       Inquired       Total        No Inquiry      Inquired        Inquired

2006         81,077          736          0.91%          80,341           194         0.24%            15.87          15.72           0.15          0.93%
2007         72,035         3,380         4.69%          68,655          1,116        1.60%            12.98          12.18           0.80          6.13%
2008         66,986         4,931         7.36%          62,055          1,700        2.67%            13.44          11.83           1.61         11.97%
2009         86,096         9,079        10.55%          77,017          3,010        3.76%            17.06          14.40           2.65         15.56%
2010        115,214         17,766       15.42%          97,448          6,394        6.16%            25.09          18.38           6.71         26.74%
2011        143,361         25,664       17.90%         117,697          8,425        6.68%            28.32          20.16           8.16         28.83%
2012        193,316         34,216       17.70%         159,100         11,222        6.59%            34.46          24.84           9.61         27.90%
2013        255,363         50,902       19.93%         204,461         17,080        7.71%            43.51          29.68          13.83         31.79%
2014        311,288         72,068       23.15%         239,220         24,485        9.28%            54.19          34.15          20.04         36.98%
2015        351,405         95,311       27.12%         256,094         33,838       11.67%            58.42          34.24          24.17         41.38%
Total      1,676,141       314,053       18.74%        1,362,088       107,464        7.31%           303.35         215.60          87.74         28.93%
                                                                Panel B: New Private Banks
          # Filtered         #           Bureau         # Loans         # Loans        % Loans       Amount         Amount         Amount           %Amt
Year
         Applications     Inquiries      Usage         No Inquiry       Inquired       Inquired       Total        No Inquiry      Inquired        Inquired
2006        48,136          4,334         9.00%          43,802           908           2.03%          11.28         10.72            0.56          4.96%
2007        78,862          32,310       40.97%          46,552          10,118        17.85%          13.88          9.38            4.50         32.43%
2008       105,448          82,774       78.50%          22,674          25,941        53.36%          12.55          4.81            7.74         61.65%
2009        70,286          61,834       87.97%          8,452           16,379        65.96%           6.09          1.54            4.55         74.75%
2010        48,485          41,423       85.43%          7,062           13,321        65.35%           7.19          1.54            5.64         78.52%
2011        61,263          52,640       85.92%          8,623           19,517        69.36%          13.31          2.13           11.18         84.00%
2012        82,802          67,478       81.49%          15,324          27,453        64.18%          19.01          2.88           16.13         84.86%
2013       110,792          90,671       81.84%          21,021          33,897        62.75%          25.66          4.27           21.39         83.36%
2014       136,302         115,875       85.01%          20,427          41,293        66.90%          27.02          4.32           22.69         83.99%
2015       173,313         148,058       85.43%          25,255          52,011        67.31%          36.62          5.42           31.20         85.19%
Total      915,689         697,397       76.16%         218,292         240,838        52.46%         172.61         47.02          125.59         72.76%


                                                                             39
                                                                      Table 3A
                                              Inquiries and Loans in Final Sample: New Borrowers
The table reports data on inquiries with the credit bureau and loans made with or without inquiring by public sector banks and new private banks
where the borrower or loan applicant has no prior lending relationship with the bank. The 1% random sample includes all loan types excluding
credit cards, priority sector loans, and gold loans and all lending inquiries between 2006 and 2015 at a major credit bureau in India. Filtered
applications refer to the sum of the number of inquiries and the number of loans without inquiry. Bureau usage is the ratio of the number of inquiries
to the number of filtered applications. Amounts are in billion rupees. The exchange rate at the end of our sample period is about US$1 = 65 rupees.
Year refers to the fiscal year-end in March. For example, 2015 refers to the year ending March 2015.
                                                         Panel A: Public Sector Banks (PSBs)
          # Filtered                    Bureau      # Loans        # Loans       % Loans        Amount          Amount          Amount       %Amt
Year                     # Inquiries
         Applications                   Usage      No Inquiry      Inquired      Inquired        Total         No Inquiry       Inquired    Inquired
2006         702            701         99.86%           1           163       99.39%             0.13            0.00            0.13       98.49%
2007        3,108          3,094        99.55%          14           871       98.42%             0.63            0.01            0.61       98.08%
2008        4,472          4,404        98.48%          68          1,298      95.02%             1.31            0.04            1.28       97.28%
2009        8,182          8,047        98.35%         135          2,302      94.46%             2.15            0.08            2.07       96.47%
2010        15,598         15,398       98.72%         200          4,783      95.99%             5.43            0.13            5.30       97.67%
2011        21,566         21,252       98.54%         314          5,630      94.72%             6.18            0.25            5.93       95.93%
2012        27,738         27,287       98.37%         451          6,610      93.61%             6.56            0.31            6.25       95.26%
2013        40,017         39,456       98.60%         561          9,215      94.26%             8.98            0.38            8.59       95.73%
2014        54,713         53,941       98.59%         772         12,221      94.06%            13.03            0.84           12.18       93.52%
2015        69,251         68,230       98.53%        1,021        14,824      93.56%            13.98            0.71           13.26       94.91%
Total      245,347        241,810       98.56%        3,537        57,917      94.24%            58.37            2.75           55.62       95.28%
                                                        Panel B: New Private Banks (NPBs)
                                                    # Loans
          # Filtered                    Bureau                    # Loans       % Loans          Amount         Amount          Amount       %Amt
Year                     # Inquiries                  No
         Applications                   Usage                    Inquired       Inquired          Total        No Inquiry       Inquired    Inquired
                                                    Inquiry
2006        3,454          3,440        99.59%         14           579         97.64%             0.36           0.01            0.36       98.38%
2007        22,233         22,009       98.99%        224          6,077        96.45%             2.66           0.09            2.57       96.58%
2008        54,485         54,067       99.23%        418         17,054        97.61%             4.20           0.15            4.04       96.33%
2009        39,850         39,766       99.79%         84         10,636        99.22%             2.45           0.04            2.41       98.52%
2010        27,375         27,270       99.62%        105          8,992        98.85%             3.31           0.06            3.25       98.30%
2011        35,220         35,099       99.66%        121         12,934        99.07%             5.87           0.10            5.76       98.27%
2012        45,575         45,408       99.63%        167         17,831        99.07%             8.17           0.11            8.05       98.62%
2013        60,468         60,250       99.64%        218         21,637        99.00%            10.90           0.12           10.78       98.90%
2014        76,082         75,802       99.63%        280         24,673        98.88%            12.05           0.31           11.75       97.44%
2015        96,461         96,200       99.73%        261         28,973        99.11%            15.48           0.20           15.28       98.72%
Total      461,203        459,311       99.59%       1,892       149,386        98.75%            65.44           1.18           64.26       98.19%




                                                                         40
                                                                       Table 3B
                                       Inquiries and Loans in Final Sample; Prior Relationship Borrowers
The table reports data on inquiries with the credit bureau and loans made with or without inquiring by public sector banks and new private banks
where the borrower or loan applicant has a prior lending relationship with the bank. The 1% random sample includes all loan types excluding credit
cards, priority sector loans, and gold loans and all lending inquiries between 2006 and 2015 at a major credit bureau in India. Filtered applications
refer to the sum of the number of inquiries and the number of loans without inquiry. Bureau usage is the ratio of the number of inquiries to the
number of filtered applications. Amounts are in billion rupees. The exchange rate at the end of our sample period is about US$1 = 65 rupees. Year
refers to the fiscal year-end in March. For example, 2015 refers to the year ending March 2015.
                                                         Panel A: Public Sector Banks (PSB)
          # Filtered                    Bureau      # Loans        # Loans       % Loans       Amount          Amount          Amount       %Amt
Year                     # Inquiries
         Applications                   Usage      No Inquiry      Inquired      Inquired       Total         No Inquiry       Inquired    Inquired
2006        32,636           35          0.11%        32,601           8         0.02%           8.05            8.04            0.00        0.03%
2007        26,975          286          1.06%        26,689           94        0.35%           6.86            6.77            0.09        1.32%
2008        22,623          527          2.33%        22,096          152        0.68%           6.37            6.24            0.13        2.00%
2009        26,629         1,032         3.88%        25,597          365        1.41%           7.61            7.33            0.28        3.69%
2010        33,009         2,368         7.17%        30,641          856        2.72%           9.91            9.09            0.81        8.22%
2011        35,296         4,412        12.50%        30,884         1,376       4.27%          10.44            9.29            1.16       11.08%
2012        38,631         6,929        17.94%        31,702         2,215       6.53%          10.57            8.94            1.63       15.42%
2013        39,617         11,446       28.89%        28,171         3,563      11.23%          10.79            7.89            2.90       26.91%
2014        49,605         18,127       36.54%        31,478         5,721      15.38%          13.33            8.98            4.36       32.67%
2015        56,084         27,081       48.29%        29,003         8,868      23.42%          13.67            7.49            6.18       45.20%
Total      361,105         72,243       20.01%       288,862        23,218       7.44%          97.61           80.07           17.54       17.97%
                                                         Panel B: New Private Banks (NPB)
                                                    # Loans
          # Filtered                    Bureau                    # Loans        % Loans        Amount         Amount          Amount       %Amt
Year                     # Inquiries                   No
         Applications                   Usage                     Inquired       Inquired        Total        No Inquiry       Inquired    Inquired
                                                    Inquiry
2006        43,090          894          2.07%       42,196          126           0.30%          10.16         10.12            0.04        0.36%
2007        54,758         10,301       18.81%       44,457         3,644          7.58%          10.17          8.61            1.56       15.36%
2008        48,952         28,707       58.64%       20,245         8,008         28.34%           7.20          3.99            3.21       44.58%
2009        27,605         22,068       79.94%        5,537         4,915         47.02%           2.76          1.08            1.68       60.89%
2010        19,262         14,153       73.48%        5,109         3,752         42.34%           2.86          1.05            1.81       63.21%
2011        23,729         17,541       73.92%        6,188         5,840         48.55%           5.82          1.65            4.17       71.59%
2012        29,460         22,070       74.92%        7,390         8,164         52.49%           8.31          1.83            6.48       77.96%
2013        37,827         30,421       80.42%        7,406         9,878         57.15%          10.94          2.48            8.46       77.34%
2014        46,451         40,073       86.27%        6,378        11,009         63.32%          11.25          2.24            9.02       80.12%
2015        57,424         51,858       90.31%        5,566        14,248         71.91%          15.21          2.51           12.70       83.48%
Total      388,558        238,086       61.27%      150,472        69,584         31.62%          84.70         35.57           49.13       58.00%




                                                                         41
                                                  Table 4
                       Credit Bureau Inquiries and Lending by Credit Scores
The table reports data on inquiries and loans made by public sector banks and new private banks
classified by whether the credit is scorable and credit score buckets where available for a 1% random
sample of records at a major credit bureau in India in fiscal years ending in March 2013 and March
2014. Filtered applications refer to the sum of the number of inquiries and the number of loans without
inquiry. Bureau usage is the ratio of the number of inquiries to the number of filtered applications.
Amounts are in billion rupees. The exchange rate for the sample period is about US$1 = 65 rupees.
                                         Panel A: New Borrowers
 Score          # Filtered        # Loans          #                   Bureau
                                                            #L|I                   P (L|I)    P (L|FA)
 Bucket        Applications No Inquiry Inquiries                        Usage
                                           Public Sector Banks
 ≤ 650             5,566              67         5,499       408       98.80%      7.42%        8.53%
 650-750          15,257             269        14,988      2,339      98.24% 15.61%           17.09%
 ≥ 750            12,998             217        12,781      2,130      98.33% 16.67%           18.06%
 All Scores       33,821             553        33,268      4,877      98.36% 14.66%           16.06%
 No Score         60,909             780        60,129     16,559      98.72% 27.54%           28.47%
 Total            94,730            1,333       93,397     21,436      98.59% 22.95%           24.04%
                                           Private Sector Banks
 ≤ 650             8,748              34         8,714       878       99.61%      9.69%       10.04%
 650-750          21,711             138        21,573      6,272      99.36% 28.43%           28.89%
 ≥ 750            10,842              45        10,797      3,073      99.58% 28.04%           28.34%
 All Scores       41,301             217        41,084     10,223      99.47% 24.35%           24.75%
 No Score         95,249             281        94,968     36,585      99.70% 38.23%           38.41%
 Total           136,550             498       136,052     46,808      99.64% 34.04%           34.28%
                                     Panel B: Prior Borrowers
Score          # Filtered       # Loans         #                    Bureau
                                                         #L|I                   P (L|I)     P (L|FA)
Bucket        Applications     No Inquiry Inquiries                  Usage
                                        Public Sector Banks
≤ 650             4,784          1,655        3,129       482        65.41%     15.40%      44.67%
650-750          22,704         10,322       12,382      2,915       54.54%     23.54%      58.30%
≥ 750            10,706          3,988        6,718      1,578       62.75%     23.49%      51.99%
All Scores       38,194         15,965       22,229      4,975       58.20%     22.38%      54.83%
No Score         51,028         43,684        7,344      4,309       14.39%     58.67%      94.05%
Total            89,222         59,649       29,573      9,284       33.15%     31.39%      77.26%
                                        Private Sector Banks
≤ 650             9,849           235         9,614      1,711       97.61%     17.80%      19.76%
650-750          26,878           939        25,939      9,601       96.51%     37.01%      39.21%
≥ 750            13,262           387        12,875      4,741       97.08%     36.82%      38.67%
All Scores       49,989          1,561       48,428     16,053       96.88%     33.15%      35.24%
No Score         34,289         12,223       22,066      4,834       64.35%     21.91%      49.74%
Total            84,278         13,784       70,494     20,887       83.64%     29.63%      41.14%




                                           42
                           Table 5
  Delinquency Rates LQ 360 By Bank Type, Relationships and
                     Credit Score Bucket

                      Panel A: All loans
              Public Sector Banks           New Private Banks
             All    No Inq      Inq        All     No Inq    Inq
<=650       4.15%   5.45%     2.00%    2.14%       5.26%    1.90%
650-750     0.78%   0.97%     0.48%    0.76%       2.62%    0.68%
>=750       0.34%   0.46%     0.23%    0.25%       2.19%    0.17%
Scored      0.96%   1.29%     0.51%    0.74%       2.90%    0.64%
Unscored    1.52%   1.95%     0.78%    1.61%       2.89%    1.43%
All Loans   1.34%   1.75%     0.68%    1.27%       2.89%    1.11%
              Panel B: Loans with prior relation
              Public Sector Banks           New Private Banks


<=650       4.83%   5.98%     2.28%    1.30%       5.26%    1.11%
650-750     0.82%   0.95%     0.51%    0.51%       0.62%    0.51%
>=750       0.38%   0.48%     0.22%    0.19%       1.47%    0.14%
Scored      1.06%   1.29%     0.58%    0.49%       1.36%    0.45%
Unscored    1.12%   1.19%     1.03%    0.81%       1.99%    0.64%
All Loans   1.03%   1.24%     0.77%    0.61%       1.62%    0.49%
             Panel C: Loans with no prior relation
              Public Sector Banks           New Private Banks
             All    No Inq      Inq        All     No Inq    Inq
<=650       2.70%   3.85%     1.63%    3.76%       5.26%    3.56%
650-750     0.65%   1.08%     0.43%    1.16%       5.61%    0.94%
>=750       0.27%   0.39%     0.23%    0.36%       3.26%    0.23%
Scored      0.71%   1.33%     0.44%    1.14%       4.97%    0.93%
Unscored    0.85%   2.31%     0.71%    1.69%       2.99%    1.52%
All Loans   0.75%   2.22%     0.64%    1.49%       3.19%    1.39%




                              43
                                          Table 6
The dependent variable is one if a loan is preceded by a credit bureau inquiry and 0 for
loans without inquiry. The data comprise a 1% random sample of the data held at the
bureau for all loans made between 2013 and 2014 excluding credit cards, priority sector
loans, and gold loans. PSB is an indicator for whether a bank is state-owned. Past
relationship equals one if the borrower is recorded in the credit bureau records as having
borrowed from the same bank in the past The specification includes indicators for credit
score buckets and their interactions with the PSB indicator, and controls for gender, (log)
age, and quarter-year time period fixed effects.. Standard errors in parentheses are
clustered at borrower level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                             (1)            (2)               (3)                 (4)

PSB                      0.2536***      -0.1593***        -0.1411***         -0.1914***
                           (0.002)         (0.002)          (0.002)             (0.002)
Past Relationship       -0.0807***       0.0663***        -0.0332***          0.0039***
                           (0.002)         (0.001)          (0.002)             (0.001)
Past
relationship*PSB                        -0.2965***        -0.2701***         -0.3310***
                                          (0.004)            (0.003)            (0.003)
Low Score                                                  0.2265***          0.1419***
                                                             (0.002)            (0.002)
Medium Score                                               0.1982***          0.1319***
                                                             (0.002)            (0.002)
High Score                                                 0.2346***          0.1390***
                                                             (0.002)            (0.002)
PSB*Low Score                                                                 0.1811***
                                                                                (0.005)
PSB*Medium Score                                                              0.1228***
                                                                                (0.003)
PSB*High Score                                                                0.1735***
                                                                                (0.004)
Male                     0.0260***      0.0222***           -0.0007            -0.0023
                           (0.002)        (0.002)           (0.002)             (0.002)
Log (Age)                 -0.0026       0.0113***         -0.0142***         -0.0105***
                           (0.003)        (0.003)           (0.003)             (0.003)
Qtr-Year FE                   Y              Y                 Y                   Y
# Observations            348,158        348,158            348,158            348,158




                                            44
                                            Table 7
The table reports 2SLS results. In the first stage, the dependent variable is an indicator for
whether a loan is inquired or not. The instruments are whether the bank is state-owned (PSB),
and this indicator interacted with whether a borrower is a past relationship borrower or not.
In the second stage, the dependent variable is loan delinquency LQ 360, which is an indicator
for whether the loan goes 90 days past due within 360 days of granting the loan. Standard
errors are reported in parentheses and clustered at the level of an individual borrower. The
explanatory variables include credit score buckets, borrower gender, log of one plus borrower
age, log of one plus the loan amount in rupee, loan product type and quarter-year fixed effects.
The results are similar when the fixed effects are excluded. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                                (1)             (2)               (3)              (4)
                            First Stage     Second Stage      First Stage      Second Stage

Inquired                                     -0.0115***                         -0.0104***
                                               (0.003)                            (0.003)
PSB                         -0.2229***                        -0.1474***
                              (0.002)                            (0.002)
Past Relationship           -0.1412***       -0.0060***       -0.0228***        -0.0061***
                              (0.002)          (0.001)           (0.001)          (0.001)
PSB*Past Relationship                                         -0.2427***
                                                                 (0.003)
Low Score                    0.1773***        0.0224***        0.1635***         0.0222***
                               (0.002)          (0.003)          (0.002)           (0.003)
Medium Score                 0.1398***       -0.0027***        0.1347***        -0.0028***
                               (0.002)          (0.001)          (0.002)           (0.001)
High Score                   0.1778***       -0.0057***        0.1671***        -0.0059***
                               (0.002)          (0.001)          (0.002)           (0.001)
Male                         0.0101***         0.0019**        0.0087***         0.0019**
                               (0.002)          (0.001)          (0.002)           (0.001)
LN(Age)                     -0.0259***       -0.0074***       -0.0152***        -0.0074***
                               (0.003)          (0.001)          (0.003)           (0.001)
LN(1+Amt)                                    -0.0037***                         -0.0036***
                                                (0.000)                            (0.000)
Constant                     1.0367***        0.0986***        0.9610***         0.0966***
                               (0.010)          (0.008)          (0.010)           (0.007)
Product FE                        N                Y                N                 Y
Quarter-Year FE                   Y                Y                Y                 Y
# Observations                331,961           107,284         331,961           107,284
                                                  Table 8
         Counterfactual Loan Supply and Delinquency Rates for PSB Loans Without Inquiry
The data comprise loans made by state-owned banks (PSBs) without inquiry in fiscal years 2013 and
2014 excluding priority sector and gold loans. For each loan, we estimate the probability of inquiry and
probability of acceptance given inquiry based on inquiry and acceptance rates for new private banks
(NPBs) whose estimates we do not report here. The loan supply is the product of the loan amount and the
compound probability of inquiry and acceptance given inquiry. The actual delinquency rate is the
realized delinquency rate for PSBs for the un-inquired pool of loans. Counterfactual 1 is the delinquency
rate for the counterfactual loan supply using the realized delinquency rate on each loan. Counterfactual
2 is the delinquency rate for the counterfactual loan supply using the delinquency rate based on the
projected rate for a loan of similar characteristics made by an NPB.
                                                                 Delinquency Rate
 Past Relationship      Loan Supply        Actual          Counterfactual 1           Counterfactual 2
       No              281,603,448        1.33%               0.70%                      0.57%
       Yes             719,841,267        1.29%               0.97%                      0.57%
       All            1,001,444,714       1.29%               0.90%                      0.57%




                                                       46
                                                                       Table 9
                                                                  Old Private Banks
The table reports data on inquiries with the credit bureau and loans made with or without inquiring by old private banks (OPBs) classified by
whether the borrower or loan applicant has a prior lending relationship with the bank. The 1% random sample includes all loan types excluding
credit cards, priority sector loans, and gold loans and all lending inquiries between 2006 and 2015 at a major credit bureau in India. Filtered
applications refer to the sum of the number of inquiries and the number of loans without inquiry. Bureau usage is the ratio of the number of inquiries
to the number of filtered applications. Amounts are in billion rupees. The exchange rate at the end of our sample period is about US$1 = 65 rupees.
Year refers to the fiscal year-end in March. For example, 2015 refers to the year ending March 2015.
                                                               Panel A: New Borrowers
          # Filtered                    Bureau      # Loans        # Loans       % Loans        Amount          Amount          Amount       %Amt
Year                     # Inquiries
         Applications                   Usage      No Inquiry      Inquired      Inquired        Total         No Inquiry       Inquired    Inquired
2006         738            738        100.00%            -          152          3.21%       0.95                0.94            0.01        1.18%
2007        7,301          7,290        99.85%           11         1,003        22.18%       2.73                2.57            0.16        6.01%
2008        4,989          4,967        99.56%           22          274         13.51%       3.48                3.27            0.22        6.24%
2009        1,226          1,224        99.84%            2           56          3.00%       1.81                1.72            0.08        4.51%
2010        1,081          1,074        99.35%            7          150          6.76%       1.39                1.17            0.22       16.06%
2011        1,626          1,619        99.57%            7          300         13.74%       1.71                1.17            0.54       31.41%
2012        2,135          2,113        98.97%           22          468         17.75%       2.55                1.30            1.25       49.19%
2013        2,439          2,385        97.79%           54          448         19.11%       3.84                1.73            2.11       54.98%
2014        3,324          3,260        98.07%           64          634         25.57%       3.19                1.35            1.84       57.63%
2015        5,456          5,374        98.50%           82          692         28.51%       4.05                1.53            2.52       62.18%
Total       30,315         30,044       99.11%          271         4,177        16.34%      25.71               16.75            8.96       34.85%
                                                       Panel B: Prior Relationship Borrowers
2006        4,911             20         0.41%        4,891          10             0.20%       0.94              0.94            0.00        0.04%
2007        3,928            220         5.60%        3,708          57             1.51%       2.58              2.57            0.01        0.36%
2008        2,263            281        12.42%        1,982          39             1.93%       3.29              3.26            0.02        0.73%
2009        2,057             86         4.18%        1,971           5             0.25%       1.72              1.72            0.00        0.11%
2010        2,564            186         7.25%        2,378          23             0.96%       1.22              1.16            0.05        4.24%
2011        2,929            336        11.47%        2,593         114             4.21%       1.33              1.17            0.16       11.97%
2012        3,812            557        14.61%        3,255         239             6.84%       2.08              1.28            0.80       38.45%
2013        3,909            792        20.26%        3,117         301             8.81%       3.10              1.69            1.41       45.52%
2014        3,932           1,070       27.21%        2,862         371            11.48%       2.13              1.27            0.86       40.30%
2015        4,420           1,465       33.14%        2,955         519            14.94%       2.70              1.49            1.21       44.80%
Total       34,725          5,013       14.44%       29,712        1,678            5.35%      21.09             16.56            4.53       21.47%




                                                                         47
                  Figure 1

   Panel A: Fraction of Loans with Inquiry




Panel B: Fraction of Loan Amount with Inquiry




                     48
                          Figure 2

  Panel A: Delinquency LQ360 Versus Credit Score (All Banks)




Panel B: LQ 360 versus Credit Score (PSBs and NPBs Separately)




                             49
              Figure 3

Percentage Loans Inquired by Bank Age




                 50
