                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   RISK MANAGEMENT IN FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

                                      Adriano A. Rampini
                                        S. Viswanathan
                                      Guillaume Vuillemey

                                      Working Paper 25698
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25698


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            March 2019, Revised May 2019




We thank Manuel Adelino, Juliane Begenau, Markus Brunnermeier, Mark Flannery, Dalida
Kadyrzhanova, Divya Kirti, Kebin Ma, Justin Murfin, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Roberta Romano,
Farzad Saidi, João Santos, David Scharfstein, Jeremy Stein, Jason Sturgess, Amir Sufi, Adi
Sunderam, Yuri Tserlukevich, James Vickery, and seminar participants at Duke, HEC Paris,
Princeton, Georgia State, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the NBER Insurance and
Corporate Finance Joint Meeting, the FIRS Conference, the NYU-NY Fed-RFS Conference on
Financial Intermediation, the ETH-NYU Law & Banking/Finance Conference, the Paul Woolley
Centre Conference at LSE, the LBS Summer Finance Symposium, the Barcelona GSE Summer
Forum, INSEAD, Frankfurt School of Finance & Management, the CEPR ESSFM in Gerzensee,
the EFA Annual Meeting, EIEF, the Wharton Conference on Liquidity and Financial Crises, the
AFA Annual Meeting, the Jackson Hole Finance Conference, the NY Fed Conference on OTC
Derivatives, National University of Singapore, Paris-Dauphine, Mannheim, the Conference of
Swiss Economists Abroad, the Bank of Italy, and Zurich for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Adriano A. Rampini, S. Viswanathan, and Guillaume Vuillemey. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Risk Management in Financial Institutions
Adriano A. Rampini, S. Viswanathan, and Guillaume Vuillemey
NBER Working Paper No. 25698
March 2019, Revised May 2019
JEL No. D92,E44,G21,G32

                                           ABSTRACT

We study risk management in financial institutions using data on hedging of interest rate and
foreign exchange risk. We find strong evidence that institutions with higher net worth hedge
more, controlling for risk exposures, both across institutions and within institutions over time. For
identification, we exploit net worth shocks resulting from loan losses due to drops in house
prices. Institutions that sustain such shocks reduce hedging significantly relative to otherwise
similar institutions. The reduction in hedging is differentially larger among institutions with high
real estate exposure. The evidence is consistent with the theory that financial constraints impede
both financing and hedging.

Adriano A. Rampini                                Guillaume Vuillemey
Duke University                                   HEC Paris
Fuqua School of Business                          Finance Department
100 Fuqua Drive                                   1 rue de la Libération
Durham, NC 27708                                  78 351 Jouy-en-Josas
and NBER                                          France
rampini@duke.edu                                  vuillemey@hec.fr

S. Viswanathan
Duke University
Fuqua School of Business
100 Fuqua Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
viswanat@duke.edu
1       Introduction
Despite much debate about bank risk management and its purported failure during the
financial crisis, the basic patterns of risk management in financial institutions are not
known and its main determinants are not well understood. Since financial institutions
play a key role in the macroeconomy and the transmission of monetary policy, under-
standing their exposure to shocks is essential for monetary and macro-prudential policy.1
Financial institutions can manage the risk exposures arising from lending and deposit-
taking activities using financial derivatives; indeed, financial institutions are the largest
users of derivatives, measured in terms of gross notional exposures. We study risk manage-
ment in U.S. financial institutions using panel data on interest rate and foreign exchange
rate derivatives positions which represent on average 94% and 5% of the notional value
of all derivatives used for hedging, that is, almost all the derivatives financial institutions
use for hedging purposes.2
    We show that the net worth of financial institutions is a principal determinant of their
risk management both across institutions and within institutions over time: institutions
with higher net worth hedge more and institutions whose net worth declines reduce hedg-
ing. To study the causal effect of net worth on hedging, we propose a novel identification
strategy using net worth shocks resulting from loan losses which are in turn due to house
price drops. Using difference-in-differences specifications, we find that institutions which
sustain such shocks reduce hedging of both interest rate and foreign exchange risk sub-
stantially relative to otherwise similar institutions. Using triple differences specifications
to control for differences in lending opportunities, we show that the reduction in both
types of hedging is differentially larger for institutions with higher real estate exposure,
which sustain larger shocks to their net worth. We conclude that the financing needs
associated with hedging are a major barrier to risk management.
    1
     Following Bernanke and Gertler (1989), the effects of the net worth of financial institutions on the
availability of intermediated finance and real activity are analyzed by Holmström and Tirole (1997),
Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010), Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014), and Rampini and Viswanathan (2019),
among others. Empirically, the effects of bank net worth on lending and real activity are documented by
Peek and Rosengren (1997, 2000), and its effects on employment are studied by Chodorow-Reich (2014).
Financial institutions’ central role in the transmission of monetary policy is examined by Gertler and
Gilchrist (1994), Bernanke and Gertler (1995), Kashyap and Stein (2000), and Jiménez, Ongena, Peydró,
and Saurina (2012).
   2
     According to the BIS’ Derivative Statistics (December 2014), financial institutions account for more
than 97% of all gross derivatives exposures. Financial institutions’ derivatives positions for hedging
include, in addition to interest rate and foreign exchange derivatives, equity derivatives (0.7%) and
commodity derivatives (0.1%). Not included in these calculations are credit derivatives, as no breakdown
between uses for hedging and trading is available.


                                                   1
    We use theory to inform our measurement. A leading theory of risk management
argues that firms subject to financial constraints are effectively risk averse, giving them
an incentive to hedge (see Froot, Scharfstein, and Stein (1993)). Given this rationale,
Rampini and Viswanathan (2010, 2013) show that when financing and risk management
are subject to the same financial constraints, that is, promises to both financiers and
hedging counterparties need to be collateralized, both require net worth and thus risk
management has an opportunity cost which is higher for more constrained firms. The
same risk management concerns arise in the context of financial institutions (see Froot
and Stein (1998) and Rampini and Viswanathan (2019)). Financial institutions face
a trade-off between lending and risk management: financially constrained institutions
must allocate their limited net worth between the two. Hedging has an opportunity cost
in terms of forgone lending. The main prediction is that more financially constrained
financial institutions, that is, institutions with lower net worth, hedge less; the cost of
foregoing lending or cutting credit lines is higher at the margin for such institutions.
    We use panel data on U.S. financial institutions, focusing on bank holding compa-
nies. We first establish a new basic stylized fact about risk management in financial
institutions: across institutions, financial institutions with higher net worth hedge inter-
est rate and foreign exchange rate risk to a greater extent; and within institutions over
time, institutions whose net worth falls reduce hedging. We control for risk exposures
throughout.
    We then test the main prediction of the theory using a novel identification strategy
by focusing on drops in financial institutions’ net worth due to loan losses attributable
to falls in house prices. We use 2009 as the treatment year and define treatment as insti-
tutions with a below median mortgage-weighted average local house price change in the
two preceding years or a below median mortgage-weighted average local housing supply
elasticity.3 In difference-in-differences specifications using either definition of treatment,
treated institutions reduce hedging economically and statistically significantly relative to
otherwise similar control institutions; indeed, treated institutions cut hedging by as much
as one half. Similar results obtain when treatment and control group are propensity-score
matched. Treatment affects institutions’ net worth significantly, but not their risk expo-
sures. This evidence corroborates the hypothesis that financial constraints are a major
determinant of hedging.
   3
    A growing literature uses house prices to instrument for the collateral value of firms (see, for example,
Chaney, Sraer, and Thesmar, 2012) and entrepreneurs (see, for example, Adelino, Schoar, and Severino,
2015). For financial institutions, a measure of local house prices in a similar spirit to ours, albeit at a
more aggregated level, is used in several recent studies of the determinants of the supply of bank lending
(see Bord, Ivashina, and Taliaferro (2018), Cuñat, Cvijanović, and Yuan (2018), and Kleiner (2015)).


                                                     2
    We use a triple differences specification to control for differences in lending oppor-
tunities, comparing the effect of treatment across terciles of institutions based on their
exposure to real estate. Treated institutions with higher real estate exposure reduce both
interest rate and foreign exchange hedging differentially more, in fact, by about one half.
We moreover show that for such treated institutions net worth also falls differentially
more, whereas exposures do not change differentially. This suggests that the mechanism
works via net worth as the theory predicts, rather than via lending opportunities or
exposures.
    We do not think that our results are due to alternative hypotheses for several rea-
sons. First, since our hedging variables are scaled by total assets, our results show that
treated institutions hedge less per unit of asset; thus a reduction in lending and assets
itself cannot explain our findings. Second, changes in interest rate risk exposures due to
changes in the lending environment are also not likely to drive our results, as we control
for exposures throughout and show that treatment does not affect exposures; moreover,
our results are similar for foreign exchange hedging, and arguably institutions’ foreign ex-
change exposures are not directly affected by the domestic lending environment. Third,
our results cannot be due to differences in sophistication across institutions or fixed costs
of hedging, since we measure the intensive margin of hedging and not just whether in-
stitutions hedge or not and since the results hold within institutions, that is, controlling
for institution fixed effects. Fourth, we do not think that the reduction of hedging by
financially constrained institutions is evidence of risk shifting, because we find that these
institutions reduce derivatives trading at the same time, suggesting they take less risk, not
more. Furthermore, our results hold for institutions far away from distress, for which risk
shifting incentives should be limited. Finally, we find that it is the net worth of financial
institutions, that is, their economic value, which determines their hedging policy rather
than their regulatory capital. Perhaps surprisingly, regulatory capital does not seem to
be a major determinant of risk management in financial institutions.
    Our paper is related to the literature on interest rate risk in banking. Purnanandam
(2007) shows that the lending policy of financial institutions which engage in derivatives
hedging is less sensitive to interest rate spikes than that of non-user institutions. More
recently, Gomez, Landier, Sraer, and Thesmar (2016) find that the exposure of financial
institutions to interest rate risk predicts the sensitivity of their lending policy to interest
rates. The interaction between monetary policy and banks’ exposure to interest rate risk
is studied theoretically by Di Tella and Kurlat (2018) and empirically by Drechsler, Savov,
and Schnabl (2017). Haddad and Sraer (2018) argue that banks’ balance sheet interest
rate exposures are largely determined by consumers’ demand for loans and deposits.


                                              3
Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl (2018) argue that banks’ interest rate exposures may be
more limited than commonly thought, because deposit rates are more slow moving than
their short-term maturity suggests. Hoffmann, Langfield, Pierobon, and Vuillemey (2018)
study the allocation of interest rate risk in the banking sector, finding heterogenous bank
exposures as well as limited hedging. The optimal management of interest rate risk by
financial institutions is modeled by Vuillemey (2019). Begenau, Piazzesi, and Schneider
(2015) quantify the exposure of financial institutions to interest rate risk. They find
economically large interest rate exposures both in terms of balance sheet exposures and
exposures due to the overall derivatives portfolios, which include trading and market-
making positions. In contrast, our focus is on the dynamic determinants of hedging by
financial institutions based on risk management theory.
    This paper is also related to the literature on corporate risk management more broadly.
Data availability presents a major challenge for inference regarding the determinants of
risk management. Much of the literature is forced to rely on data that includes only
dummy variables on whether firms use any derivatives or not.4 In contrast, our data
provides measures of the intensive margin of hedging, not just of the extensive margin.
Further, much of the literature has access to only cross-sectional data or data with at
best a limited time dimension.5 Instead, we have panel data at the quarterly frequency
for up to 19 years, that is, up to 76 quarters. This enables us to exploit the within-
variation separately from the between-variation. Like us, Rampini, Sufi, and Viswanathan
(2014) have panel data on the intensive margin of hedging, albeit for a much smaller
sample of fuel price hedging by U.S. airlines. Another key difference is the identification
strategy, as we are able to exploit exogenous variation in net worth due to house price
changes. Furthermore, we provide new measures of net hedging and balance sheet risk
exposures for financial institutions which allow better measurement. Finally, we focus on
risk management in the financial intermediary sector, which is of quantitative importance
from a macroeconomic perspective and has received widespread attention both among
researchers and policy makers.
    When describing the basic patterns of risk management, the existing literature has
mostly emphasized a strong positive relation between hedging and the size of firms and
financial institutions.6 From the vantage point of previous theories, this positive relation
   4
     Guay and Kothari (2003) emphasize that such data may be misleading when interpreting the eco-
nomic magnitude of risk management. Their hand-collected data on the size of derivatives hedging
positions suggests that these are quantitatively small for most non-financial firms.
   5
     For example, Tufano (1996)’s noted study of risk management by gold mining firms uses only three
years of data, although the data is on the intensive margin of hedging.
   6
     For firms, see Nance, Smith, and Smithson (1993), Mian (1996), and Géczy, Minton, and Schrand



                                                 4
has long been considered a puzzle (see, for example, Stulz, 1996), because larger firms
are considered less constrained.7 The hypothesis which we test, in contrast, is consis-
tent with the observation that large financial institutions hedge more. Guided by the
dynamic theory of risk management subject to financial constraints, we provide a much
more detailed empirical characterization of the dynamic behavior of hedging by financial
institutions, concluding that the key determinant of hedging is net worth, as measured by
several variables, not size per se. Nonetheless, the fact that hedging is increasing in the
size of financial institutions is noteworthy, since it is contrary to what one might expect
if Too-Big-To-Fail considerations were the main determinant of risk management.
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses the theory of risk management sub-
ject to financial constraints, and formulates our main hypothesis. Section 3 describes the
data and the measurement of interest rate and foreign exchange rate hedging by financial
institutions. Section 4 establishes stylized facts on the relation between hedging and net
worth, and provides our identification strategy and empirical evidence. Section 5 discusses
the external validity and considers alternative hypotheses and Section 6 concludes.


2     Risk management subject to financial constraints
Financial constraints render financial institutions, and firms more broadly, effectively
risk averse, giving them an incentive to hedge. However, financial constraints impede risk
management at the same time. Indeed, when financing and risk management are subject
to the same constraints, Rampini and Viswanathan (2010, 2013) show that a trade-off
arises: financially constrained institutions must choose between using their limited inter-
nal funds to make loans and using them for risk management purposes. In their dynamic
model with collateral constraints, both promises to outside financiers and to hedging
counterparties need to be collateralized; in other words, unencumbered collateral can be
either used to raise more funds to lend out or to back derivatives positions associated
with risk management. Importantly, their model predicts that more constrained financial
institutions hedge less, or not at all, that is, use their limited net worth to make loans
instead of committing scarce internal funds to risk management. The paradox of risk
(1997). For financial institutions, Purnanandam (2007) shows that users of derivatives are larger than
non-users and Ellul and Yerramilli (2013) construct a risk management index to measure the strength and
independence of the risk management function at bank holding companies and find that larger institutions
have a higher risk management index, that is, stronger and more independent risk management.
   7
     Other theories of risk management include managerial risk aversion (see Stulz, 1984) and information
asymmetries between managers and shareholders (see DeMarzo and Duffie (1995) and Breeden and
Viswanathan (2016)); if anything, these theories would predict less hedging by large firms.


                                                   5
management is that while financial constraints are the raison d’être for risk management,
financial constraints are also the main impediment to risk management. As a conse-
quence, the basic prediction of this theory is that less financially constrained institutions
hedge more, that is, measures of hedging and net worth are positively related. This is the
prediction we test in our paper.8 While much of the literature considers risk management
in the corporate context, the same trade-off applies to financial institutions as well (see
Froot and Stein, 1998; Rampini and Viswanathan, 2019).9
    The key endogenous state variable in the model, which determines how financially
constrained institutions are and thus the extent of the trade-off is (economic) net worth.
In the model, net worth is defined as net operating revenues plus assets minus liabilities
plus the payoff of any hedging claims.10 Moreover, all else equal, institutions with higher
net worth in the model also have higher value, deploy more capital (that is, have higher
assets or loans), have higher net income, and pay higher dividends. Thus, value, size, net
income, and dividends are all positively related to net worth. Based on this reasoning, we
use these variables as proxies for net worth, since economic net worth itself is challenging
to measure; in this spirit, we also construct a net worth index which is the first principal
component of these variables, all of which proxy for net worth. In addition, leverage in
the model is decreasing in net worth and, since ratings are decreasing in leverage, we can
use ratings as another proxy for net worth.
    Two features of the model are worth emphasizing. First, in the model, net worth
   8
      Froot, Scharfstein, and Stein (1993) show that financially constrained firms are risk averse in the
amount of internal funds they have, giving them an incentive to hedge, and thus formalize this ratio-
nale for risk management. Their model predicts that financial institutions should completely hedge the
tradable risks they face. Moreover, since risk management should not be a concern for unconstrained
institutions, they conclude that more financially constrained institutions should hedge more. In other
words, their main prediction is that hedging is decreasing in measures of net worth, which is the opposite
of the prediction we test. This difference in predictions is due to the fact that, in their model, hedging is
frictionless and there is no concurrent investment with associated financing needs. In contrast, and con-
sistent with the theory we test, Holmström and Tirole (2000) argue that credit-constrained entrepreneurs
may choose not to buy full insurance against liquidity shocks, that is, incomplete risk management may
be optimal. Mello and Parsons (2000) also argue that financial constraints could constrain hedging.
However, neither of these papers predicts the positive relation between hedging and net worth that we
investigate here.
    9
      Vuillemey (2019) explicitly considers interest rate risk management in a dynamic quantitative model
of financial institutions subject to financial constraints and finds that interest rate risk management is
limited and that the sign of the hedging demand for interest rate risk can vary across institutions, which
is important in interpreting the data below.
   10
      Net worth is also the key state variable in the literature on macro finance models with financial
intermediaries summarized in footnote 1.



                                                     6
is a key determinant of the size of an institution, and thus size is an important proxy
for net worth based on theory. Indeed, size plays a prominent role in most indices of
financial constraints in the literature. That said, differences in productivity and sources
of heterogeneity outside the model could also result in variation in the size of institutions
in the data. To account for variation in size not driven by net worth, we scale some
variables, including value, net income, and dividends by assets. Scaling these variables
by assets would also be appropriate in a constant-returns-to-scale version of the model.
We discuss this in more detail in the next section. Second, the theory implies that
the appropriate state variable is net worth, not cash, liquid assets, or collateral per se.
Financial institutions’ net worth determines their willingness to pledge collateral to back
hedging positions, use it to raise additional funding, or keep it unencumbered. In other
words, available cash and collateral are endogenous. Net worth is defined as total assets,
including the current cash flow, net of liabilities. Thus, it includes unused debt capacity,
such as unused credit lines and unencumbered assets. Importantly, the fact that financial
institutions hold large amounts of liquid assets on average does not imply that they are
unconstrained or that the cost of collateral is low. Indeed, a large part of these securities
are encumbered, for example, pledged as collateral in the repo market; there is thus a
substantial opportunity cost to encumbering additional assets to back derivatives hedging
transactions.
    In the theory, expected productivity, that is, investment or lending opportunities, are
an additional state variable. Lending opportunities increase the marginal value of net
worth in the model, making financial institutions more constrained, reducing hedging all
else equal. Therefore, to isolate the effect of net worth on hedging, it may be important to
control for potential changes in lending opportunities; we take this concern into account in
our empirical strategy. Furthermore, any additional variation in exposures to risk factors
across or within institutions outside the model would also affect the extent of hedging;
we thus control for measures of exposures throughout.
    To sum up, theory predicts a positive relation between hedging and net worth, which
is the state variable affecting the extent of financial constraints. Theory also suggests
several variables, including value, size, net income, and dividends, which can serve as
proxies for net worth. Finally, theory suggests that controlling for lending opportunities
may be important, as is controlling for exposures.




                                             7
3      Data and measurement
This section describes our data and the measurement of financial institutions’ hedging,
exposures, and net worth.


3.1      Sample
We use quarterly data on U.S. bank holding companies (BHCs). Our dataset comprises
balance sheet data from the call reports (form FR Y-9C), market data from CRSP, S&P
credit ratings data from Capital IQ, and mortgage origination data from HMDA. Specific
descriptions for all variables are in Table A1 in Appendix A. Our sample period starts in
1995Q1, when derivatives data becomes available, and extends to 2013Q4. The merged
sample contains 22,723 BHC-quarter observations, that is, roughly 300 observations per
quarter on average, for 76 quarters.11 We focus on BHC-level data due to the availability
of market and credit ratings data. Each BHC controls one or several banks, and for
clarity we refer to BHCs as financial institutions rather than banks.12 That said, similar
results obtain at the level of individual banks as we show in Appendix B.


3.2      Measurement of hedging
We study both interest rate and foreign exchange hedging. We use two measures of
hedging, gross hedging and net hedging. Gross interest rate (IR) hedging by financial
institution i at time t is measured as
                                    Gross notional of interest rate derivatives for hedgingit
         Gross IR hedgingit ≡                                                                 ,            (1)
                                                            Assetsit
where the denominator is total assets and the numerator includes all interest rate deriva-
tives, primarily swaps but also options, futures, and forwards, across all maturities. Gross
foreign exchange (FX) hedging is measured analogously. Importantly, our measures in-
clude only derivatives used for hedging purposes, not trading, as the call reports data
allows us to distinguish between derivatives contracts “held for trading” and “held for
purposes other than trading,” that is, hedging.13
  11
      We drop U.S. branches of foreign financial institutions, because a large part of their hedging activities
is likely unobserved. We also drop the six main dealers (Bank of America, Citigroup, Goldman Sachs,
J.P. Morgan Chase, Morgan Stanley and Wells Fargo), since they engage in extensive market making in
derivatives markets. However, our results are robust to the inclusion of these dealers.
   12
      BHCs can also engage in asset management or securities dealing. BHC-level data consolidates balance
sheets of all entities within a BHC (see Avraham, Selvaggi, and Vickery, 2012).
   13
      Derivatives held for trading include (i) dealer and market making activities, (ii) positions taken with
the intention to resell in the short-term or to benefit from short-term price changes, (iii) positions taken

                                                      8
    Net hedging is the economically relevant variable, and gross hedging might hence be
an imperfect measure, unless institutions’ hedging positions all have the same sign over
the measurement period. While net hedging is not directly reported by institutions, we
propose a new method to infer net interest rate hedging from reported data for BHCs.14
Specifically, consider an institution with a net hedging position at date t with market
value M Vt which is reported in our data. Suppose that between date t and t + 1 the
market value changes by ∆M Vt+1 ≡ M Vt+1 − M Vt whereas the relevant benchmark
interest rate changes by ∆rt+1 ≡ rt+1 − rt . Using the reported data, we infer institutions’
net hedging as
                                               ∆M Vit+1 /Assetsit
                          Net IR hedgingit ≡                      .                      (2)
                                                     ∆rt+1
Intuitively, we infer the sign and magnitude of the hedging position at date t from the
joint dynamics of interest rates and the market value of the portfolio of interest rate
derivatives between t and t + 1: if the market value of the portfolio of interest rate
derivatives goes up when interest rates go up, then the institution has a long position in
interest rate derivatives and vice versa. This measure is an approximation and may not
perfectly capture expiring or new positions with non-zero market value between t and
t + 1, and implicitly assumes a one-factor (the short rate) model of the term structure.
Moreover, we winsorize net hedging at the 5th and 95th percentiles to avoid outliers in
quarters when ∆rt+1 ≈ 0.15 We anticipate here that we find very similar results using
our measures of gross and net hedging throughout.16


3.3     Measurement of net worth
The key state variable in the theory is net worth; the marginal value of net worth reflects
the extent of financial constraints and determines institutions’ risk management policy.
Since net worth as defined in the theory is only imperfectly measurable as discussed in
Section 2, we use two approaches to measurement. Our preferred measure is a “Net Worth
Index” (denoted NWIndex) that we construct, defined as the first principal component
of four variables which are all positively correlated with net worth in theory: market
as an accommodation for customers, and (iv) positions taken to hedge other trading activities.
  14
     Our measurement approach for BHC data is related to that of Begenau, Piazzesi, and Schneider
(2015). In Appendix B we propose a different approach for bank-level data which allows us to infer net
interest rate hedging for a subset of banks that only use interest rate swaps.
  15
     Alternatively, one could drop quarters in which (the absolute value of) the interest rate change is
below the median from the sample; this approach yields comparable results in our baseline specification.
  16
     An analogous measure of net foreign exchange hedging could be constructed using the market value
of foreign exchange derivatives and the trade-weighted effective U.S. dollar exchange rate.



                                                   9
capitalization over total assets, size (log total assets), net income over total assets, and
dividends over total assets. Specifically, our net worth index is:
                            MktCapit                            NetIncit            Divit
 NWIndexit ≡ 0.307 ×                 + 0.149 × Sizeit + 0.272 ×          + 0.272 ×          . (3)
                            Assetsit                            Assetsit           Assetsit

We observe that the net worth index loads most on market capitalization to assets (30.7%)
and least on size (14.9%), in contrast to existing measures of financial constraints in the
literature, including the Whited-Wu Index (see Whited and Wu, 2006), which heavily
load on size.17 Nevertheless, to isolate variation in net worth not driven by size, we
construct a version of the net worth index excluding size (denoted NWIndex (ex size)),
defined as the first principal component of the three variables other than size: market
capitalization over total assets, net income over total assets, and dividends over total
assets. Specifically, our net worth index without size is:
                                          MktCapit           NetIncit            Divit
    NWIndex (ex size)it ≡ 0.359 ×                  + 0.329 ×          + 0.312 ×          .              (4)
                                          Assetsit           Assetsit           Assetsit

The net worth index (ex size) loads roughly equally on the three included measures, and
its correlation with size is only 0.228, that is, considerably lower than for our baseline
net worth index (0.419); we use this version of the net worth index as our second main
measure of net worth. In addition to these two indices of financial constraints, we use
the component variables individually as proxies of net worth; we report results using
market capitalization over total assets (MktCap/Assets) and size in the paper and using
net income over assets (NetInc/Assets), dividends over assets (Div/Assets), log of market
capitalization (MktCap), and credit rating (Rating) in Appendix A. Descriptive statistics
for all net worth variables and the correlation matrix are in Appendix Table A2 and the
time series of the distributions of key variables are plotted in Figure 1 and Appendix
Figure A1.


3.4     Measurement of balance sheet risk exposures
To control for financial institutions’ exposures to interest rate and foreign exchange risk,
we use the following measures. We measure institutions’ balance sheet exposures to
interest rate risk using the one-year maturity gap, defined as

                                                         AIR    IR
                                                          it − Lit
                                    Maturity gapit ≡                   ,                                (5)
                                                            Assetsit
  17
     A version of the Whited-Wu Index, which is estimated for industrial firms, adapted to financial
institutions yields results that are quite similar to the results for size; see the working paper version of
this paper for details.

                                                    10
where AIR         IR
         it and Lit are assets and liabilities that mature or reprice within one year for
institution i at date t. The maturity gap is effectively an institution’s net floating-rate
assets. The change in an institution’s net interest income from assets and liabilities in the
1-year maturity bucket ∆N IIit is approximately proportional to the maturity gap, that is,
∆N IIit ≈ Maturity gapit ×∆rt , where ∆rt is the change in 1-year interest rate. A positive
maturity gap implies that increases in the short rate increase an institution’s net interest
income at the one-year horizon, because the institution holds positive net floating-rate
assets, that is, more interest rate-sensitive assets than liabilities at this maturity. The
maturity gap is used by risk managers in practice (see Saunders and Cornett (2008) and
Mishkin and Eakins (2009)) and is used in earlier research (see Hoffmann, Langfield,
Pierobon, and Vuillemey, 2018).18
    Financial institutions’ assets and liabilities are not broken down by currency. We
therefore use the share of income realized in foreign offices as a proxy for institutions’
exposure to exchange rates, that is, we compute
                                 Fee and interest income from loans in foreign officesit
            FX exposureit ≡                                                              .            (6)
                                                Total interest incomeit

We use these two measures to control for institutions’ risk exposures throughout.


3.5     Descriptive statistics
The descriptive statistics on financial institutions’ risk management and risk exposures are
in Panel A of Table 1. Interest rate and foreign exchange hedging is quite concentrated,
with many institutions not hedging at all. The gross hedging data shows that the median
BHC hedges interest rate risk to a limited extent and does not hedge foreign exchange
risk. Furthermore, conditional on hedging, the magnitude of risk management is relatively
small, except for interest rate hedging in the top decile of the distribution. Therefore,
the level of risk management with derivatives is relatively limited.19
  18
     For bank-level data, one can also construct a measure of the duration gap; see Appendix B.
  19
     From the vantage point of the traditional view of banking as institutions with long-term assets
and short-term liabilities, which suggests a sizeable maturity gap, the level of hedging may hence seem
surprisingly low at first blush; however, recent evidence in Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl (2018) suggests
that the interest-rate sensitivity of deposit rates is quite low in practice, suggesting that deposits are
less short-term than previously thought, and thus the maturity gap financial institutions face may be
considerably lower than the traditional view suggests. Therefore, the limited level of interest rate risk
management may not be so puzzling after all. In any case, the focus of our work is on understanding the
variation in risk management across and within institutions, not the level, although the theory we test
also predicts that the level of hedging, given exposures, may be reduced due to its opportunity cost.



                                                   11
    We emphasize that our data allows us to distinguish between derivatives positions held
for hedging and for trading purposes, and we focus on hedging positions in the bulk of
our paper. Hedging positions are sizable relative to trading positions except in the tail of
the distribution; indeed, trading is even more concentrated than hedging, with more than
75% (90%) of institution-year observations in our data showing no interest rate (foreign
exchange rate) trading.20 Therefore, hedging positions are economically relevant when
compared to trading positions. Our measure of net interest rate hedging and the maturity
gap provide information about the direction of hedging and exposure. To verify that
derivatives positions held for hedging purposes are in fact used for risk management, as
stated, we regress the signed measure of net interest rate hedging on institutions’ signed
maturity gap (see Panel B of Table 1). In specifications with and without institution
fixed effects, we find a negative and statistically significant relation between hedging
and exposure, consistent with these positions being used for risk management. A one
standard deviation increase in the maturity gap reduces the net hedging position by one-
sixth to one-eight of a standard deviation, which is quite sizable keeping in mind that
many institutions do not hedge.21


4      Evidence on hedging and net worth
In this section, we describe the basic stylized facts on the relation between hedging and
net worth and use difference-in-differences and triple differences strategies to show that
net worth causally impacts risk management in financial institutions.


4.1     Stylized facts: Cross-sectional and within evidence
We first document the relation between hedging and net worth across and within financial
institutions. Specifically, we estimate the relation between net worth and hedging using
several specifications: a pooled time-series cross-section specification, a Tobit specifica-
tion, and a specification with institution fixed effects of the form

              Hedgingit = αi + µt + β0 × N etW orthit + β1 × Exposureit + εit ,                          (7)
  20
     In the aggregate, the derivatives trading activities of a few dealers comprise the bulk of gross trading
notionals: In 2013Q4, and including the six main dealers here, the top 5 institutions account for 96.0%
of all positions held for trading, and the top 10 institutions for more than 99.7% of such positions. For
this reason we exclude the six main dealers in our empirical analysis (see footnote 11).
  21
     For bank-level data, Figure B1 in Appendix B shows that the distribution of net hedging is shifted
down substantially for banks with a high maturity gap consistent with risk management.



                                                     12
where Hedgingit and N etW orthit are measured using several variables. All specifications
control for institutions’ exposures (Exposureit ) and include time fixed effects µt to account
for time trends. We cluster standard errors at the institution and quarter level throughout.
We report estimates using the four main measures of net worth in Table 2 and estimates
with the four auxiliary measures of net worth in Appendix Table A3. We scale all variables
by their standard deviation so that the coefficients can be interpreted as the effect of a one
standard deviation change in the explanatory variable in terms of the standard deviation
of the dependent variable.
    Theory predicts that institutions with higher net worth choose to hedge more and that
the larger the exposure in absolute value the larger (in absolute value) hedging should be.
We thus measure hedging either using gross interest rate or foreign exchange hedging or
the absolute value of net interest rate hedging and measure exposure using the absolute
value of the maturity gap or our foreign exchange exposure measure for interest rate and
foreign exchange hedging, respectively.
    In the pooled time-series cross-section specification (essentially, equation (7) without
institution fixed effects), we find a positive and economically and statistically significant
relation between hedging and net worth for all three of our dependent variables (net
interest rate, gross interest rate, and gross foreign exchange hedging) and all four of our
main measures of net worth, except in one case.22 The relation is economically significant:
for example, focusing on our preferred measure, a one standard deviation increase in the
net worth index increases hedging by about one-sixth of a standard deviation, or by
about one third relative to the mean and more than that for foreign exchange hedging.23
Remarkably, the magnitudes are similar across measures of both net and gross interest
rate and gross foreign exchange hedging. The magnitude of the effect varies somewhat
with the measure of net worth; it is a bit smaller for the net worth index (ex size) and the
MktCap/Assets measure and about two to three times larger when net worth is measured
using size.24
    The Tobit specification accounts for the fact that some institutions do not hedge at
all. For this specification, we report marginal effects to make the estimates comparable to
those obtained in the other specifications. The Tobit estimates are remarkably similar to
  22
     The results using the four auxiliary measures are similar, but we discuss these only in cases where
there are differences to our main results that are noteworthy.
  23
     Table 1 reports the mean and standard deviation of the dependent variables, except for the absolute
value of net interest rate hedging, which has a mean of 0.082 and standard deviation of 0.151.
  24
     The estimates of the effect of exposure are positive, as predicted by theory, and statistically sig-
nificant, albeit somewhat less so than our measures of net worth, while the economic magnitudes vary
somewhat depending on the measures used for hedging and net worth.



                                                   13
the ones obtained in the OLS specification, both in terms of magnitudes and significance.
Together these results suggest a basic stylized fact: there is a positive relation between
hedging and net worth among financial institutions in the pooled time-series cross-section
data.
    The results in the pooled data could in part be driven by time-invariant differences
across institutions, such as the business model or sophistication, or by the fixed costs
of setting up a risk management program. The specification with institution fixed ef-
fects, equation (7), isolates within-institution variation; recall that the theory predicts a
positive relation between hedging and net worth within institutions, and not just across
institutions. The within-estimates show a positive and significant relation between hedg-
ing and net worth very similar to the one in the pooled data, albeit of somewhat smaller
magnitude; a one standard deviation increase in the net worth index increases hedging by
about 10%-20% relative to the mean, and an analogous increase in size increases hedging
by substantially more than that. The estimates with fixed effects show that financial
institutions hedge more at times when their net worth is higher, controlling for their
exposure and time trends, although these estimates do not allow a causal interpretation.
    Finally, we show that this basic stylized fact is robust to controlling for two confound-
ing factors. First, one might be concerned that the pattern is entirely driven by the size
of the financial institutions, and that our various net worth measures simply pick up the
correlation with size. In Appendix Table A4, we therefore estimate the main specification,
first excluding the bottom size tercile with net worth measured using the net worth index
(see Panel A) and then with dummy variables for each of the top two terciles of the size
distribution with net worth measured using the net worth index (ex size) (see Panel B).
In the pooled and Tobit specifications, our estimates of the relation between hedging and
net worth are similar to the ones in the main specification albeit somewhat attenuated
when size terciles dummies are included. In the within-institution specification, the rela-
tion is sizable and significant both when we exclude the bottom size tercile (see Panel A)
and when we include size tercile dummies (see Panel B), and the magnitudes are very
similar to the baseline estimates, too. It is worth noting that the size tercile dummies
show substantial variation by size across terciles in the pooled and Tobit specifications,
showing an essentially monotone effect of considerable magnitude especially for the top
tercile. In the within-specifications, the estimates of the size tercile dummies are much
smaller and vary in sign. We emphasize that the theory suggests that size is endogenous
and in turn determined by institutions’ net worth; this implies that controlling for size
directly, as we do with the size tercile dummies here, is not appropriate as it amounts to
over-controlling. In any case, the results corroborate our baseline estimates in our view.


                                             14
    Second, interest rate exposures may not be accurately measured by the maturity
gap. Indeed, recent research by Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl (2018) shows that deposit
rates adjust relatively sluggishly, that is, deposits should not be considered floating rate
liabilities despite their short-term maturity. To address this, in Appendix Table A5 we
estimate the relation between hedging and net worth controlling for institutions’ deposit
share and a measure of the maturity gap which excludes demand deposits, which we refer
to as the “narrow maturity gap” (see Flannery and James (1984) for a similar definition).
We do indeed find that institutions with a higher share of deposits to total assets hedge
less, consistent with the view that deposits reduce net interest rate exposures. That
said, our estimates of the effect of net worth on hedging remain significant and of similar
magnitude to our baseline results.


4.2       Identification: Difference-in-differences estimation
We now turn to our main identification strategy, a difference-in-differences strategy us-
ing a quasi-natural experiment. Specifically, we exploit the large drop in the financial
institutions’ net worth during the global financial crisis as our event of interest. As seen
in Figure 1 and Appendix Figure A1, most net worth measures dropped significantly
during the year 2009. The drop is most striking for net income, indicating that financial
institutions recorded significant losses within a few quarters. However, there is significant
cross-sectional heterogeneity in the extent of the drops in institutions’ net worth, and, as
we show below, this heterogeneity is closely related to drops in house prices at the local
level. The idea behind our quasi-natural experiment is to compare otherwise similar in-
stitutions that differ in terms of the dynamics of local house prices that they face. We use
data from 2005Q1 to 2013Q4 and 2009 as the treatment year, and compare institutions
based on the weighted average drop in house prices they faced in the preceding two years
(that is, in 2007Q1 to 2008Q4).25
    This setup has a number of attractive features. First, real estate loans represent a large
share of institutions’ assets (47% on average, see Appendix Table A2). Second, changes in
house prices have a significant impact on borrowers’ ability to repay mortgages, and thus
on financial institutions’ net worth. Indeed, Bajari, Chu, and Park (2008), Mayer, Pence,
and Sherlund (2009), Demyanyk and Van Hemert (2011), and Palmer (2015) all show that
changes in local house prices were the main driver of mortgage defaults from 2007 onwards.
Third, there is very significant variation in house price dynamics at the local level as we
discuss in more detail below. Fourth, local drops in house prices are unrelated to changes
in interest rates or exchange rates, which could simultaneously induce institutions to
 25
      We provide direct evidence that treatment affects institutions’ net worth significantly in Section 4.5.

                                                     15
adjust their hedging of these risks; indeed, the interest rate environment and foreign
exchange rates are the same nationwide and thus for all institutions, whereas house price
dynamics differed at the local level. Finally, to provide further support for this quasi-
experiment, we decompose institutions net income into several components in Appendix
Figure A2. As seen in the top left panel, net income (a key component of net worth in
the theory) dropped significantly in 2009. This drop is not primarily due to changes in
net interest income (top right panel), but instead can be mostly attributed to provisions
for credit losses, which reduce net income (bottom left panel). These loan loss provisions
in turn are overwhelmingly due to losses on real estate loans (bottom right panel).
    To construct the treatment and control group, we define an institution-level mortgage-
weighted average change in local house prices over 8 quarters between t − 8 and t as
                                                 X               Pz,t − Pz,t−8
                           ∆HouseP riceit ≡            wiz,t−8                 ,                    (8)
                                                  z                  Pz,t−8
where wiz,t−8 is the share of mortgages originated by institution i in ZIP code z, and
Pzt is the house price in ZIP code z at time t. To construct ∆HouseP riceit , we use
data from HMDA on the geographical breakdown of mortgage originations to compute
wiz,t−8 , and Zillow data on house prices for Pzt .26 Institutions that are exposed to larger
drops in house prices experience larger drops in net worth, and we compute the weighted
average by mortgage originations to capture institutions’ overall exposure. We define
the treatment and control group by setting t = 2008Q4, that is, consider the house price
change in 2007 and 2008, ∆HouseP ricei,2008Q4 , using weights wiz,2006Q4 , that is, the share
of mortgage originations in the two preceding years, 2005 and 2006. Institutions with
below-median values of ∆HouseP ricei,2008Q4 are considered treated, while institutions
with above-median values are the control group. The weighted-average change in local
house prices in the treatment group is -21.1% on average (with a median of -18.2%)
compared to -6.2% on average (with a median of -4.1%) in the control group.
    We estimate the following difference-in-differences specification

          Hedgingit = αi + µt + β0 × P ostt × T reatedi + β1 × Exposureit + εit ,                   (9)

where P ostt equals one after 2009Q1 and T reatedi equals one for treated institutions.
  26
     Zillow data is at the ZIP-code level, while HMDA gives mortgage originations by census tract, which
we aggregate to the ZIP-code level. We follow the use of HMDA data by Loutskina and Strahan (2011).
Since the data contains only loan originations, not the stock of mortgages by ZIP code, we construct
wiz,t−8 using the share of mortgage originations in the two years preceding the house price change, that
is, in quarters t − 15 to t − 8. Similar results obtain when using a deposit-weighted average change in
house prices using ZIP-code level deposit data from the FDIC; see the working paper version of this
paper, Rampini, Viswanathan, and Vuillemey (2017).

                                                  16
Furthermore, all our specifications include a time-varying measure of balance sheet expo-
sure to either interest rate or foreign exchange risk.27
    The descriptive statistics for the sample used in our difference-in-differences specifica-
tion are reported in Panel A of Appendix Table A6; we restrict the sample to institutions
that hedge at least once before the treatment. It is worth noting that in this sample all
but 14% of the institution-quarter observations show strictly positive hedging. The base-
line estimation results are in Panel A of Table 3. Across all three measures of hedging, we
find that risk management drops for treated institutions relative to control institutions.
The drop is statistically significant in all cases, and also economically significant. Indeed,
net interest rate hedging drops by about one-sixth of a standard deviation, while gross
interest rate hedging drops by about one-third of a standard deviation. The drop in
foreign exchange hedging is also significant, albeit of smaller magnitude (about one-tenth
of a standard deviation). Relative to the mean, both gross interest rate and gross foreign
exchange hedging drop by one half or more for treated institutions, while net interest rate
hedging drops somewhat less.28


4.3     Identification: Triple differences by real estate exposure
A natural question is whether our difference-in-differences results are driven by differences
in lending opportunities between treatment and control institutions. One could argue that
in areas where house prices drop more, lending opportunities may also be lower, and so
treatment may affect hedging not just through its effect on financial institutions’ net
worth, but also through its effect on lending opportunities or interest rate exposures.
    Below we propose a triple differences strategy to address this concern, but before
doing so, we emphasize several aspects that limit its force. First, the hedging variables are
scaled by assets and thus the level of lending itself cannot be driving the results. Second,
we control for measures of exposure in our difference-in-differences specification directly.
Third, it is unlikely that local house prices affect foreign lending opportunities, and the
fact that we find similar results for foreign exchange hedging therefore suggests that the
mechanism works through net worth not through lending opportunities or exposures.
Finally, while the Rampini and Viswanathan (2013) model suggests that both net worth
and investment opportunities are state variables, a drop in investment opportunities itself
  27
     We control for institutions’ risk exposure, but similar results obtain without such controls; see the
working paper version, Rampini, Viswanathan, and Vuillemey (2017).
  28
     Appendix Table A6 reports the mean and standard deviation of the dependent variables in the
sample used here, except for the absolute value of net interest rate hedging, which has a mean of 0.223
and standard deviation of 0.240.



                                                   17
reduces the opportunity cost of hedging, and thus predicts an increase in hedging, that
is, the opposite sign of the net worth effect. However, if the investment opportunity
mechanism were present, it would affect the magnitude of the estimates and could even
lead to finding no effect at all. Our estimation strategy here allows us to tackle this as
well.
    Specifically, to further address this concern, we use the following triple differences
approach: we estimate the differential effect of treatment across institutions that vary
in terms of their real estate exposure. We group institutions in terciles by the ratio of
real estate loans to total assets in 2008Q4.29 As before, we define the treatment group as
institutions with below median weighted average house prices change, but now interact
the treatment variable with dummy variables based on whether institutions are in the
middle or top tercile by real estate exposure. Our identifying assumption is that the
treatment affects the lending opportunities of all treated institutions similarly, but affects
the net worth of treated institutions with higher real estate exposure of existing loans
differentially more. In sum, we estimate the following triple differences specification

Hedgingit = αi + µt + β0 × P ostt × T reatedi + β0,M idRE × P ostt × T reatedi × M idREi
                  + β0,HighRE × P ostt × T reatedi × HighREi + β1 × Exposureit
                  + β2,M idRE × P ostt × M idREi + β2,HighRE × P ostt × HighREi + εit , (10)

where M idREi and HighREi equal one for institutions in the middle and top tercile by
real estate exposure in 2008Q4.
    The triple differences estimates are reported in Panel A of Table 3. Overall, we
find that the effect of the treatment is concentrated among institutions with higher real
estate exposure of existing loans, consistent with the prediction of the theory. There is
no significant drop in hedging for institutions with low exposure to real estate. There
is a more substantial, albeit not typically statistically significant drop in hedging for
institutions in the middle real estate exposure tercile. For institutions in the top tercile
of real estate exposure, the drop in hedging is statistically significant and economically
large, dropping by about one third of a standard deviation for both interest rate and
foreign exchange hedging; relative to the mean, such institutions cut interest rate hedging
by roughly one half and foreign exchange hedging by even more. We observe that the
point estimates decrease monotonically with real estate exposure for all three measures of
hedging. These results are consistent with the view that the drop in house prices affects
  29
    The ratio of real estate loans to total assets in 2008Q4 varies considerably across the three terciles
with a within-tercile average of 36.6%, 51.3%, and 64.9% (within-tercile median of 38.9%, 51.7%, and
63.3%), respectively.


                                                   18
hedging via the net worth of financial institutions rather than lending opportunities or
exposure.


4.4    Estimation with propensity score matching
The treatment and control group may differ in terms of other characteristics that may
be relevant for their risk management policy after 2009. To analyze this, we compare
the characteristics of the treatment and control group one year before the treatment
(2008Q1) using a two-sample t test in columns (1) to (3) in Panel B of Appendix Table A6.
While the two groups are not statistically different along some important characteristics,
such as size, maturity gap, and deposits to assets, they do differ along other dimensions
such as both versions of the net worth index, market capitalization to assets, and loans
to assets. We therefore use a propensity score matching estimator to make sure that
differences in hedging between the treatment and control group are not driven by pre-
treatment differences in characteristics. We match each institution in the treatment
group to an institution in the control group based on all characteristics in Panel B of
Appendix Table A6, allowing for control institutions to be matched multiple times. After
matching, no significant differences between treatment and control institutions remain;
see columns (4) to (6) in Panel B of Appendix Table A6. We then repeat the difference-in-
differences and triple differences estimation using the propensity-score matched treatment
and control groups.
    The propensity-score matched estimates are reported in Panel B of Table 3. Over-
all, the propensity-score matched results are quite similar to the ones in the baseline
specifications, both in terms of statistical significance and economic magnitude. Indeed,
many of the propensity-score matched estimates are a bit larger in magnitude (in ab-
solute value) and slightly more statistically significant; moreover, the triple differences
estimates are again monotone across terciles by real estate exposure and the differential
effects for the middle and top tercile by real estate exposure are now all significant. In-
terest rate and foreign exchange hedging drop significantly after 2009, and the drop is
most substantial for institutions with high real estate exposure. Relative to the mean,
the estimated effect of treatment, and the differential effect of treatment on institutions
with high real estate exposure, are again on the order of one half or more. All told, the
propensity-score matched findings confirm our results in Panel A of Table 3 and lead us
to conclude that drops in institutions’ net worth have a negative causal effect on financial
risk management.




                                            19
4.5        Effect of treatment on net worth and exposure measures
The mechanism we investigate works via financial institutions’ net worth, not risk ex-
posures. In our difference-in-differences and triple differences specifications, we define
treatment in terms of the mortgage-weighted average house price change, arguing that
treatment affects the net worth of financial institutions, but note that we do not use mea-
sures of net worth in the definition of the treatment and control group in any way. We
now provide direct evidence that the treatment affects financial institutions’ net worth
significantly, but does not have a significant impact on exposures.
    We repeat the difference-in-differences and triple differences estimation for net worth.
All four of our main measures of net worth drop economically and statistically significantly
for treated institutions relative to control institutions, and differentially so for institutions
in the top tercile by real estate exposure; see Panel A of Table 4.30 These results justify
our interpretation of the treatment as a substantial shock to net worth.
    Two aspects of these estimates are worth noting. First, the effect of treatment on
net worth is economically and statistically significant even for treated institutions in
the bottom tercile by real estate exposure, while we did not find a significant effect of
treatment on hedging among such institutions (see Table 3). This may be a result of the
countervailing force due to the effect of treatment on lending opportunities. In contrast,
the differential effect for institutions in the top tercile by real estate exposure is not
affected by this and thus controls for changes in lending opportunities. Second, while the
effect of treatment on size is substantial, note that the within-R2 in the specifications
using size are much smaller than in the other three specifications, and thus the effect of
treatment on size does not explain much of the within-variation in institutions’ size.
    To understand how treatment affects exposure, we repeat the difference-in-differences
and triple differences estimation for our exposure measures; see Panel B of Table 4.
Treatment affects neither the maturity gap nor the foreign exchange exposure significantly.
Nor is there a differential effect on institutions across real estate exposure terciles; in fact,
the estimates of the triple interaction terms are not just insignificant, the point estimates
are close to zero. It is worth noting that all our specifications control for exposure, but
it is nevertheless reassuring to know that treatment does not seem to impact exposure
in any case. Based on these estimates, we conclude that the evidence is more consistent
with the net worth mechanism.
  30
       Appendix Table A7 reports similar results for the four auxiliary net worth measures.




                                                    20
4.6     Placebo tests and alternative definition of treatment
A key identifying assumption in difference-in-differences estimation is the parallel trends
assumption. Trends in the outcome variable must be the same in the treatment and in
the control group. We provide supporting evidence for this assumption in Table 5 by
including treatment-year dummies during the pre-treatment period for our benchmark
specification. Across all three hedging variables, we find no significant differences in trends
during pre-treatment years. Instead, hedging in the treatment and control groups diverge
significantly only from 2009 onwards. Figure 2 illustrates the parallel trends before 2009
and the effect of treatment for both interest rate and foreign exchange hedging. Therefore,
this key identifying assumption seems valid.
    The evolution of house prices is significantly affected by housing supply elasticity
which in turn is determined largely by geography. This suggests an alternative definition
of treatment in terms of the weighted average housing supply elasticity which varies
across financial institutions depending on where they lend. This alternative definition of
treatment also avoids using house prices altogether, which might themselves be affected
by the credit supply of the banking sector.
    For each institution, we compute a measure of the mortgage-weighted average housing
supply elasticity using data on the housing supply elasticity at the Metropolitan Statisti-
cal Area (MSA) level from Saiz (2010).31 We use HMDA data on mortgage originations
aggregated to the MSA level to construct the institution-specific mortgage-weighted av-
erage MSA-level housing supply elasticity it ≡ m wim,t−8 m , where m is the housing
                                                    P

supply elasticity in MSA m and wim,t−8 is the share of mortgage originations by institu-
tion i in MSA m in the two years preceding time t − 8, that is, quarters t − 15 to t − 8;
specifically, since the treatment year is 2009 and t = 2008Q4, we use data from 2005Q1
to 2006Q4 to compute the weights as before.32
    We define the treatment (control) group as institutions below (above) the median
in terms of mortgage-weighted average housing supply elasticity. The mortgage-weighted
average housing supply elasticity in the treatment group is 1.54 on average (with a median
of 1.56) compared to 3.18 on average (with a median of 3.19) in the control group;
thus, the elasticity is about half in the treatment group.33 Institutions in the treatment
  31
     This measure, available for 269 MSAs, is constructed using satellite-generated data on terrain ele-
vation and on the presence of water bodies, and is purely cross-sectional, that is, has no within-MSA
variation over time.
  32
     The construction of the mortgage-weighted average housing supply elasticity follows the construction
of the mortgage-weighted average change in house prices; see footnote 26 for details.
  33
     The average drop in house prices varies substantially across the treatment and control group defined
using housing supply elasticity: the average of the institution-level mortgage-weighted average house


                                                   21
group are more likely to face large house prices drops during the treatment period. The
interpretation of this pseudo-natural experiment is that areas in which the housing supply
is inelastic are subject to larger house price drops during the treatment period, which
affects the net worth of financial institutions which operate in these areas, especially
ones with high real estate exposure.34 We stress that the variation in mortgage-weighted
average housing supply elasticity across financial institutions is largely determined by
geography and not the interest rate or foreign exchange environment.
    We repeat our main difference-in-differences and triple differences estimation using
the alternative definition of treatment and obtain similar results overall, both in the
baseline specification and in the specification with propensity score matching; see Table 6.
In the difference-in-differences specification, we obtain a negative estimate for all three
hedging measures, which is statistically significant in four out of six cases. In the triple
differences specification, the drops in hedging are concentrated among institutions in
the middle and top tercile by real estate exposure, and are monotone in real estate
exposure in the estimation with propensity score matching. The economic magnitude and
statistical significance are somewhat smaller than our baseline results, probably due to
the higher level of aggregation at the MSA instead of the ZIP-code level. The results using
the definition of treatment based on housing supply elasticity corroborate our previous
findings.


4.7     Bank-level evidence
Our baseline results use data on bank holding companies (BHCs), but we obtain rather
similar results using data on individual banks; see Appendix B.35 The bank-level data
has two advantages in terms of measurement. First, for the subset of banks which uses
only interest rate swaps, we can construct an alternative measure of net interest rate
price change is -16.1% and -6.5% in the treatment and control group, respectively. The difference in the
average house price change between treatment and control group defined using housing supply elasticity
is about two thirds of the difference when treatment is defined directly in terms of house prices.
   34
      While we acknowledge that housing supply elasticity may be an even better instrument for the re-
sponse of house prices to positive shocks than negative shocks, due to construction activity and the
irreversibility of housing investment, one would nevertheless expect house prices to drop significantly
more in low housing supply elasticity areas in response to negative shocks and indeed we find a substan-
tial difference in house price changes in the treatment and control group defined using housing supply
elasticity; see the previous footnote.
   35
      Our data shows that hedging occurs mostly at the bank level. Aggregating derivative exposures of
individual banks within each top-tier BHC (that is, BHC that is not owned by another sample BHC),
we find that these exposures represent on average 88.5% of the exposure reported by the BHC.



                                                  22
hedging, essentially the difference between pay-fixed and pay-floating swaps.36 Despite
its different construction, the estimates we obtain using this measure of net interest rate
hedging at the bank level are remarkably similar in magnitude and significance to the
ones we obtain using our other measure of net interest rate hedging at the BHC level.
Moreover, there is an economically and statistically significant relation between these two
measures of net interest rate hedging, suggesting that our main measure of net interest
rate hedging is indeed a credible proxy; see Panel B of Appendix Table B1. Second,
bank-level data also allows the construction of an alternative measure of interest rate risk
exposure, the duration gap, which is essentially the difference between the duration of
assets and liabilities; in contrast, the maturity gap is essentially the difference between
floating-rate assets and liabilities, that is, uses only the composition of the balance sheet in
terms of claims with effective maturity less than one year. Using either measure produces
quite similar results.
    In Appendix Table B2 we provide bank-level evidence on the cross-sectional and
within-institution stylized facts (Panel A) and the difference-in-differences and triple dif-
ferences specifications for hedging (Panel B), net worth (Panel C), and risk exposures
(Panel D). The bank-level cross-sectional and within patterns again show an econom-
ically and statistically significant relation between hedging and net worth. Treatment
results in a significant drop in interest rate and foreign exchange hedging, which is differ-
entially larger for high real estate exposure banks; measures of net worth drop similarly,
especially for high real estate exposure institutions, whereas risk exposures are not af-
fected significantly. The magnitudes of the estimates are very similar to those obtained
in BHC-level data. The bank-level evidence thus further corroborates the BHC-level
findings.


5      External validity and alternative hypotheses
We now show the external validity of our results on the effect of net worth on hedging
with an instrumental variables approach using house prices. We also consider two alter-
native hypotheses, namely that the results we find are driven by institutions’ risk shifting
behavior or their concern about regulatory capital.
  36
   For this subset of banks, the average ratio of (the absolute value of) net hedging to gross hedging is
above 90%, suggesting that our gross hedging measure is a good proxy for net hedging.




                                                   23
5.1    Hedging and net worth: Instrumental variable estimation
The premise of our difference-in-differences and triple differences approach is that drops in
house prices result in drops in financial institutions’ net worth during the global financial
crisis. Based on this reasoning, we can use changes in house prices as an instrument for
net worth in a instrumental variable (IV) strategy more generally, that is, using data
from the full sample period.
    We use the institution-level mortgage-weighted average change in local house prices
defined in (8) to instrument for institutions’ net worth. Our first-stage regression is

         N etW orthit = φi + λt + γ0 × ∆HouseP riceit + γ1 × Exposureit + νit ,         (11)

and our second-stage regression,

            Hedgingit = αi + µt + β0 × N etW
                                          \  orthit + β1 × Exposureit + εit ,           (12)

where N etW
          \   orthit is the instrumented net worth obtained from the first stage.
    We estimate the first-stage regressions for all net worth measures, and the second-
stage regressions whenever the instrument turns out to be valid in the first stage. Table 7
reports the results for our four main net worth measures, but we find similar results for
the four auxiliary net worth measures (see Appendix Table A8). Among our four main
net worth measures, house prices are a valid instrument in the first stage for three of the
measures, the net worth index, the net worth index (ex size), and market capitalization
to assets, with both statistically significant estimates and a high F -statistic (well above
the conventional threshold of 10 suggested by Stock and Yogo (2005)). In the second
stage, instrumented net worth has a positive effect on interest rate hedging, across all
specifications, which is statistically significant for net interest rate hedging and, in some
specifications, for gross interest rate hedging. The magnitudes are slightly larger than
with OLS estimation, as a one standard deviation increase in net worth increases hedging
by one-sixth to one-fourth of a standard deviation. Unlike in the case of interest rate
hedging, the second stage regressions produce insignificant results for foreign exchange
hedging. Nevertheless, the IV results overall suggest that net worth has a causal effect
on hedging not just during the financial crisis, but throughout the entire sample period.


5.2    Hedging before distress
Another way to study the effect of the net worth of financial institutions on their risk
management outside the financial crisis is by focusing on distress events over the entire
sample period. Institutions in distress are severely constrained and thus theory predicts

                                             24
a large reduction in hedging for such institutions. Since distress is typically the result of
credit losses and not primarily due to derivative exposures, these events provide plausible
within-institution variation in net worth, albeit we do not observe the specific reason for
distress.
    We define a distress event as an institution’s exit from the sample with a ratio of
market capitalization to total assets below 4% in the last quarter in which the institution
is in the sample.37 We restrict the sample to institutions that hedge in at least one
quarter, resulting in a sample with 53 distress events. We study the extent of hedging in
the eight quarters leading up to distress by estimating
                                                        8
                                                        X
                           Hedgingit = αi + µt +              γj × Di,τ −j + εit ,                   (13)
                                                        j=0

where τ is the quarter in which institution i exits the sample in distress and Di,τ −j a
dummy variable equal to 1 for distressed institutions at each date τ − j ∈ {τ − 8, ..., τ }
and 0 otherwise. This specification isolates within-institution variation and the estimation
uses the whole sample, both distressed institutions and institutions that are not distressed.
    The estimates in Table 8 show that both net and gross interest rate hedging drop
significantly several quarters before distress. The magnitude of the effect is economically
significant, as estimated coefficients imply that institutions cut hedging by about one-
half in distress. Foreign exchange hedging also drops, but not statistically significantly
so, perhaps due to the fact that we have 5 or less distressed institutions that engage in
foreign exchange hedging at all. Note that there are no significant pre-distress patterns
in exposure. Overall, these results suggest that distressed institutions, which are likely
severely constrained, cut hedging substantially.38


5.3     Alternative hypothesis: Risk shifting
An alternative interpretation of the reduction in hedging we find is that it is evidence of
risk shifting. Indeed, Jensen and Meckling (1976) argue that due to limited liability the
  37
      There are several reasons why financial institutions exit the sample, including mergers and acquisi-
tions or failures. The reason for exiting the sample is obtained from the National Information Center
(NIC) transformation data. Distinguishing between actual failures and distress episodes leading to ac-
quisitions is, however, of limited interest for our purposes. Mergers and acquisitions are in fact often
arranged before FDIC assistance is provided and the institution actually fails (see Granja, Matvos, and
Seru, 2017). Of the events we consider, 94.3% involve mergers or purchases before the entity actually
fails, and the others are failures in which FDIC assistance is provided.
   38
      Since hedging is scaled by total assets, a drop in institution size before distress would increase
hedging, all else equal, and thus cannot explain these patterns.


                                                   25
payoffs of equityholders are convex, at least close to distress, and they thus may benefit
from an increase in volatility. Leland (1998) shows that this may induce equityholders to
reduce hedging as they approach default.
    While we cannot rule out that this alternative hypothesis also plays a role, there
are several aspects of the data that we think suggest that financial constraints, not risk
shifting, explain our results. First, risk shifting by institutions should primarily be a
concern close to distress. To investigate this, we repeat our baseline cross-sectional and
within-institution specifications excluding the bottom tercile of institutions in terms of
the pertinent measure of net worth; see Appendix Table A9. For both interest rate and
foreign exchange hedging and all our main net worth variables we find estimates that
are comparable to our baseline results using the full sample in Table 2, both in terms of
magnitude and significance, although the within-institution estimates are attenuated in
some specifications. For three of the four measures of net worth, the pooled and Tobit
estimates when we exclude observations for institutions close to distress are actually larger
in magnitude than in the full sample. Clearly, there is a significant relation between
hedging and net worth even well away from distress, consistent with the predictions of
the theory based on financial constraints.
    The risk shifting hypothesis predicts that institutions close to distress take more risks.
While a reduction in hedging with financial derivatives could be consistent with that
prediction, another prediction of this hypothesis is that institutions close to distress in fact
explicitly take more risk, for example, by increasing derivatives trading. In contrast, the
theory of risk management subject to financial constraints would make no such prediction,
and, to the extent that trading activities also require net worth, might in fact predict that
distressed institutions reduce trading as well, the opposite prediction of the risk shifting
hypothesis.
    We use data on trading of interest rate and foreign exchange derivatives by finan-
cial institutions to investigate this prediction. Table 9 reports estimates for our baseline
cross-sectional and within specifications using interest rate and foreign exchange trading
as dependent variables. We find a positive, mostly statistically significant and econom-
ically sizable relation between trading and net worth, in both pooled OLS and Tobit
specifications. In the within-specifications, we find a positive relation for interest rate
trading, while the results are more mixed for foreign exchange trading, possibly because
of the limited number of non-zero observations for foreign exchange trading. That said,
we conclude that the relation between trading and net worth is positive in most cases.
Since risk shifting should be more pertinent near distress, we also study financial insti-
tutions’ trading behavior before distress along the lines of the analysis of hedging before


                                              26
distress in Section 5.2. We find that both interest rate and foreign exchange trading by
financial institutions drop before distress, albeit only interest rate trading significantly
so; see Table 8. Overall, the derivatives trading behavior of financial institutions does
not show any evidence of risk shifting in our view.
    While our evidence does not speak to whether distressed institutions engage in risk
shifting in other ways, the evidence on hedging behavior away from distress and derivatives
trading suggests that hedging policy is driven by financial constraints, not risk shifting.39


5.4      Alternative hypothesis: Regulatory capital
An additional alternative explanation is that the positive relation between hedging and net
worth is driven not by economic measures of net worth, which we use, but by regulatory
capital. If financial institutions’ behavior is determined by regulatory capital instead of
net worth, then the positive relation between hedging and net worth might spuriously
arise due to a positive relation between net worth and regulatory capital. That said, if
regulators are concerned about regulatory capital, they might require more hedging when
regulatory capital is low, which would predict a negative relation between hedging and
regulatory capital.
    We consider two measures of regulatory capital, regulatory capital to assets and Tier 1
capital to risk-weighted assets; these two measures are very highly correlated with each
other, but the correlation with our net worth measures are remarkably low and in several
cases negative (see Appendix Table A1 for variable definitions and Panel B of Appendix
Table A2 for correlations). The behavior of net worth and regulatory capital over time is
also strikingly different: while most measures of net worth drop quite dramatically during
the financial crisis, both measures of regulatory capital barely drop and then substantially
increase following the crisis (see Appendix Figure A1). Therefore, it is unlikely that
the variation we pick up using net worth measures arises spuriously from a correlation
with regulatory capital. Nevertheless, we repeat our baseline cross-sectional and within
specifications using the two measures of regulatory capital as the independent variable;
see Panel A of Appendix Table A10. We find a relatively weak relation between hedging
and regulatory capital; the results are mixed in terms of sign, with most estimates having
a negative sign.
  39
    Landier, Sraer, and Thesmar (2015) report evidence of risk shifting in the lending behavior of a large
subprime mortgage originator in distress; in contrast, Andrade and Kaplan (1998) “find no evidence
that the distressed firms engage in asset substitution of any kind” and Rauh (2009) concludes that the
“incentive to limit costly financial distress plays a considerably larger role than risk shifting in explaining
variation in pension fund investment policy among firms in the United States.”



                                                      27
    In Panel B of Appendix Table A10 we report Davidson and MacKinnon (1981) J-
tests for model specification, testing specifications with economic measures of net worth
against alternative specifications with regulatory capital. The residuals of the regression of
hedging on regulatory capital are regressed on measures of net worth and vice versa, since
such tests of model specification have no natural null hypothesis (see, for example, Greene,
2012). We report t-statistics for the second-stage regression of the test. While our model
using net worth is not typically rejected in favor of the alternative model using regulatory
capital, the model using regulatory capital is rejected in favor of our specification with
economic net worth in all but two cases. Therefore, the evidence suggests that regulatory
capital is not a major determinant of hedging by financial institutions.


6     Conclusion
We present evidence that financial institutions with higher net worth hedge more. There
is a strong positive relation between hedging of both interest rate and foreign exchange
risk and net worth among financial institutions; this relation obtains both in the cross-
section and within institutions over time – a new and robust stylized fact. We use a
difference-in-differences and triple differences specification for identification, exploiting
net worth shocks arising from drops in house prices. In the difference-in-differences spec-
ification, we find that treated institutions whose net worth drops due to such shocks
reduce their hedging in an economically and statistically significant way relative to oth-
erwise similar control institutions; indeed, treated institutions cut hedging by as much
as one half. Using a triple differences specification, we find that the effect of such shocks
is differentially larger among institutions in the top tercile by real estate exposure, sug-
gesting the mechanism works through net worth rather than lending opportunities. This
causal effect of net worth on hedging can be explained by the theory of risk management
under financial constraints of Rampini and Viswanathan (2010, 2013). We conclude that
financing needs associated with hedging are a substantial barrier to risk management for
financial institutions.
    Auxiliary evidence suggests that the relation between hedging and net worth is not
due to alternative hypotheses. Our results are not due to differences in sophistication
or fixed costs of establishing a hedging program, since they hold at the intensive mar-
gin and controlling for institution fixed effects. Moreover, we control for risk exposures
throughout, implying that heterogeneity in risk exposures is not the driver of our re-
sults. Changes in lending opportunities across institutions are also unlikely to drive our
results, given our triple differences estimation results and since foreign exchange hedging


                                             28
also drops following net worth shocks, and differentially so for institutions with high real
estate exposure. We do not think that our results are due to more constrained financial
institutions engaging in risk shifting using derivatives for several reasons: first, the results
obtain even after we exclude institution-year observations in which institutions’ net worth
is relatively low and they hence may be closer to distress; second, we find a strong posi-
tive relation between trading and net worth. Finally, there is no strong relation between
hedging and regulatory capital, suggesting that economic measures of net worth, rather
than regulatory capital, explain the hedging behavior of financial institutions.
    Understanding the determinants of risk management of financial institutions is of
genuine importance due to their central and quantitatively significant role in the macroe-
conomy. Our evidence suggests that financial constraints are a key impediment to risk
management by financial institutions. Limited risk management leaves financial insti-
tutions, especially financially constrained ones, exposed to changes in interest rates and
other risks, and thus affects the distribution of risk exposures with potentially significant
consequences for the effects of monetary, financial, and macroeconomic shocks. There-
fore, our findings are also significant from a monetary policy as well as a macro-prudential
perspective.




                                              29
References
Adelino, M., A. Schoar, and F. Severino (2015). House prices, collateral and self-
 employment. Journal of Financial Economics 117, 288–306.
Andrade, G. and S. N. Kaplan (1998). How costly is financial (not economic) distress?
 Evidence from highly leveraged transactions that became distressed. Journal of Fi-
 nance 53, 1443–1493.
Avraham, D., P. Selvaggi, and J. Vickery (2012). A structural view of U.S. bank holding
  companies. FRBNY Economic Policy Review June, 65–81.
Bajari, P., C. S. Chu, and M. Park (2008). An empirical model of subprime mortgage
  default from 2000 to 2007. NBER Working Paper 14625 .
Begenau, J., M. Piazzesi, and M. Schneider (2015). Banks’ risk exposures. NBER Working
  Paper 21334 .
Bernanke, B. and M. Gertler (1989). Agency costs, net worth and business fluctuations.
  American Economic Review 79, 14–31.
Bernanke, B. and M. Gertler (1995). Inside the black box: The credit channel of monetary
  policy transmission. Journal of Economic Perspectives 9, 27–48.
Bord, V. M., V. Ivashina, and R. D. Taliaferro (2018). Large banks and small firm lending.
  NBER Working Paper 25184 .
Breeden, D. and S. Viswanathan (2016). Why do firms hedge? An asymmetric informa-
  tion model. Journal of Fixed Income 25, 7–25.
Brunnermeier, M. K. and Y. Sannikov (2014). A macroeconomic model with a financial
  sector. American Economic Review 104, 379–421.
Chaney, T., D. Sraer, and D. Thesmar (2012). The collateral channel: How real estate
 shocks affect corporate investment. American Economic Review 102, 2381–2409.
Chodorow-Reich, G. (2014). The employment effects of credit market disruptions: Firm-
 level evidence from the 2008-9 financial crisis. Quarterly Journal of Economics 129,
 1–59.
Cuñat, V., D. Cvijanović, and K. Yuan (2018). Within-bank spillovers of real estate
 shocks. Review of Corporate Finance Studies 7, 157–193.
Davidson, R. and J. G. MacKinnon (1981). Several tests for model specification in the
 presence of alternative hypotheses. Econometrica 49, 781–793.
DeMarzo, P. and D. Duffie (1995). Corporate incentives for hedging and hedge accounting.
  Review of Financial Studies 8, 743–777.
Demyanyk, Y. and O. Van Hemert (2011). Understanding the subprime mortgage crisis.

                                           30
  Review of Financial Studies 24, 1848–1880.
Di Tella, S. and P. Kurlat (2018). Why are banks exposed to monetary policy? Working
  paper.
Drechsler, I., A. Savov, and P. Schnabl (2017). The deposit channel of monetary policy.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 132, 1819–1876.
Drechsler, I., A. Savov, and P. Schnabl (2018). Banking on deposits: Maturity transfor-
  mation without interest rate risk. NBER Working Paper 24582 .
Ellul, A. and V. Yerramilli (2013). Stronger risk controls lower risk: Evidence from U.S.
  bank holding companies. Journal of Finance 68, 1757–1803.
English, W. B., S. J. Van den Heuvel, and E. Zakrajsek (2018). Interest rate risk and
  bank equity valuations. Journal of Monetary Economics 98, 80–97.
Flannery, M. J. and C. M. James (1984). Market evidence on the effective maturity of
  bank assets and liabilities. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 16, 435–445.
Froot, K. A., D. S. Scharfstein, and J. C. Stein (1993). Risk management: Coordinating
  corporate investment and financing policies. Journal of Finance 48, 1629–1658.
Froot, K. A. and J. C. Stein (1998). Risk management, capital budgeting and capital
  structure policy for financial institutions: An integrated approach. Journal of Financial
  Economics 47, 55–82.
Géczy, C., B. A. Minton, and C. Schrand (1997). Why firms use currency derivatives.
 Journal of Finance 52, 1323–1354.
Gertler, M. and S. Gilchrist (1994). Monetary policy, business cycles, and the behavior
 of small manufacturing firms. Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 309–340.
Gertler, M. and N. Kiyotaki (2010). Financial intermediation and credit policy in business
 cycle analysis. In B. M. Friedman and M. Woodford (Eds.), Handbook of Monetary
 Economics, pp. 547–599. Elsevier.
Gomez, M., A. Landier, D. Sraer, and D. Thesmar (2016). Banks’ exposure to interest-
 rate risk and the transmission of monetary policy. Working paper.
Granja, J., G. Matvos, and A. Seru (2017). Selling failed banks. Journal of Finance 72,
  1723–1784.
Greene, W. H. (2012). Econometric Analysis (7th ed.). Pearson.
Guay, W. and S. Kothari (2003). How much do firms hedge with derivatives? Journal of
 Financial Economics 70, 423–461.
Haddad, V. and D. Sraer (2018). The banking view of bond risk premia. Working paper.
Hoffmann, P., S. Langfield, F. Pierobon, and G. Vuillemey (2018). Who bears interest

                                            31
  rate risk? Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Holmström, B. and J. Tirole (1997). Financial intermediation, loanable funds, and the
  real sector. Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 663–691.
Holmström, B. and J. Tirole (2000). Liquidity and risk management. Journal of Money
  Credit and Banking 32, 295–319.
Jensen, M. and W. Meckling (1976). Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency
  costs and ownership structure. Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305–360.
Jiménez, G., S. Ongena, J.-L. Peydró, and J. Saurina (2012). Credit supply and monetary
  policy: Identifying the bank balance-sheet channel with loan applications. American
  Economic Review 102, 2301–2326.
Kashyap, A. K. and J. C. Stein (2000). What do a million observations on banks say
 about the transmission of monetary policy? American Economic Review 90, 407–428.
Kleiner, K. (2015). House price contagion: Evidence from bank branching networks.
  Working Paper.
Landier, A., D. Sraer, and D. Thesmar (2015). The risk-shifting hypothesis: Evidence
  from subprime originations. Working paper.
Leland, H. E. (1998). Agency costs, risk management, and capital structure. Journal of
  Finance 53, 1213–1243.
Loutskina, E. and P. E. Strahan (2011). Informed and uninformed investment in housing:
  The downside of diversification. Review of Financial Studies 24, 1447–1480.
Mayer, C., K. Pence, and S. M. Sherlund (2009). The rise in mortgage defaults. Journal
 of Economic Perspectives 23, 27–50.
Mello, A. and J. Parsons (2000). Hedging and liquidity. Review of Financial Studies 13,
 127–153.
Mian, S. L. (1996). Evidence on corporate hedging policy. Journal of Financial and
 Quantitative Analysis 31, 419–439.
Mishkin, F. and S. Eakins (2009). Financial Markets and Institutions (7th ed.). Pearson.
Nance, D. R., C. W. Smith, and C. W. Smithson (1993). On the determinants of corporate
  hedging. Journal of Finance 48, 267–284.
Palmer, C. (2015). Why did so many subprime borrowers default during the crisis: Loose
  credit or plummeting prices? Working paper.
Peek, J. and E. S. Rosengren (1997). The international transmission of financial shocks:
  The case of Japan. American Economic Review 87, 495–505.
Peek, J. and E. S. Rosengren (2000). Collateral damage: Effects of the Japanese bank

                                          32
  crisis on real activity in the United States. American Economic Review 90, 30–45.
Purnanandam, A. (2007). Interest rate derivatives at commercial banks: An empirical
  investigation. Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 1769–1808.
Rampini, A. A., A. Sufi, and S. Viswanathan (2014). Dynamic risk management. Journal
  of Financial Economics 111, 271–296.
Rampini, A. A. and S. Viswanathan (2010). Collateral, risk management, and the distri-
  bution of debt capacity. Journal of Finance 65, 2293–2322.
Rampini, A. A. and S. Viswanathan (2013). Collateral and capital structure. Journal of
  Financial Economics 109, 466–492.
Rampini, A. A. and S. Viswanathan (2019). Financial intermediary capital. Review of
  Economic Studies 86, 413–455.
Rampini, A. A., S. Viswanathan, and G. Vuillemey (2017). Risk management in financial
  institutions. Working Paper.
Rauh, J. D. (2009). Risk shifting versus risk management: Investment policy in corporate
  pension plans. Review of Financial Studies 22, 2687–2734.
Saiz, A. (2010). The geographic determinants of housing supply. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 125, 1253–1296.
Saunders, A. and M. M. Cornett (2008). Financial Institutions Management - A Risk
  Management Approach (6th ed.). McGraw-Hill.
Stock, J. H. and M. Yogo (2005). Testing for weak instruments in linear IV regression. In
  D. W. K. Andrews and J. H. Stock (Eds.), Identification and Inference for Econometric
  Models: Essays in Honor of Thomas Rothenberg, Chapter 5, pp. 80–108. Cambridge:
  Cambridge University Press.
Stulz, R. M. (1984). Optimal hedging policies. Journal of Financial and Quantitative
  Analysis 19, 127–140.
Stulz, R. M. (1996). Rethinking risk management. Journal of Applied Corporate Fi-
  nance 9, 8–24.
Tufano, P. (1996). Who manages risk? An empirical examination of risk management
  practices in the gold mining industry. Journal of Finance 51, 1097–1137.
Vuillemey, G. (2019). Bank interest rate risk management. Management Science, forth-
  coming.
Whited, T. M. and G. Wu (2006). Financial constraints risk. Review of Financial Stud-
 ies 19, 531–559.




                                           33
                  Table 1 – Descriptive statistics on risk management
This table provides descriptive statistics on hedging, trading, and balance sheet exposures. Panel A
reports moments of the distribution of these variables in the pooled sample. Panel B reports estimates of
a pooled OLS regression of net interest rate hedging on the maturity gap and time fixed effects, without
and with institution fixed effects. Data is at the BHC level and variables are defined in Appendix
Table A1. Time frame: 1995Q1-2013Q4.


                                   Panel A: Descriptive statistics

                     Mean S.D.     5th   10th    25th Median 75th 90th 95th 98th 99th             Obs.
Hedging variables
Net IR hedg.         0.016 0.325 -0.798 -0.182    0       0       0 0.236 0.986 0.986 0.986 19,832
Gross IR hedg.       0.039 0.088    0      0      0     0.001   0.034 0.120 0.203 0.344 0.570 22,723
Gross FX hedg.       0.001 0.009    0      0      0       0       0     0 0.002 0.014 0.026 22,707
Trading variables
Gross IR trad.       0.031 0.161   0       0      0       0       0    0.019 0.110 0.504 1.218 22,723
Gross FX trad.       0.012 0.098   0       0      0       0       0      0 0.010 0.072 0.483 22,723
Exposure variables
Maturity gap         0.094 0.178 -0.196 -0.120 -0.011   0.091   0.205 0.317 0.384 0.468 0.538 22,697
FX exposure          0.007 0.046    0      0      0       0       0     0 0.006 0.091 0.222 19,284


                 Panel B: Regression of net interest rate hedging on maturity gap

                                                                                      Net IR hedging
Maturity gap                                                                        -0.159∗∗∗ -0.125∗∗∗
                                                                                     (0.052) (0.039)
Time FE                                                                                  Y        Y
Institution FE                                                                           N        Y
R2 /Within-R2                                                                          0.033    0.033
Obs.                                                                                  19,815    19,815




                                                   34
    Table 2 – Hedging and net worth: Cross-sectional and within evidence
This table provides evidence on the relation between interest rate or foreign exchange hedging and
measures of net worth. For each combination of hedging and net worth measures, we estimate a pooled
OLS specification, a Tobit specification, and a specification with institution fixed effects. Each regression
includes the relevant measure of balance sheet exposure (maturity gap for interest rate hedging and foreign
exchange exposure for foreign exchange hedging) as well as time fixed effects. We use the absolute value
of net interest rate hedging and the maturity gap. Data is at the BHC level and variables are normalized
and defined in Appendix Table A1. For Tobit specifications, marginal effects are reported. Standard
errors (in parentheses) are double clustered at the institution and quarter level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ denote
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level. Time frame: 1995Q1-2013Q4.

                               Net IR hedging              Gross IR hedging            Gross FX hedging
                           Pooled    Tobit     Within Pooled      Tobit   Within Pooled         Tobit    Within

NWIndex                    0.161∗∗∗ 0.173∗∗∗ 0.054∗∗∗   0.148∗∗∗ 0.156∗∗∗ 0.042∗∗∗   0.137∗∗   0.152∗∗∗ 0.022∗∗∗
                            (0.024) (0.024) (0.012)      (0.035) (0.028) (0.007)     (0.057)    (0.046) (0.006)
Exposure                   0.106∗∗ 0.085∗∗ 0.004        0.170∗∗∗ 0.115∗∗∗ 0.015∗∗∗   0.321∗∗    0.040∗ 0.090∗∗∗
                            (0.041) (0.034) (0.007)      (0.059) (0.041) (0.004)     (0.165)    (0.021) (0.005)
Time FE                        Y       Y        Y           Y       Y        Y          Y          Y       Y
Institution FE                 N       N        Y           N       N        Y          N          N       Y
R2 /Within-R2                0.181 0.181 0.221            0.061 0.028 0.012           0.127      0.105 0.019
Obs.                        18,396 18,396 18,396         20,562 20,652 20,652        19,270     19,270 19,270

NWIndex (ex size)          0.070∗∗∗ 0.078∗∗∗ 0.049∗∗∗     0.032 0.056∗∗∗ 0.036∗∗∗    0.106∗    0.085∗∗∗ 0.022∗∗∗
                            (0.023) (0.007) (0.011)      (0.026) (0.006) (0.006)     (0.062)    (0.006) (0.006)
Exposure                   0.117∗∗∗ 0.098∗∗∗ 0.004      0.182∗∗∗ 0.126∗∗∗ 0.015∗∗∗   0.328∗∗   0.049∗∗∗ 0.090∗∗∗
                            (0.043) (0.005) (0.007)      (0.061) (0.005) (0.004)     (0.167)    (0.003) (0.006)
Time FE                        Y       Y        Y           Y       Y        Y          Y          Y       Y
Institution FE                 N       N        Y           N       N        Y          N          N       Y
R2 /Within-R2                0.165 0.123 0.221            0.045 0.016 0.012           0.121      0.089 0.019
Obs.                        18,396 18,396 18,396         20,562 20,652 20,652        19,270     19,270 19,270

MktCap/Assets               0.043∗ 0.055∗∗     0.024∗∗ -0.009 0.024 -0.009           0.163∗    0.092∗∗   0.048∗∗∗
                            (0.024) (0.024)    (0.011) (0.024) (0.021) (0.007)       (0.087)   (0.037)    (0.006)
Exposure                   0.115∗∗∗ 0.096∗∗∗    0.006 0.185∗∗∗ 0.127∗∗∗ 0.019∗∗∗     0.328∗∗   0.046∗∗   0.091∗∗∗
                            (0.041) (0.035)    (0.007) (0.058) (0.042) (0.004)       (0.165)   (0.022)    (0.005)
Time FE                        Y       Y          Y       Y       Y        Y            Y         Y          Y
Institution FE                 N       N          Y       N       N        Y            N         N          Y
R2 /Within-R2                0.158 0.158        0.213   0.044 0.015 0.009             0.132     0.077      0.021
Obs.                        19,815 19,815      19,815 22,699 22,699 22,699           19,282    19,282     19,282

Size                       0.368∗∗∗ 0.338∗∗∗ 0.239∗∗∗   0.457∗∗∗ 0.354∗∗∗ 0.513∗∗∗   0.210∗∗∗ 0.208∗∗∗ 0.510∗∗∗
                            (0.017) (0.013) (0.055)      (0.052) (0.029) (0.033)      (0.046) (0.050) (0.051)
Exposure                   0.042∗∗ 0.015 0.006          0.085∗∗∗ 0.038∗∗ 0.019∗∗∗     0.287∗ -0.010 0.087∗∗∗
                            (0.020) (0.014) (0.007)      (0.034) (0.019) (0.004)      (0.159) (0.019) (0.005)
Time FE                        Y       Y        Y           Y       Y        Y           Y       Y        Y
Institution FE                 N       N        Y           N       N        Y           N       N        Y
R2 /Within-R2                0.286 0.286 0.214            0.243 0.128 0.021            0.155 0.255 0.033
Obs.                        19,815 19,815 19,815         22,699 22,699 22,699         19,282 19,282 19,282


                                                     35
      Table 3 – Difference-in-differences and triple differences estimation
This table provides difference-in-differences and triple differences estimates, using measures of inter-
est rate or foreign exchange hedging as dependent variables. Panel A provides the baseline estimates.
Panel B provides estimates for specifications in which the treatment and control group are propensity-
score matched. The treatment group is defined as institutions with a below-median mortgage-weighted
average ZIP-code level house price change from 2007Q1 through 2008Q4. In triple differences specifica-
tions, we interact the baseline coefficient with dummy variables based on whether institutions are in the
middle or top terciles of the distributions of real estate loans to total assets in 2008Q4. In both panels,
the sample is restricted to institutions that hedge at least once before the treatment. We control for
exposure and time fixed effects as in Table 2. We use the absolute value of net interest rate hedging
and the maturity gap. Data is at the BHC level and variables are normalized and defined in Appendix
Table A1. Standard errors (in parentheses) are double clustered at the institution and quarter level. ∗ ,
∗∗
   , and ∗∗∗ denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level. Time frame: 2005Q1-2013Q4.

                                    Panel A: Baseline estimation

                                  Net IR hedging            Gross IR hedging         Gross FX hedging
                                      ∗                          ∗∗∗
 Postt ×Treatedi                -0.122       0.002         -0.309         -0.113    -0.221∗∗∗     -0.045
                                (0.061)     (0.106)         (0.071)      (0.097)     (0.062)     (0.066)
 Postt ×Treatedi ×MidREi                     -0.124                     -0.259∗∗                  -0.185
                                            (0.125)                      (0.115)                 (0.110)
 Postt ×Treatedi ×HighREi                  -0.299∗∗                    -0.325∗∗∗                -0.312∗∗∗
                                            (0.121)                      (0.115)                 (0.105)
 Postt ×MidREi /HighREi            Y          Y               Y           Y             Y           Y
 Exposure                          Y          Y               Y           Y             Y           Y
 Time FE                           Y          Y               Y           Y             Y           Y
 Institution FE                    Y          Y               Y           Y             Y           Y
 Within-R2                       0.133      0.241           0.029       0.030         0.020       0.021
 Obs.                            4,268      4,268           4,804       4,804         4,804       4,804

                       Panel B: Estimation with propensity score matching

                                  Net IR hedging            Gross IR hedging         Gross FX hedging
                                      ∗                          ∗∗∗
 Postt ×Treatedi                -0.222      0.006          -0.336         -0.052    -0.192∗∗      -0.091
                                (0.140)    (0.108)          (0.111)      (0.114)     (0.095)     (0.090)
 Postt ×Treatedi ×MidREi                   -0.131∗                      -0.245∗∗                 -0.235∗
                                           (0.112)                       (0.119)                 (0.090)
 Postt ×Treatedi ×HighREi                 -0.414∗∗∗                    -0.421∗∗∗                -0.351∗∗∗
                                           (0.121)                       (0.142)                 (0.120)
 Postt ×MidREi /HighREi            Y          Y               Y           Y             Y           Y
 Exposure                          Y          Y               Y           Y             Y           Y
 Time FE                           Y          Y               Y           Y             Y           Y
 Institution FE                    Y          Y               Y           Y             Y           Y
 Within-R2                       0.142      0.231           0.035       0.041         0.024       0.027
 Obs.                            4,268      4,268           4,804       4,804         4,804       4,804




                                                      36
       Table 4 – Effect of treatment on net worth and exposure measures
This table provides difference-in-differences and triple differences estimates as in Panel A of Table 3
using measures of net worth and exposure as the dependent variables. Panel A reports the difference-in-
differences and triple differences estimates with the four main measures of net worth as the dependent
variables. Panel B reports the difference-in-differences and triple differences estimates with measures
of balance sheet exposure as the dependent variables. In triple differences specifications, we interact
the baseline coefficient with dummy variables based on whether institutions are in the middle or top
terciles of the distributions of real estate loans to total assets in 2008Q4. In both panels, the sample is
restricted to institutions that hedge at least once before the treatment. Each regression includes time and
institution fixed effects. Data is at the BHC level and variables are normalized and defined in Appendix
Table A1. Standard errors (in parentheses) are double clustered at the institution and quarter level. ∗ ,
∗∗
   , and ∗∗∗ denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level. Time frame: 2005Q1-2013Q4.

                             Panel A: Effect of treatment on net worth

                            NWIndex            NWIndex (ex size)      MktCap/Assets                     Size
                             ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
Postt ×Treatedi        -0.412   -0.295     -0.438   -0.257     -0.263   -0.209    -0.205     0.049
                        (0.055) (0.056)     (0.056) (0.054)     (0.041) (0.041)    (0.061) (0.061)
Postt ×Treatedi                   -0.031              -0.049              0.023            -0.412∗∗∗
  ×MidREi                        (0.048)             (0.051)             (0.035)            (0.052)
                                       ∗∗∗                 ∗∗∗                ∗∗∗
Postt ×Treatedi                 -0.517              -0.562              -0.239             -0.971∗∗∗
  ×HighREi                       (0.048)             (0.052)             (0.032)            (0.050)
Postt ×MidREi /HighREi Y             Y            Y         Y           Y           Y            Y               Y
Exposure               N             N            N         N           N           N            N               N
Time FE                Y             Y            Y         Y           Y           Y            Y               Y
Institution FE         Y             Y            Y         Y           Y           Y            Y               Y
Within-R2            0.296         0.324        0.312     0.345       0.374       0.382        0.005           0.068
Obs.                 4,788         4,788        4,788     4,788       4,804       4,804        4,804           4,804


                          Panel B: Effect of treatment on risk exposures

                                                Maturity gap                            FX exposure
                                   Unmatched Unmatched Matched Unmatched Unmatched Matched
Postt ×Treatedi                        -0.159        -0.153      -0.101        0.091           0.111         0.091
                                      (0.133)       (0.186)     (0.164)       (0.081)         (0.135)      (0.112)
Postt ×Treatedi ×MidREi                              -0.004      0.002                         -0.013        0.002
                                                    (0.293)     (0.285)                       (0.101)      (0.097)
Postt ×Treatedi ×HighREi                             -0.011      -0.022                        -0.016       -0.018
                                                    (0.262)     (0.241)                       (0.102)      (0.098)
Postt ×MidREi /HighREi                   Y             Y            Y             Y             Y                Y
Time FE                                  Y             Y            Y             Y             Y                Y
Institution FE                           Y             Y            Y             Y             Y                Y
Within-R2                              0.112         0.112        0.121         0.012         0.040            0.038
Obs.                                   4,804         4,804        4,804         4,511         4,804            4,804




                                                     37
           Table 5 – Difference-in-differences estimation: Placebo tests
This table provides placebo tests for the difference-in-differences specifications in Table 3 by including
treatment-year dummy variables, omitting 2008. The sample is restricted to institutions that hedge at
least once before the treatment. Each regression includes year and institution fixed effects. Data is at
the BHC level and variables are normalized and defined in Appendix Table A1. Standard errors (in
parentheses) are double clustered at the institution and quarter level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ denote statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level. Time frame: 2005Q1-2013Q4.

                                    Net IR hedging          Gross IR hedging         Gross FX hedging
                                 Unmatched Matched        Unmatched Matched         Unmatched Matched
2005                                 -0.073      -0.003        0.049      0.043         0.066      0.035
                                    (0.124)     (0.123)      (0.090)     (0.092)      (0.077)     (0.068)
2006                                 -0.003       0.019       -0.021      0.018         0.089      0.032
                                    (0.134)     (0.131)      (0.090)     (0.092)      (0.077)     (0.068)
2007                                  0.107       0.085       -0.007      -0.002        0.121      0.060
                                    (0.124)     (0.123)      (0.091)     (0.092)      (0.077)     (0.068)
2008                                    -           -            -           -            -           -
                                        -           -            -           -            -           -
2009                                  0.072       0.020      -0.217∗     -0.223∗       0.051       0.045
                                    (0.134)     (0.128)      (0.090)     (0.092)      (0.077)     (0.068)
2010                                 -0.063      -0.153     -0.378∗∗∗   -0.397∗∗∗      -0.069     -0.141∗
                                    (0.151)     (0.151)      (0.090)     (0.092)      (0.077)     (0.068)
2011                                -0.218∗     -0.270∗     -0.413∗∗∗   -0.418∗∗∗     -0.147∗     0.165∗∗
                                    (0.122)     (0.125)      (0.090)     (0.092)      (0.077)     (0.068)
2012                                -0.218∗    -0.328∗∗     -0.388∗∗∗   -0.370∗∗∗    -0.228∗∗∗   -0.183∗∗∗
                                    (0.124)     (0.124)      (0.090)     (0.092)      (0.077)     (0.068)
2013                                 -0.154     -0.221∗     -0.327∗∗∗   -0.338∗∗∗    -0.269∗∗∗   -0.271∗∗∗
                                    (0.123)     (0.123)      (0.090)     (0.092)      (0.077)     (0.068)
Exposure                                Y           Y            Y          Y             Y          Y
Year FE                                 Y           Y            Y          Y             Y          Y
Institution FE                          Y           Y            Y          Y             Y          Y
Within-R2                             0.323       0.325       0.025       0.026         0.018      0.017
Obs.                                  4,268       4,268        4,804      4,804         4,804      4,804




                                                    38
   Table 6 – Estimation with treatment based on housing supply elasticity
This table provides difference-in-differences and triple differences estimates, using measures of interest
rate or foreign exchange hedging as dependent variables, as in Table 3, but using a definition of treatment
based on housing supply elasticity. Panel A provides the baseline estimates. Panel B provides estimates
for specifications in which the treatment and control group are propensity-score matched. The treatment
group is defined as below-median mortgage-weighted average MSA-level housing supply elasticity (Saiz,
2010) in 2008Q4. In triple differences specifications, we interact the baseline coefficient with dummy
variables based on whether institutions are in the middle or top terciles of the distributions of real estate
loans to total assets in 2008Q4. In both panels, the sample is restricted to institutions that hedge at
least once before the treatment. We control for exposure and time fixed effects as in Table 2. We use the
absolute value of net interest rate hedging and the maturity gap. Data is at the BHC level and variables
are normalized and defined in Appendix Table A1. Standard errors (in parentheses) are double clustered
at the institution and quarter level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
level. Time frame: 2005Q1-2013Q4.

                                     Panel A: Baseline estimation

                                       Net IR hedging          Gross IR hedging         Gross FX hedging
                                                                    ∗∗
 Postt ×Treatedi                      -0.099     0.004        -0.201        0.097       -0.183∗     0.078
                                     (0.087)    (0.108)        (0.080)     (0.088)      (0.063)    (0.092)
 Postt ×Treatedi ×MidREi                         -0.048                  -0.269∗∗∗                -0.303∗∗
                                                (0.120)                    (0.094)                 (0.096)
 Postt ×Treatedi ×HighREi                       -0.224∗                   -0.243∗∗                  -0.146
                                                (0.121)                    (0.094)                 (0.094)
 Postt ×MidREi /HighREi                 Y          Y             Y           Y             Y          Y
 Exposure                               Y          Y             Y           Y             Y          Y
 Time FE                                Y          Y             Y           Y             Y          Y
 Institution FE                         Y          Y             Y           Y             Y          Y
 Within-R2                            0.081      0.093         0.019       0.021         0.015      0.016
 Obs.                                 4,268      4,268         4,804       4,804         4,804      4,804


                       Panel B: Estimation with propensity score matching

                                       Net IR hedging          Gross IR hedging         Gross FX hedging
                                            ∗                       ∗∗
 Postt ×Treatedi                     -0.157       0.013       -0.224        -0.041       -0.126     0.016
                                     (0.082)     (0.099)       (0.110)     (0.118)      (0.090)    (0.093)
 Postt ×Treatedi ×MidREi                          -0.166                  -0.200∗∗                 -0.0126
                                                 (0.128)                   (0.126)                 (0.092)
 Postt ×Treatedi ×HighREi                       -0.252∗∗                 -0.298∗∗∗                -0.195∗∗
                                                 (0.125)                   (0.126)                 (0.092)
 Postt ×MidREi /HighREi                 Y          Y             Y           Y             Y          Y
 Exposure                               Y          Y             Y           Y             Y          Y
 Time FE                                Y          Y             Y           Y             Y          Y
 Institution FE                         Y          Y             Y           Y             Y          Y
 Within-R2                            0.082      0.095         0.022       0.022         0.017      0.018
 Obs.                                 4,268      4,268         4,804       4,804         4,804      4,804




                                                     39
     Table 7 – Hedging and net worth: Instrumental variables estimation
This table provides evidence on the relation between hedging and net worth using an instrumental
variables approach. Panel A shows the first stage in which net worth measures are instrumented using
mortgage-weighted average ZIP-code level house price changes over the past two years as in equation (11).
Panel B shows the second stage in which hedging measures are regressed on instrumented net worth as in
equation (12). We estimate the second stage only when the instrument has sufficient statistical power in
the first stage. Each regression controls for exposure and includes time fixed effects. We use the absolute
value of net interest rate hedging and the maturity gap. Data is at the BHC level and variables are
normalized and defined in Appendix Table A1. Standard errors (in parentheses) are double clustered at
the institution and quarter level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
level. Time frame: 1995Q1-2013Q4.

                                         Panel A: First stage

                              NWIndex          NWIndex (ex size)      MktCap/Assets                Size
∆ House prices            0.106∗∗∗ 0.107∗∗∗    0.115∗∗∗ 0.121∗∗∗     0.168∗∗∗ 0.129∗∗∗      -0.001 -0.006
                           (0.034) (0.032)      (0.034) (0.029)       (0.030) (0.029)      (0.031) (0.009)
Exposure                     Y        Y           Y         Y           Y         Y           Y      Y
Time FE                      Y        Y           Y         Y           Y         Y           Y      Y
Institution FE               N        Y           N         Y           N         Y           N      Y
R2 /Within-R2              0.295    0.436       0.312     0.431       0.391     0.562       0.017 0.693
F -statistic               17.12    16.45       18.64     17.17       23.10     21.96        5.15  15.47
Obs.                       12,843   12,843      12,843    12,843      13,470    13,470      13,470 13,470


                                        Panel B: Second stage

                                               Net IR hedging      Gross IR hedging      Gross FX hedging

NWIndex (instr.)                              0.227∗∗∗ 0.178∗∗∗    0.076∗∗    0.041       0.005      0.001
                                               (0.062) (0.061)     (0.039)   (0.029)     (0.017)    (0.005)
Exposure                                          Y       Y           Y         Y           Y          Y
Time FE                                           Y       Y           Y         Y           Y          Y
Institution FE                                    N       Y           N         Y           N          Y
Obs.                                           12,843 12,843       12,843    12,843      12,843     12,843

NWIndex (ex size) (instr.)                    0.231∗∗∗ 0.185∗∗∗    0.081∗∗   0.048∗       0.006      0.001
                                              (0.063) (0.062)      (0.040)   (0.029)     (0.018)    (0.007)
Exposure                                         Y        Y           Y         Y           Y          Y
Time FE                                          Y        Y           Y         Y           Y          Y
Institution FE                                   N        Y           N         Y           N          Y
Obs.                                           12,843 12,843       12,843    12,843      12,843     12,843

MktCap/Assets (instr.)                        0.200∗∗∗ 0.137∗∗∗    0.078∗∗    0.030       0.002      -0.002
                                               (0.053) (0.042)     (0.039)   (0.028)     (0.019)    (0.011)
Exposure                                          Y       Y           Y         Y           Y          Y
Time FE                                           Y       Y           Y         Y           Y          Y
Institution FE                                    N       Y           N         Y           N          Y
Obs.                                           13,470 13,470       13,470    13,470      13,470     13,470



                                                    40
                             Table 8 – Hedging before distress
This table provides evidence on hedging, trading, and balance sheet exposures before distress. We
report estimates from regressions of these variables on dummies for up to 8 quarters before distress as in
equation (13). Each regression includes time and institution fixed effects. Distress events are defined as
exits from the sample with a ratio of market capitalization to total assets below 4%. We use the absolute
value of net interest rate hedging and the maturity gap. Data is at the BHC level and variables are
normalized and defined in Appendix Table A1. For Tobit specifications, marginal effects are reported.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are double clustered at the institution and quarter level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗
denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level. Time frame: 1995Q1-2013Q4.

                                        IR risk management                       FX risk management
                               Net       Gross       Gross    Maturity        Gross      Gross      FX
                             hedging    hedging     trading     gap          hedging    trading     Exp.
 τ −8                          0.159      -0.025     -0.111      0.032         -0.149     -0.079    0.053
                              (0.157)    (0.093)    (0.078)    (0.122)        (0.413)    (0.487)   (0.254)
 τ −7                          0.040      -0.017    -0.121∗     0.089          -0.154     -0.085    0.051
                              (0.126)    (0.091)    (0.061)    (0.119)        (0.413)    (0.487)   (0.254)
 τ −6                          0.057      -0.092   -0.107∗∗     0.110          -0.163     -0.107    0.040
                              (0.142)    (0.091)    (0.062)    (0.119)        (0.413)    (0.487)   (0.254)
 τ −5                        -0.258∗∗     -0.111   -0.126∗∗     0.039          -0.156     -0.071    0.028
                              (0.121)    (0.091)    (0.061)    (0.119)        (0.413)    (0.487)   (0.254)
 τ −4                        -0.296∗∗    -0.154∗   -0.114∗∗     0.003          0.027      -0.053    0.022
                              (0.124)    (0.090)    (0.062)    (0.118)        (0.414)    (0.487)   (0.255)
 τ −3                        -0.302∗∗    -0.170∗   -0.125∗∗     -0.052         -0.091     -0.060    0.170
                              (0.124)    (0.088)    (0.062)    (0.116)        (0.414)    (0.487)   (0.255)
 τ −2                        -0.341∗∗    -0.161∗   -0.123∗∗     -0.103          0.057     -0.109    0.196
                              (0.141)    (0.089)    (0.060)    (0.117)        (0.414)    (0.487)   (0.255)
 τ −1                        -0.343∗∗   -0.217∗∗   -0.117∗∗     -0.094         -0.422     -0.118    0.226
                              (0.137)    (0.088)    (0.060)    (0.116)        (0.414)    (0.487)   (0.255)
 τ                            -0.243∗   -0.208∗∗   -0.118∗∗     0.008          -0.420     -0.109    0.275
                              (0.142)    (0.089)    (0.059)    (0.116)        (0.414)    (0.488)   (0.255)
 Time FE                        Y          Y           Y          Y              Y         Y          Y
 Institution FE                 Y          Y           Y          Y              Y         Y          Y
 No. distressed                 53         53          13         53             5         3          5
 Within-R2                    0.265      0.014       0.048      0.028          0.019     0.025      0.025
 Obs.                         15,807     18,025      7,568      18,002         4,797     3,885      4,151




                                                    41
    Table 9 – Trading and net worth: Cross-sectional and within evidence
This table provides evidence on the relation between interest rate or foreign exchange trading and mea-
sures of net worth. For each combination of trading and net worth measures, we estimate a pooled OLS
specification, a Tobit specification, and a specification with institution fixed effects. Each regression
includes time fixed effects but not controls for balance sheet exposure. Data is at the BHC level and
variables are normalized and defined in Appendix Table A1. For Tobit specifications, marginal effects
are reported. Standard errors (in parentheses) are double clustered at the institution and quarter level.
∗ ∗∗
 , , and ∗∗∗ denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level. Time frame: 1995Q1-2013Q4.

                                           Gross IR trading                    Gross FX trading
                                     Pooled      Tobit     Within        Pooled     Tobit      Within
 NWIndex                            0.210∗∗∗   0.207∗∗∗   0.021∗∗∗       0.160∗∗   0.202∗∗∗   -0.013∗∗∗
                                    (0.053)     (0.046)    (0.005)       (0.067)    (0.062)    (0.004)
 Exposure                              N          N          N             N          N          N
 Time FE                               Y          Y          Y             Y          Y          Y
 Institution FE                        N          N          Y             N          N          Y
 R2 /Within-R2                       0.035      0.056      0.028         0.029      0.103      0.007
 Obs.                                20,568     20,568     20,568        20,568     20,568     20,568

 NWIndex (ex size)                   0.090∗∗   0.097∗∗∗   0.021∗∗∗       0.094∗    0.114∗∗∗   -0.013∗∗∗
                                     (0.038)    (0.006)    (0.005)       (0.052)    (0.006)    (0.004)
 Exposure                              N          N          N             N          N          N
 Time FE                               Y          Y          Y             Y          Y          Y
 Institution FE                        N          N          Y             N          N          Y
 R2 /Within-R2                       0.008      0.015      0.028         0.014      0.037      0.007
 Obs.                                20,568     20,568     20,568        20,568     20,568     20,568

 MktCap/Assets                        0.056    0.073∗∗∗   0.017∗∗∗        0.102     0.099∗∗   -0.030∗∗∗
                                     (0.041)   (0.027)     (0.006)       (0.062)    (0.038)    (0.006)
 Exposure                              N          N          N             N          N          N
 Time FE                               Y          Y          Y             Y          Y          Y
 Institution FE                        N          N          Y             N          N          Y
 R2 /Within-R2                       0.004      0.312      0.021         0.014      0.030      0.007
 Obs.                                22,723     22,723     22,723        22,723     22,723     22,723

 Size                               0.455∗∗∗   0.270∗∗∗     0.003       0.283∗∗∗   0.223∗∗∗   0.176∗∗∗
                                    (0.076)     (0.031)    (0.029)       (0.084)    (0.048)    (0.029)
 Exposure                              N          N          N             N          N          N
 Time FE                               Y          Y          Y             Y          Y          Y
 Institution FE                        N          N          Y             N          N          Y
 R2 /Within-R2                       0.208      0.268      0.020         0.087      0.310      0.008
 Obs.                                22,723     22,723     22,723        22,723     22,723     22,723




                                                   42
               Figure 1 – Distribution of main measures of net worth
This figure plots the distribution of the four main measures of net worth. There is one cross-sectional
box plot for each quarter; in each of them, the horizontal dash is the median and the diamond is the
mean. The whiskers represent the 5th and 95th percentiles. The grey rectangle represents the 25th and
75th percentiles. The top left panel also shows the year 2009 in dark red, which is the treatment year in
the difference-in-differences and triple differences estimation. Data is at the BHC level and variables are
defined in Appendix Table A1. Time frame: 1995Q1-2013Q4.




                                                    43
     Figure 2 – Difference-in-differences: Effect of treatment on hedging
This figure plots hedging in the treatment and control group used in the difference-in-differences
estimation. Panel A plots gross interest rate hedging and Panel B plots gross foreign exchange hedging.
The sample is restricted to institutions that hedge at least once before the treatment year. Data is at
the BHC level and variables are defined in Appendix Table A1. Time frame: 2005Q1-2013Q4.

                 .02          .08
                    Interest rate hedging
                              .04
                              0          .06
                                                             Panel A: Interest rate hedging




                                               2005   2006   2007   2008   2009     2010   2011   2012   2013   2014

                                                                      Non-treated            Treated



                                                         Panel B: Foreign exchange hedging
                              .008    .006
                  Foreign exchange hedging
                 .002       .004
                              0




                                               2005   2006   2007   2008   2009     2010   2011   2012   2013   2014

                                                                      Non-treated            Treated




                                                                            44
                                                           Appendix – For Online Publication


Appendix A: Auxiliary tables and figures

                               Table A1 – Variable definitions
This table provides definitions of the variables used in the empirical analysis.

 Variable                  Definition                                                      Data source
                                            Derivatives data
 Net IR hedging            Change in net market value of interest rate deriva-             Call reports
                           tives (bhck8741 +bhck8749 -bhck8745 -bhck8753 ), divided        and FRED
                           by changes in the Fed funds rate, normalized by total assets;
                           winsorized at the 5th and 95th percentiles
 Gross IR hedging          Total gross notional amount of interest rate derivatives held   Call reports
                           for purposes other than trading (bhck8725 ) over total as-
                           sets; for the period 1995-2000, contracts not marked to mar-
                           ket (bhck8729 ) are added; winsorized at the 99th percentile
 Gross FX hedging          Total gross notional amount of foreign exchange rate deriva-    Call reports
                           tives held for purposes other than trading (bhck8726 ) over
                           total assets; for the period 1995-2000, contracts not marked
                           to market (bhck8730 ) are added; winsorized at the 99th
                           percentile
 Gross IR trading          Total gross notional amount of interest rate derivatives held   Call reports
                           for trading (bhcka126 ); winsorized at the 99th percentile
 Gross FX trading          Total gross notional amount of foreign exchange rate deriva-    Call reports
                           tives held for trading (bhcka127 ); winsorized at the 99th
                           percentile

                                          Net worth measures
 Size                      Log of total assets (bhck2170 )                                 Call reports
 Market capitalization     Log of share mid-price at the end of each quarter multiplied    CRSP
 (MktCap)                  by the number of shares outstanding
 Market capitalization     Market capitalization normalized by total assets (at book       CRSP
 /Assets                   value) minus book equity plus market capitalization; win-
 (MktCap/Assets)           sorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles
 Net income/Assets         Net income (bhck4340 ) normalized by total assets; win-         Call reports
 (NetInc/Assets)           sorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles
 Dividends/Assets          Cash dividends on common stock (bhck4460) normalized            Call reports
 (Div/Assets)              by total assets; winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles
 Rating                    S&P credit rating coded linearly from 1 (D) to 22 (AAA)         Capital IQ
 Net worth index           First principal component of MktCap/Assets, Size, Net-          Call reports
 (NWIndex)                 Inc/Assets, and Div/Assets:                                     and CRSP
                           NWIndex = 0.307 × MktCap/Assets + 0.149 × Size + 0.272
                           × NetInc/Assets + 0.272 × Div/Assets
 Net worth index           First principal component of MktCap/Assets, Net-                Call reports
 excluding size            Inc/Assets, and Div/Assets:                                     and CRSP
 (NWIndex ex size)         NWIndex (ex size) = 0.359 × MktCap/Assets + 0.329
                           × NetInc/Assets + 0.312 × Div/Assets




                                                     1
                                                          Appendix – For Online Publication


                        Table A1 (continued) – Variable definitions

Variable                   Definition                                                     Data source
                                          Regulatory capital
Regulatory capital         Total qualifying capital allowable under the risk-based cap-   Call reports
/Assets                    ital guidelines (bhck3792 ) normalized by risk-weighted as-
(RegCap/Assets)            sets (bhcka223 ); winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles
Tier 1 capital/Assets      Tier 1 capital allowable under the risk-based capital          Call reports
(Tier1/Assets)             guidelines (bhck8274 ) normalized by risk-weighted assets
                           (bhcka223 ); winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles

                                    Decomposition of net income
Net interest income        Net interest income (bhck4074 ); annualized                    Call reports
Provisions                 Provision for loan and lease losses (bhck4230 ); annualized    Call reports

                                    Other balance sheet variables
Total assets               Total assets (bhck2170 )                                       Call reports
Maturity gap               Earning assets that are repriceable or mature within one       Call reports
                           year (bhck3197 ) minus interest-bearing deposits that ma-
                           ture or reprice within one year (bhck3296 ) minus long-term
                           debt that reprices or matures within one year (bhck3298 +
                           bhck3409 ) minus variable rate preferred stock (bhck3408 )
                           minus other borrowed money with a maturity of one year or
                           less (bhck2332 ) minus commercial paper (bhck2309 ) minus
                           federal funds and repo liabilities (bhdmb993 + bhckb995 ),
                           normalized by total assets
Narrow maturity gap        Maturity gap + interest-bearing deposits that mature or        Call reports
                           reprice within one year (bhck3296 ), normalized by total
                           assets
FX exposure                Fee and interest income from loans in foreign offices          Call reports
                           (bhck4059 ) / Total interest income (bhck4107 )
Total loans                Total loans and leases, net of unearned income (bhck2122 )     Call reports
Real estate loans          Loans secured by real estate (bhck1410 )                       Call reports

                                    House price and related data
House prices               House prices by ZIP code                                       Zillow
Housing supply elastic-    Housing supply elasticity by MSA                               Saiz (2010)
ity
Real estate loans by       Mortgage applications by ZIP code                              HMDA
zip code
Deposits by ZIP code       Total amount of deposits by ZIP code                           Summary of
                                                                                          deposits FDIC




                                                   2
                                                            Appendix – For Online Publication


                              Table A2 – Descriptive statistics
This table provides descriptive statistics on net worth and regulatory capital measures, the maturity gap
and related variables, and loans and house prices. Panel A reports moments of the distribution of these
variables in the pooled sample. The net worth index is normalized to have a zero mean. Panel B reports
pairwise correlations between all measures of net worth and regulatory capital in the pooled sample.
Data is at the BHC level and variables are defined in Appendix Table A1. Time frame: 1995Q1-2013Q4.


                                 Panel A: Distribution of variables

                                            Mean    S.D.     10th    25th     Med.     75th     90th     Obs.

Net worth and regulatory capital
NWIndex                                    -0.002   1.388   -1.660   -0.835    0.029    0.876    1.677   20,568
NWIndex (ex size)                          -0.001   1.352   -1.596   -0.782   0.068    0.834    1.566    20,568
MktCap/Assets                               0.135   0.060    0.057    0.096   0.133    0.171     0.209   22,723
Size                                       14.748   1.361   13.347   13.700   14.381   15.476   16.696   22,723
NetInc/Assets                               0.008   0.010    0.001    0.006    0.010   0.012     0.015   20,704
Div/Assets                                  0.001   0.001      0     0.000     0.001   0.001     0.002   22,426
MktCap                                     12.665   1.617   10.909   11.551   12.391   13.602   14.861   22,723
Rating                                     BBB+     2.065   BBB-      BBB     BBB+        A       A+      3,579
RegCap/Assets                               0.100   0.024    0.078    0.087   0.097    0.109     0.125   21,780
Tier1/Assets                                0.088   0.023    0.066    0.074   0.085    0.097     0.112   21,780

Maturity gap, its components, and related variables
Maturity gap                                0.094   0.178 -0.120 -0.011 0.091          0.205    0.317 22,697
Earning assets < 1 yr.                      0.384   0.144 0.196 0.282 0.384            0.479    0.564 22,697
Minus: interest-bearing liabilities < 1 yr.
Interest-bearing deposits                   0.276   0.146 0.116      0.175    0.248    0.353    0.500    22,697
Repricing long-term debt                    0.011   0.025   0          0        0      0.011    0.039    22,697
Maturing long-term debt                     0.001   0.002   0          0        0        0        0      22,697
Variable-rate pref. stock                   0.000   0.001   0          0        0        0        0      22,697
Commercial paper                            0.001   0.006   0          0        0        0        0      22,697
Fed funds and repo                          0.026   0.045   0          0      0.005    0.037    0.075    22,697
Other borrowed money                        0.029   0.038   0        0.003    0.016    0.042    0.078    22,697
For reference (not included in maturity gap):
Non int.-bearing assets                     0.027   0.015 0.011      0.016    0.024    0.034    0.046 22,697
Non int.-bearing deposits                   0.120   0.066 0.045      0.076    0.111    0.149    0.201 22,697

Loans and house prices
Total loans/ Assets                      0.664 0.112         0.520   0.602     0.675    0.740   0.798    22.697
Real estate loans/ Asset                 0.470 0.149         0.282    0.375   0.476     0.576   0.655    22.697
Real estate loans 2008Q4/ Assets        0.552 0.138          0.388    0.460    0.562    0.648   0.718    22,697
Mortgage-weighted house price change    -0.119 0.116        -0.268   -0.182   -0.104   -0.041   0.026    22,697
Mortgage-weighted housing supply elast. 2.537 1.433          1.059   1.563     2.259    3.190   4.391    22,697




                                                    3
                                                 Appendix – For Online Publication


                    Table A2 (continued) – Descriptive statistics

        Panel B: Correlation between measures of net worth and regulatory capital

                      NWIndex NWIndex MktCap Size       NetInc Div MktCap Rating RegCap
                              (ex size) /Assets         /Assets /Assets          /Assets
NWIndex (ex size)      0.978      1
MktCap/Assets          0.841    0.873      1
Size                   0.419    0.228    0.207    1
NetInc/Assets          0.759    0.799    0.554 0.105      1
Div/Assets             0.617    0.614    0.419 0.188              1
MktCap                 0.344    0.551    0.245 0.68     0.142   0.164      1
Rating                 0.523    0.473    0.303 0.406    0.369   0.268    0.351      1
RegCap/Assets          0.112    0.138    0.141 -0.072   0.146   0.039   -0.052   -0.310     1
Tier1/Assets           0.077    0.131    0.133 -0.202   0.152   0.026   -0.155   -0.392   0.961




                                            4
                                                                Appendix – For Online Publication


   Table A3 – Hedging and net worth: Cross-sectional and within evidence
This table provides evidence on the relation between interest rate or foreign exchange hedging and the
four auxiliary measures of net worth, analogous to Table 2. For each combination of hedging and net
worth measures, we estimate a pooled OLS specification, a Tobit specification, and a specification with
institution fixed effects. We control for exposure and time fixed effects as in Table 2. We use the
absolute value of net interest rate hedging and the maturity gap. Data is at the BHC level and variables
are normalized and defined in Appendix Table A1. For Tobit specifications, marginal effects are reported.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are double clustered at the institution and quarter level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗
denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level. Time frame: 1995Q1-2013Q4.

                          Net IR hedging                   Gross IR hedging             Gross FX hedging
                      Pooled     Tobit     Within    Pooled      Tobit     Within     Pooled    Tobit     Within

NetInc/Assets        0.051∗∗∗   0.042∗∗    0.041∗∗∗ 0.033∗      0.032∗∗    0.025∗∗∗    0.070 0.081∗ -0.005
                      (0.018)    (0.018)    (0.008) (0.019)      (0.016)    (0.004)   (0.044) (0.046) (0.004)
Exposure             0.118∗∗∗   0.100∗∗∗     0.003 0.185∗∗∗     0.130∗∗∗   0.016∗∗∗   0.329∗ 0.050∗∗ 0.090∗∗∗
                      (0.043)    (0.038)    (0.007) (0.062)      (0.045)    (0.004)   (0.168) (0.025) (0.005)
Time FE                  Y          Y          Y       Y            Y          Y         Y       Y       Y
Institution FE           N          N          Y       N            N          Y         N       N       Y
R2 /Within-R2          0.164      0.041      0.221   0.046        0.015      0.012     0.116   0.063   0.018
Obs.                  18,500     18,500     18,500  20,681       20,681     20,681    19,282 19,282 19,282

Div/Assets           0.044∗∗    0.051∗∗∗    -0.002     0.035    0.050∗∗      -0.005    0.029 0.027∗ -0.004
                      (0.017)    (0.018)   (0.007)    (0.024)    (0.020)    (0.004)   (0.027) (0.014) (0.003)
Exposure             0.120∗∗∗   0.102∗∗∗     0.005   0.185∗∗∗   0.130∗∗∗   0.018∗∗∗   0.331∗ 0.055∗∗ 0.089∗∗∗
                      (0.042)    (0.036)   (0.007)    (0.059)    (0.043)    (0.004)   (0.168) (0.026) (0.005)
Time FE                  Y          Y          Y         Y          Y           Y        Y       Y       Y
Institution FE           N          N          Y         N          N           Y        N       N       Y
R2 /Within-R2          0.158      0.041      0.212     0.045      0.016       0.009    0.114   0.057   0.018
Obs.                  19,792     19,792    19,792     22,419     22,419     22,419    19,277 19,277 19,277

MktCap               0.340∗∗∗   0.324∗∗∗   0.123∗∗∗ 0.406∗∗∗    0.333∗∗∗   0.118∗∗∗ 0.220∗∗∗   0.227∗∗∗     0.016
                      (0.020)    (0.015)    (0.024) (0.051)      (0.031)    (0.014) (0.055)     (0.053)    (0.013)
Exposure             0.048∗∗      0.022      0.006  0.097∗∗     0.047∗∗    0.019∗∗∗ 0.291∗       -0.008   0.089∗∗∗
                      (0.023)    (0.016)    (0.007) (0.037)      (0.021)    (0.004) (0.158)     (0.017)    (0.005)
Time FE                  Y          Y          Y        Y           Y          Y        Y           Y         Y
Institution FE           N          N          Y        N           N          Y        N           N         Y
R2 /Within-R2          0.261      0.117      0.214    0.193       0.102      0.012    0.157       0.253     0.018
Obs.                  19,815     19,815     19,815   22,699      22,699     22,699   19,282     19,282     19,282

Rating                0.158∗∗   0.143∗∗ 0.075∗       0.319∗∗    0.267∗∗    0.085∗∗     0.135 0.189∗∗      0.188∗∗∗
                      (0.062)   (0.059) (0.040)      (0.133)    (0.114)    (0.033)    (0.095) (0.094)      (0.043)
Exposure              0.110∗∗   0.103∗∗ 0.096∗∗∗     0.267∗∗    0.229∗∗    0.052∗∗     0.332   0.050      0.166∗∗∗
                      (0.051)   (0.046) (0.031)      (0.126)    (0.102)    (0.026)    (0.203) (0.108)      (0.020)
Time FE                  Y         Y        Y           Y          Y          Y          Y       Y            Y
Institution FE           N         N        Y           N          N          Y          N       N            Y
R2 /Within-R2          0.398     0.137    0.489       0.091      0.025      0.032      0.105   0.038        0.060
Obs.                   3,178     3,178    3,178       3,573      3,573      3,573      3,266   3,266        3,266



                                                       5
                                                               Appendix – For Online Publication


             Table A4 – Hedging and net worth: Evidence by size terciles
This table provides evidence on the relation between interest rate or foreign exchange hedging and the
net worth index by size terciles. The table reports the cross-sectional and within-institution evidence as
in Table 2. Panel A excludes the bottom size tercile and uses the net worth index as the measure of net
worth. Panel B includes dummies for the middle and top tercile by size and uses the net worth index (ex
size) as the measure of net worth. For each hedging measure, we estimate a pooled OLS specification, a
Tobit specification, and a specification with institution fixed effects. We control for exposure and time
fixed effects as in Table 2. We use the absolute value of net interest rate hedging and the maturity gap.
Data is at the BHC level and variables are normalized and defined in Appendix Table A1. For Tobit
specifications, marginal effects are reported. Standard errors (in parentheses) are double clustered at the
institution and quarter level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level.
Time frame: 1995Q1-2013Q4.

                          Panel A: Evidence excluding bottom size tercile
                                Net IR hedging                Gross IR hedging             Gross FX hedging
                            Pooled    Tobit   Within Pooled          Tobit   Within Pooled Tobit          Within

NWIndex                     0.139∗∗∗ 0.151∗∗∗ 0.074∗∗∗     0.117∗∗∗ 0.132∗∗∗ 0.034∗∗∗   0.178∗∗ 0.172∗∗∗ 0.033∗∗∗
                             (0.029) (0.008) (0.015)        (0.042) (0.008) (0.008)     (0.079) (0.008) (0.007)
Exposure                    0.180∗∗∗ 0.157∗∗∗ 0.006        0.289∗∗∗ 0.216∗∗∗ 0.025∗∗∗   0.320∗ 0.087∗∗∗ 0.085∗∗∗
                             (0.033) (0.008) (0.009)        (0.064) (0.007) (0.005)     (0.165) (0.003) (0.007)
Time FE                         Y       Y        Y             Y       Y        Y          Y       Y        Y
Bank FE                         N       N        Y             N       N        Y          N       N        Y
R2 /Within-R2                 0.219 0.062 0.227              0.078 0.029 0.017           0.127 0.083 0.023
Obs.                         12,946 12,946 13,599           14,431 14,431 15,227        13,531 13,531 14,285


                           Panel B: Evidence controlling for size terciles
                               Net IR hedging                Gross IR hedging             Gross FX hedging
                           Pooled    Tobit    Within Pooled         Tobit    Within Pooled        Tobit   Within

NWIndex (ex size)          0.018∗∗ 0.027∗∗∗ 0.050∗∗∗     0.060∗∗∗ 0.037∗∗∗ 0.035∗∗∗     0.074∗∗∗ 0.023∗∗∗ 0.016∗∗∗
                            (0.008) (0.006) (0.011)       (0.007) (0.005) (0.006)        (0.008) (0.005) (0.006)
MidSizei                   0.162∗∗∗ 0.284∗∗∗ 0.056∗      0.093∗∗∗ 0.206∗∗∗ 0.045∗∗        -0.004 0.189∗∗∗ -0.026∗
                            (0.016) (0.015) (0.029)       (0.016) (0.013) (0.017)        (0.016) (0.027) (0.014)
LargeSizei                 0.668∗∗∗ 0.778∗∗∗ -0.019      0.692∗∗∗ 0.705∗∗∗ 0.068∗∗      0.276∗∗∗ 0.604∗∗∗ -0.047∗
                            (0.016) (0.015) (0.049)       (0.016) (0.013) (0.029)        (0.017) (0.029) (0.024)
Exposure                       Y       Y       Y             Y       Y        Y              Y      Y        Y
Time FE                        Y       Y       Y             Y       Y        Y              Y      Y        Y
Bank FE                        N       N       Y             N       N        Y              N      N        Y
R2 /Within-R2                0.235 0.109 0.221             0.131 0.079 0.012               0.029 0.021 0.007
Obs.                        18,396 18,396 18,396          20,562 20,652 20,652           19,270 19,270 19,270




                                                       6
                                                            Appendix – For Online Publication


     Table A5 – Hedging and net worth: Evidence controlling for deposits
This table provides evidence on the relation between interest rate hedging and measures of net worth,
controlling for the ratio of deposits to total assets and the narrow maturity gap separately, as well as
time fixed effects. For each combination of hedging and net worth measures, we estimate a pooled OLS
specification, a Tobit specification, and a specification with institution fixed effects. We use the absolute
value of net interest rate hedging and the maturity gap. Data is at the BHC level and variables are
normalized and defined in Appendix Table A1. For Tobit specifications, marginal effects are reported.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are double clustered at the institution and quarter level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗
denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level. Time frame: 1995Q1-2013Q4.

                                          Net IR hedging                        Gross IR hedging
                                   Pooled       Tobit      Within         Pooled       Tobit       Within

 NWIndex                           0.122∗∗∗    0.127∗∗∗   0.049∗∗∗       0.097∗∗∗     0.105∗∗∗    0.030∗∗∗
                                   (0.022)      (0.022)    (0.012)        (0.031)      (0.024)     (0.007)
 Deposits/ Assets                 -0.230∗∗∗   -0.215∗∗∗   -0.053∗∗∗      -0.317∗∗∗   -0.248∗∗∗    -0.119∗∗∗
                                   (0.029)      (0.027)    (0.015)        (0.054)      (0.038)     (0.009)
 Narrow maturity gap                  Y            Y          Y              Y            Y           Y
 Time FE                              Y            Y          Y              Y            Y           Y
 Institution FE                       N            N          Y              N            N           Y
 R2 /Within-R2                      0.224        0.083      0.221          0.139        0.069       0.020
 Obs.                               18,396      18,396     18,396         20,562       20,562      20,562

 NWIndex (ex size)                 0.048∗∗     0.049∗∗∗   0.045∗∗∗         0.003      0.025∗∗∗    0.026∗∗∗
                                   (0.021)      (0.006)    (0.011)        (0.026)      (0.005)     (0.006)
 Deposits/ Assets                 -0.247∗∗∗   -0.235∗∗∗   -0.054∗∗∗      -0.335∗∗∗   -0.266∗∗∗    -0.120∗∗∗
                                   (0.030)      (0.005)    (0.015)        (0.055)      (0.005)     (0.009)
 Narrow maturity gap                  Y            Y          Y              Y            Y           Y
 Time FE                              Y            Y          Y              Y            Y           Y
 Institution FE                       N            N          Y              N            N           Y
 R2 /Within-R2                      0.215        0.076      0.221          0.132        0.063       0.019
 Obs.                              18,396       18,396     18,396         20,562       20,562      20,562

 MktCap/Assets                      0.026       0.030      0.024∗∗         -0.032      -0.003       -0.010
                                   (0.022)     (0.023)     (0.011)        (0.026)     (0.022)      (0.007)
 Deposits/ Assets                 -0.251∗∗∗   -0.237∗∗∗   -0.067∗∗∗      -0.344∗∗∗   -0.272∗∗∗    -0.135∗∗∗
                                   (0.028)     (0.026)     (0.014)        (0.054)     (0.038)      (0.008)
 Narrow maturity gap                  Y           Y           Y               Y           Y            Y
 Time FE                              Y           Y           Y               Y           Y            Y
 Institution FE                       N           N           Y               N           N            Y
 R2 /Within-R2                      0.210       0.076       0.214           0.136       0.064        0.019
 Obs.                              19,815      19,815      19,815         22,699      22,699       22,699

 Size                              0.325∗∗∗    0.690∗∗∗   0.184∗∗∗       0.397∗∗∗     0.303∗∗∗    0.403∗∗∗
                                   (0.020)      (0.040)    (0.057)        (0.050)      (0.027)     (0.034)
 Deposits/ Assets                 -0.117∗∗∗   -0.235∗∗∗   -0.053∗∗∗      -0.176∗∗∗   -0.128∗∗∗    -0.105∗∗∗
                                   (0.025)      (0.052)    (0.015)        (0.043)      (0.028)     (0.009)
 Narrow maturity gap                  Y            Y          Y              Y            Y           Y
 Time FE                              Y            Y          Y              Y            Y           Y
 Institution FE                       N            N          Y              N            N           Y
 R2 /Within-R2                      0.297        0.142      0.214          0.265        0.142       0.026
 Obs.                               19,815      19,815     19,815         22,699       22,699      22,699

                                                     7
                                                                Appendix – For Online Publication


        Table A6 – Difference-in-differences and triple differences sample
This table describes the data used in the difference-in-differences and triple differences specifications in
Tables 3, 4, 5, and 6, and in Appendix Table A7. Panel A provides the descriptive statistics for the
hedging, exposure, and net worth measures. Panel B compares the treatment and control group both
before and after matching. The characteristics are as of 2008Q1, that is, one year before the treatment.
The treatment group is defined as institutions with a below-median mortgage-weighted average ZIP-
code level house price change from 2007Q1 through 2008Q4. In both panels, the sample is restricted to
institutions that hedge at least once before the treatment. Data is at the BHC level and variables are
normalized and defined in Appendix Table A1. p-values are in parentheses. Time frame: 2005Q1-2013Q4.


                                    Panel A: Descriptive statistics
                                    Mean       S.D.      10th       25th    Med.        75th    90th       Obs.

 Net IR hedging                     0.026     0.413   -0.500       -0.047     0         0.049   0.666     4,268
 Gross IR hedging                   0.054     0.089      0          0.003   0.016       0.066   0.161     4,804
 Gross FX hedging                   0.001     0.003      0            0       0           0     0.001     4,804
 Maturity gap                       0.106     0.176   -0.106       -0.000   0.105       0.217   0.328     4,804
 FX exposure                        0.004     0.030      0            0       0           0     0.014     4,804
 NWIndex                           -0.055     1.355   -1.764       -0.837    0.041      0.789    1.590    4,788
 NWIndex (ex size)                 -0.177     1.363   -1.789       -0.976   -0.090      0.689    1.420    4,788
 MktCap/Assets                      0.128     0.064    0.045        0.085    0.124      0.166    0.209    4,804
 Size                              15.346     1.389   13.731       14.368   15.036     16.135   17.286    4,804
 NetInc/Assets                      0.006     0.011   -0.003        0.005    0.009      0.011    0.014    4,788
 Div/Assets                         0.001     0.001    0.000        0.000    0.001      0.001    0.002    4,804
 MktCap                            13.121     1.596   11.163       12.057   12.975     14.086   15.110    4,804
 Rating                            BBB+       0.789    BB+         BBB-     BBB+         A-        A      1,056


                      Panel B: Comparison of treatment and control group
                                            Before matching                             After matching
 Variable                         Control     Treatment         p-value       Control     Treatment      p-value

 NWIndex                            0.327       -0.208          (0.017)        0.075        -0.208       (0.176)
 NWIndex (ex size)                 0.272        -0.219          (0.021)       0.043         -0.219       (0.168)
 MktCap/Assets                     0.135         0.099          (0.001)       0.111          0.099       (0.102)
 Size                              15.291       15.382          (0.761)       15.308        15.382       (0.834)
 NetInc/Assets                      0.009        0.004          (0.000)        0.008         0.004       (0.175)
 Book equity/Assets                 0.093        0.094          (0.744)        0.093         0.094       (0.803)
 Loans/Assets                      0.699         0.751          (0.010)       0.724          0.751       (0.223)
 Real estate loans/Assets           0.492        0.580          (0.001)        0.535         0.580       (0.148)
 Securities/Assets                 0.173         0.130          (0.023)       0.158          0.130       (0.297)
 Deposits/Assets                   0.714         0.721          (0.683)       0.715          0.721       (0.873)
 Maturity gap                       0.075        0.102          (0.419)        0.083         0.102       (0.648)




                                                      8
                                                             Appendix – For Online Publication


                      Table A7 – Effect of treatment on net worth
This table provides the difference-in-differences and triple differences estimates, using the four auxiliary
measures of net worth as dependent variables, analogous to Panel A of Table 4. The treatment group is
defined as institutions with a below-median mortgage-weighted average ZIP-code level house price change
from 2007Q1 through 2008Q4. In triple differences specifications, we interact the baseline coefficient with
dummy variables based on whether institutions are in the middle or top terciles of the distributions of
real estate loans to total assets in 2008Q4. The sample is restricted to institutions that hedge at least
once before the treatment. We control for time fixed effects as in Table 2. Data is at the BHC level and
variables are normalized and defined in Appendix Table A1. Standard errors (in parentheses) are double
clustered at the institution and quarter level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ denote statistical significance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% level. Time frame: 2005Q1-2013Q4.

                          NetInc/Assets           Div/Assets              MktCap                Rating
                              ∗∗∗         ∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗                  ∗∗∗
Postt ×Treatedi        -0.192        -0.134   -0.291   -0.269        -0.259        -0.041 -0.721    -0.919∗∗∗
                        (0.053)       (0.053)  (0.055) (0.057)        (0.059)     (0.059)   (0.148) (0.152)
Postt ×Treatedi                       0.083∗              0.033                  -0.326 ∗∗∗
                                                                                                    0.588∗∗∗
  ×MidREi                             (0.047)            (0.050)                  (0.052)            (0.121)
Postt ×Treatedi                     -0.331∗∗∗           -0.118∗∗                 -0.991∗∗∗            -0.162
  ×HighREi                            (0.048)            (0.051)                  (0.053)            (0.292)
Postt ×MidREi /HighREi Y               Y          Y           Y         Y           Y          Y        Y
Exposure               N               N          N           N         N           N          N        N
Time FE                Y               Y          Y           Y         Y           Y          Y        Y
Institution FE         Y               Y          Y           Y         Y           Y          Y        Y
Within-R2            0.288           0.300      0.145       0.147     0.033       0.105      0.106    0.126
Obs.                 4,788           4,788      4,804       4,804     4,804       4,804      1,056    1,056




                                                        9
                                                           Appendix – For Online Publication


    Table A8 – Hedging and net worth: Instrumental variables estimation
This table provides evidence on the relation between hedging and net worth using an instrumental
variables approach, analogous to Table 7. Panel A shows the first stage in which the four auxiliary net
worth measures are instrumented using mortgage-weighted average ZIP-code level house price changes
over the past two years as in equation (11). Panel B shows the second stage in which hedging measures
are regressed on instrumented net worth as in equation (12). We estimate the second stage only when
the instrument has sufficient statistical power in the first stage. Each regression controls for exposure
and includes time fixed effects. We use the absolute value of net interest rate hedging and the maturity
gap. Data is at the BHC level and variables are normalized and defined in Appendix Table A1. Standard
errors (in parentheses) are double clustered at the institution and quarter level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ denote
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level. Time frame: 1995Q1-2013Q4.

                                         Panel A: First stage

                             NetInc/Assets          Div/Assets           MktCap              Rating
∆ House prices              0.172∗∗∗ 0.146∗∗∗     -0.054∗ 0.000      0.062∗∗ 0.039∗∗∗   0.196∗∗∗ 0.231∗∗∗
                             (0.031) (0.041)      (0.033) (0.022)    (0.032) (0.015)     (0.057) (0.068)
Exposure                       Y         Y          Y      Y           Y         Y         Y         Y
Time FE                        Y         Y          Y      Y           Y         Y         Y         Y
Institution FE                 N         Y          N      Y           N         Y         N         Y
R2 /Within-R2                0.231     0.334      0.096 0.127        0.061     0.371     0.040     0.135
F -statistic                 9.06       7.12       4.74   5.21       27.35    32.10      10.45     10.11
Obs.                         9,911     9,911      13,338 13,338      11,736   11,736     1,868     1,868


                                       Panel B: Second stage

                                                Net IR hedging      Gross IR hedging    Gross FX hedging

NetInc/Assets (instr.)                         0.171∗∗∗ 0.148∗∗∗    0.112∗∗   0.108∗∗    0.005     -0.002
                                               (0.053) (0.053)      (0.049)   (0.046)   (0.016)   (0.010)
Exposure                                           Y        Y          Y         Y         Y          Y
Time FE                                            Y        Y          Y         Y         Y          Y
Institution FE                                     N        Y          N         Y         N          Y
Obs.                                             9,911    9,911      9,911     9,911     9,911      9,911

MktCap (instr.)                                0.199∗∗∗ 0.121∗      0.232∗∗∗ 0.105∗      -0.001    0.002
                                                (0.052) (0.052)      (0.061) (0.054)    (0.005)   (0.003)
Exposure                                           Y       Y            Y       Y          Y         Y
Time FE                                            Y       Y            Y       Y          Y         Y
Institution FE                                     N       Y            N       Y          N         Y
Obs.                                            11,736 11,736        11,736 11,736      11,736    11,736

Rating (instr.)                                0.142∗∗   0.087∗     0.251∗∗   0.082∗∗    0.004     0.002
                                               (0.061)   (0.042)    (0.110)   (0.032)   (0.004)   (0.003)
Exposure                                          Y         Y          Y         Y         Y         Y
Time FE                                           Y         Y          Y         Y         Y         Y
Institution FE                                    N         Y          N         Y         N         Y
Obs.                                            1,868     1,868      1,868     1,868     1,868     1,868



                                                    10
                                                                Appendix – For Online Publication


    Table A9 – Hedging and net worth: Evidence excluding bottom tercile
This table provides evidence on the relation between interest rate or foreign exchange hedging and the four
main measures of net worth, dropping institutions in the bottom tercile of the distribution of the relevant
net worth variable, analogous to Table 2. For each combination of hedging and net worth measures, we
estimate a pooled OLS specification, a Tobit specification, and a specification with institution fixed
effects. We control for exposure and time fixed effects as in Table 2. We use the absolute value of net
interest rate hedging and the maturity gap. Data is at the BHC level and variables are normalized and
defined in Appendix Table A1. For Tobit specifications, marginal effects are reported. Standard errors
(in parentheses) are double clustered at the institution and quarter level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ denote statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level. Time frame: 1995Q1-2013Q4.

                                Net IR hedging                Gross IR hedging              Gross FX hedging
                             Pooled     Tobit Within Pooled            Tobit    Within Pooled        Tobit     Within

NWIndex                     0.203∗∗∗ 0.230∗∗∗ 0.008        0.236∗∗∗ 0.235∗∗∗ 0.069∗∗∗     0.289∗∗   0.215∗∗∗ -0.004
                             (0.040) (0.038) (0.022)        (0.061) (0.049) (0.012)       (0.139)    (0.075) (0.011)
Exposure                    0.124∗∗ 0.105∗∗ -0.005         0.182∗∗ 0.134∗∗ 0.002           0.053     0.054∗ 0.052∗∗∗
                             (0.057) (0.049) (0.008)        (0.075) (0.056) (0.004)       (0.038)    (0.031) (0.006)
Time FE                         Y       Y       Y              Y       Y        Y            Y          Y       Y
Institution FE                  N       N       Y              N       N        Y            N          N       Y
R2 /Within-R2                 0.211 0.066 0.234              0.065 0.031 0.014             0.033      0.055 0.014
Obs.                         12,470 12,470 12,470           13,776 13,776 13,776          13,773     13,773 13,773

NWIndex (ex size)            0.072∗    0.087∗∗∗ 0.002       0.038     0.063∗∗∗ 0.060∗∗∗   0.215∗    0.112∗∗∗    -0.006
                             (0.040)    (0.011) (0.020)    (0.043)     (0.010) (0.011)    (0.125)    (0.009)   (0.010)
Exposure                     0.123∗∗   0.106∗∗∗ -0.006     0.186∗∗    0.137∗∗∗ 0.001      0.346∗    0.092∗∗∗    0.054
                             (0.056)    (0.006) (0.008)    (0.076)     (0.006) (0.004)    (0.181)    (0.004)   (0.006)
Time FE                         Y          Y       Y          Y           Y       Y          Y          Y          Y
Institution FE                  N          N       Y          N           N       Y          N          N          Y
R2 /Within-R2                 0.188      0.051 0.235        0.048       0.018 0.014        0.131      0.065      0.014
Obs.                         12,466     12,466 13,155      13,776      13,776 14,580      12,863     12,863    13,637

MktCap/Assets                 0.031     0.039     -0.012     -0.037    -0.005    -0.018 0.243∗ 0.091∗∗ -0.032
                             (0.035)   (0.034)   (0.017)    (0.035)   (0.068)   (0.023) (0.143) (0.043) (0.037)
Exposure                     0.119∗∗   0.101∗∗    -0.005   0.182∗∗∗   0.130∗∗   0.009∗∗ 0.492∗∗ 0.117∗∗∗ 0.064∗∗∗
                             (0.051)   (0.044)   (0.007)    (0.069)   (0.051)   (0.004) (0.231) (0.038) (0.007)
Time FE                         Y         Y         Y          Y         Y         Y       Y       Y        Y
Institution FE                  N         N         Y          N         N         Y       N       N        Y
R2 /Within-R2                 0.175     0.046     0.225      0.045     0.015     0.011   0.186 0.083 0.015
Obs.                         13,408    13,408    13,408     15,205    15,205    15,205 12,894 12,894 12,894

Size                        0.409∗∗∗ 0.382∗∗∗ 0.219∗∗      0.551∗∗∗ 0.436∗∗∗ 0.653∗∗∗     0.290∗∗∗ 0.262∗∗∗ 0.650∗∗∗
                             (0.022) (0.018) (0.086)        (0.068) (0.041) (0.049)        (0.068) (0.054) (0.046)
Exposure                    0.067∗∗∗ 0.040∗ 0.004          0.133∗∗∗ 0.081∗∗ 0.024∗∗∗       0.284∗ 0.055∗∗ 0.080∗∗∗
                             (0.025) (0.023) (0.009)        (0.051) (0.035) (0.005)        (0.157) (0.025) (0.007)
Time FE                         Y       Y        Y             Y       Y        Y             Y       Y        Y
Institution FE                  N       N        Y             N       N        Y             N       N        Y
R2 /Within-R2                 0.315 0.125 0.219              0.257 0.113 0.026              0.161 0.207 0.037
Obs.                         13,482 13,482 13,482           15,204 15,204 15,204           13,539 13,539 13,539


                                                       11
                                                               Appendix – For Online Publication


                       Table A10 – Hedging and regulatory capital
This table provides evidence on the relation between interest rate or foreign exchange hedging and mea-
sures of regulatory capital. In Panel A, for each combination of hedging and regulatory capital measures,
we estimate a pooled OLS specification, a Tobit specification, and a specification with institution fixed
effects. We control for exposure and time fixed effects as in Table 2. We use the absolute value of net
interest rate hedging and the maturity gap. Data is at the BHC level and variables are normalized and
defined in Appendix Table A1. For Tobit specifications, marginal effects are reported. Standard errors
(in parentheses) are double clustered at the institution and quarter level. Panel B provides the results
for Davidson-MacKinnon J-tests of whether the specifications with measures of regulatory capital and
net worth are nested. The t-statistics are reported and p-values are in parentheses. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ denote
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level. Time frame: 1995Q1-2013Q4.

                           Panel A: Cross-sectional and within evidence
                         Net IR hedging                 Gross IR hedging                 Gross FX hedging
                    Pooled   Tobit       Within     Pooled   Tobit       Within      Pooled Tobit Within
RegCap/Assets      -0.055 -0.070∗∗∗
                         ∗∗
                                         0.025∗∗   -0.062∗∗
                                                            -0.068∗∗      -0.008      0.008 -0.013 0.020∗∗∗
                    (0.024) (0.026)      (0.010)    (0.029) (0.026)      (0.006)     (0.034) (0.020) (0.005)
Exposure               Y       Y            Y          Y        Y            Y          Y       Y       Y
Time FE                Y       Y            Y          Y        Y            Y          Y       Y       Y
Institution FE         N       N            Y          N        N            Y          N       N       Y
R2 /Within-R2        0.161   0.042        0.216      0.043    0.016        0.010      0.006   0.022   0.005
Obs.                19,123  19,123       19,123     21,753   21,753      21,753      21,749 21,749 21,749
Tier1/Assets       -0.131∗∗∗ -0.150∗∗∗    0.016 -0.161∗∗∗ -0.154∗∗∗ -0.031∗∗∗ -0.036 -0.087∗∗∗ 0.013∗∗
                    (0.028) (0.031)      (0.010) (0.039) (0.036) (0.006) (0.030) (0.031) (0.005)
Exposure               Y         Y          Y       Y         Y         Y        Y       Y        Y
Time FE                Y         Y          Y       Y         Y         Y        Y       Y        Y
Institution FE         N         N          Y       N         N         Y        N       N        Y
R2 /Within-R2        0.174     0.052      0.216   0.063     0.028     0.011    0.007   0.037    0.004
Obs.                19,123    19,123     19,123  21,753    21,753    21,753 21,749 21,749 21,749
                          Panel B: Davidson-MacKinnon (1981)’s J-test
                                                   Net IR hedging       Gross IR hedging Gross FX hedging
                                                   RegCap      Tier1    RegCap      Tier1     RegCap    Tier1
H0: Net worth / H1: Regulatory capital
NWIndex                                            3.21∗∗∗    5.51∗∗∗     0.62     3.03∗∗∗      0.03      1.59
                                                   (0.001)    (0.000)   (0.537)    (0.002)    (0.972)   (0.113)
NWIndex (ex size)                                  2.87∗∗∗    5.32∗∗∗     0.97     2.80∗∗∗      0.11     1.74∗
                                                   (0.004)    (0.000)   (0.330)    (0.005)    (0.914)   (0.082)
MktCap/Assets                                      2.62∗∗∗    3.20∗∗∗     0.91      1.92∗      -0.29     2.36∗∗
                                                   (0.009)    (0.001)   (0.365)    (0.056)    (0.773)   (0.018)
Size                                                 1.07     2.73∗∗∗   3.34∗∗∗     -1.64      1.12       -0.82
                                                   (0.285)    (0.006)   (0.001)    (0.101)    (0.261)   (0.412)
H0: Regulatory capital / H1: Net worth
NWIndex                                            5.89∗∗∗     6.30∗∗∗ 5.07∗∗∗      5.54∗∗∗   2.75∗∗∗   2.74∗∗∗
                                                    (0.000)    (0.000) (0.000)      (0.000)   (0.006)   (0.006)
NWIndex (ex size)                                  2.96∗∗∗     3.57∗∗∗   1.13        1.66∗     2.06∗∗    2.14∗∗
                                                    (0.003)    (0.000) (0.260)      (0.097)   (0.040)   (0.033)
MktCap/Assets                                        2.40∗∗    5.18∗∗∗   1.30       2.83∗∗∗    2.14∗∗    2.22∗∗
                                                    (0.017)    (0.000) (0.194)      (0.005)   (0.033)   (0.026)
Size                                               11.49∗∗∗   11.46∗∗∗ 22.37∗∗∗    21.77∗∗∗   4.21∗∗∗   4.12∗∗∗
                                                    (0.000)    (0.000) (0.000)      (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)

                                                      12
                                                        Appendix – For Online Publication


 Figure A1 – Distribution of measures of net worth and regulatory capital
This figure plots the distribution of the four auxiliary measures of net worth and regulatory capital,
analogous to Figure 1. There is one cross-sectional box plot for each quarter; in each of them, the
horizontal dash is the median and the diamond is the mean. The whiskers represent the 5th and 95th
percentiles. The grey rectangle represents the 25th and 75th percentiles. Data is at the BHC level and
variables are defined in Appendix Table A1. Time frame: 1995Q1-2013Q4.




                                                 13
                                                                    Appendix – For Online Publication


                       Figure A2 – Decomposition of net income
This figure shows the distribution of net income and some of its key components over the sample period.
The top left panel shows the distribution of net income (normalized by total assets); this panel also
shows the year 2009 in dark red, which is the treatment year in the difference-in-differences and triple
differences estimation. The top right panel shows the distribution of net interest income (normalized
by total assets); the bottom left panel shows the distribution of provisions for loan losses (normalized
by total assets). Provisions enter negatively in the calculation of net income. The bottom right panel
shows the ratio of non-accrual loans to total assets, broken down by loan type. In the top two panels and
bottom left panel, there is one cross-sectional box plot for each quarter. In each of them, the horizontal
dash is the median and the diamond is the mean. The whiskers represent the 5th and 95th percentiles.
The grey rectangle represents the 25th and 75th percentiles. Data is at the BHC level and variables are
defined in Appendix Table A1. Time frame: 1995Q1-2013Q4.




                                                                        .03




                                                                                                  Real-estate loans
                                                                                                  Commercial loans
                                                                                                  Other loans
                                                         Non-accrual loans / Total loans
                                                             .01        0      .02




                                                                                           1995        2000           2005   2010   2015




                                                   14
                                                    Appendix – For Online Publication


Appendix B: Bank-level evidence
This appendix replicates some of the main results at the bank level. The additional
contribution of bank-level data is that it allows us to construct an alternative measure
of net interest rate hedging (Section B.1) and an alternative measure of balance sheet
interest rate exposure (Section B.2). That said, the results at the bank level mirror those
at the BHC level both in terms of statistical significance and economic magnitude; indeed,
the bank-level results are remarkably similar to those obtained using BHC data.

B.1     Measuring net interest rate hedging at bank level
Bank-level data allows us to construct an alternative measure of net interest rate hedging
for the subset of banks that use only swaps and no other types of interest rate derivatives.
For such banks, we can infer net hedging as follows: first, banks report the notional
amount of interest rate derivatives held for hedging purposes; second, banks report the
notional amount of swaps held for hedging on which they pay a fixed rate. The notional
amount of swaps held for hedging on which they pay a floating rate, while not reported,
can then be inferred from these two numbers for the subset of banks that only use swaps.
Thus, for a bank i at time t which reports using only swaps, we construct a measure of
net hedging as
                                            Pay-fixed swapsit − Pay-float swapsit
            Net interest rate hedgingit =                                         .    (B1)
                                                          Assetsit

This ratio can be computed for 28.7% of all bank-quarter observations for banks that
use derivatives. Banks for which net hedging can be computed are relatively large and
have a median size of 13.58 (in log assets), which is above the 90th percentile of the bank
size distribution. An analogous measure cannot be constructed at the BHC level due to
differences in the reporting requirements for BHCs and banks.
    A positive (negative) value of net interest rate hedging means that an institution is
taking a net pay-fixed (pay-float) position, that is, hedges against increases (decreases)
in interest rates. To corroborate that derivatives which banks report as being used for
hedging purposes are indeed used for risk management, we plot the distribution of net
hedging conditional on banks’ maturity gap being above the 75th percentile vs. below
the 25th percentile in Figure B1; the shift in the distributions is evident and consistent
with hedging: banks with a more negative maturity gap, that is, more net floating rate
liabilities, tend to have a net pay-fixed position in interest rate swaps, and vice-versa.

B.2     Duration gap as measure of interest rate exposure
Bank-level data also allows us to obtain an alternative measure of balance sheet exposure
to interest rate risk, the duration gap. The duration gap is essentially the difference
between the duration of assets and liabilities. In contrast to the maturity gap, which
measures only the difference between assets and liabilities that mature or reprice within


                                             15
                                                           Appendix – For Online Publication


one year, the duration gap measures differences in maturities and repricing frequencies
across all maturities.
    Denote the market value of a bank’s assets, liabilities, and equity by A, L and E,
respectively, with A = L + E. Total assets and liabilities are comprised of contracts
                                                                              P
in various duration categories, respectively indexed by i and j, where A = i Ai and
     P
L = j Lj , and Di (Dj ) denotes the duration in category i (j). The duration of assets
and liabilities, respectively, are DA = i AAi Di and DL = j LLj Dj , and we define the
                                         P                   P

duration gap as
                                                 L
                                    Dgap ≡ DA − DL .
                                                 A
Since E = A − L, the duration of equity is
                                      X Ai            X Lj            A
                              DE =             Di −            Dj =     Dgap ;
                                       i   E           j   E          E

thus, the duration gap is essentially the deleveraged duration of equity.
    To understand the connection between these measures and the maturity gap, suppose
there were only two types of assets – short-term assets As and long-term assets Al –
and analogously two types of liabilities, Ls and Ll . Suppose moreover that short-term
(resp. long-term) assets and liabilities have the same duration, and that Ds = 0 whereas
                                                                           −Ls
Dl = 1. Then the duration gap can be written as Dgap = E            A
                                                                      − As A   = EA
                                                                                    − Mgap ,
                 As −Ls
where Mgap ≡ A is the maturity gap, and the duration of equity can be written as
             A
DE = 1 − E     Mgap . Under these stark simplifying assumptions, if the bank were fully
levered, the duration gap would just be the negative of the maturity gap, and if the bank
were fully equity financed, the duration of equity would be one minus the maturity gap.
More generally, one should thus expect the duration gap and the maturity gap to move
in opposite directions.40
    In the bank-level data, a detailed breakdown of assets and liabilities by remaining
maturity (for fixed-rate instruments) or repricing date (for variable-rate instruments) is
available from 1997Q2 onwards. The call reports provide a breakdown in 6 maturity buck-
ets: [0, 3m], (3m, 1y], (1y, 3y], (3y, 5y], (5y, 15y], and {> 15y} (where m is months and y
is years). We use the mid-point of each bucket as our measure of duration (and duration
20 for the top bucket). On the assets and liabilities side, the breakdown is available for 26
and 11 categories of instruments, respectively, which together comprise more than 90% of
assets and liabilities. For assets and liabilities for which no maturity/repricing informa-
tion is available, we assign the weighted average duration by bank and quarter. Finally,
we assign a duration of zero to demand deposits, even though their actual maturity or
repricing frequency is likely to be higher, due to the slow-moving nature of deposit rates
(see Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl, 2018).
  40
   English, Van den Heuvel, and Zakrajsek (2018) define a different notion of the duration gap, namely,
 EVZ
Dgap  ≡ DA − DL , that is, simply the difference between the duration of assets and liabilities; this
measure does not incorporate the effect of leverage and is less closely related to the duration of equity.




                                                      16
                                                     Appendix – For Online Publication


B.3     Adapting net worth index for bank level data
We adapt the net worth index for bank level data, since market capitalization is not gen-
erally available at the bank level. We replace market capitalization over assets with book
equity (BkEqty) over assets in the net worth index, keeping the other three components
(size, net income over assets, and dividends over assets) unchanged. Following the same
procedure as at the BHC level, we compute the first principal component and obtain the
following bank-level net worth index:
                           BkEqtyit                            NetIncit            Divit
NWIndexbank
       it   ≡ 0.201 ×               + 0.181 × Sizeit + 0.314 ×          + 0.307 ×          .
                           Assetsit                            Assetsit           Assetsit

For comparison, if we construct the analogous index at the BHC level, we obtain the
following loadings: book equity over assets (0.235), size (0.190), net income over assets
(0.293), dividends over assets (0.298). Thus the loadings obtained in bank-level and BHC-
level data are rather similar. Moreover, these loadings are similar to those obtained in
our baseline net worth index, which uses the market capitalization (see equation (3) and
Appendix Table A1); the main difference is that the baseline index loads relatively more
on market capitalization and relatively less on size compared to the index using book
equity.41

B.4     Results at bank level
We use the bank-level data to replicate some of our main findings obtained at the BHC
level (see Appendix Table B1 for the summary statistics of the bank-level data and
Appendix Table B2 for the results) obtaining rather similar results throughout. Panel A
shows the cross-sectional and within-bank stylized facts, using both the net worth index
and size as measures of net worth. Across all specifications, we find a positive and
significant relation between hedging and net worth, of similar magnitude as that obtained
using BHC data (see Table 2).
    Panel B replicates our main difference-in-differences and triple differences specifica-
tions. Most notably, the results obtained with the bank-level net interest rate hedging
measure are remarkably similar to the results obtained using the measure of net hedg-
ing we constructed at the BHC level (see Panel A of Table 3), suggesting that our new
measure is a plausible measure of net interest rate hedging for BHCs.
    Finally, Panels C and D replicate the difference-in-differences and triple differences
specifications with net worth and exposure measures as the dependent variable, respec-
tively. As in Table 4, we find that treatment has a statistically and economically signifi-
cant effect of similar magnitude on net worth, concentrated among banks with high real
estate exposure, but not on measures of exposure (including the bank-level duration gap
measure). All told, the bank-level evidence corroborates our findings at the BHC level.


  41
    At the BHC level the correlation between the baseline net worth index and the index using book
equity is 0.91.


                                               17
                                                              Appendix – For Online Publication


                   Table B1 – Descriptive statistics: Bank-level data
This table provides descriptive statistics on hedging, exposure, and net worth measures for the bank-level
data. Panel A provides the descriptive statistics used in the difference-in-differences and triple differences
specifications in Appendix Table B2, Panels B to D. The sample is restricted to banks that hedge at least
once before the treatment. Variables are the bank-level equivalents of the BHC-level variables defined
in Appendix Table A1 and in Appendix B. Panel B reports estimates of a pooled OLS regression of our
baseline measure of net interest rate hedging on the bank-level measure of net interest rate hedging based
on swaps data and time fixed effects, without and with bank fixed effects. Time frame: 2005Q1-2013Q4
(Panel A); 1995Q1-2013Q4 (Panel B).


                                    Panel A: Descriptive statistics

                                   Mean      S.D.     10th      25th     Med.      75th      90th       Obs.

 Net IR hedging                    -0.012    0.112   -0.098    -0.043    -0.003    0.014    0.052      45,770
 Gross IR hedging                   0.052    0.081      0       0.002     0.014    0.064    0.152      45,770
 Gross FX hedging                   0.001    0.003      0         0         0        0      0.001      45,770
 Maturity gap                       0.012    0.151   -0.182    -0.111    -0.017    0.145    0.202      45,770
 Duration gap                       4.522    1.728    2.401     3.468    4.451     5.852    7.114      45,770
 FX exposure                        0.003    0.025      0         0         0        0      0.012      45,770
 NWIndex                           -0.033    1.212   -1.604    -0.777    0.051     0.764     1.654     45,770
 Size                              13.492    1.421   11.682    12.675   13.569    14.201    15.210     45,770

                       Panel B: Relation between net IR hedging measures

                                                                                        Net IR hedging
                                                                                      (baseline measure)

 Net IR hedging                                                                       0.189∗∗        0.117∗
   (swaps data)                                                                       (0.086)        (0.070)
 Time FE                                                                                 Y              Y
 Institution FE                                                                          N              Y
 R2 /Within-R2                                                                         0.142          0.083
 Obs.                                                                                 42,143         42,143




                                                     18
                                                                   Appendix – For Online Publication


              Table B2 – Hedging and net worth: Bank-level evidence
This table provides evidence on the relation between interest rate or foreign exchange hedging and
measures of net worth at the bank level. Panel A replicates the cross-sectional and within evidence
of Table 2; Panel B replicates the difference-in-differences and triple differences estimation of Table 3,
Panel A; and Panels C and D report the effect of treatment on net worth and exposure measures,
respectively, replicating Table 4. Panel B includes evidence using the bank-level measure of net interest
rate hedging and Panel D includes evidence using the bank-level measure of the duration gap. Data is
at the bank level and variables are normalized and defined in Appendix Table A1 and in Appendix B.
Summary statistics for the sample used in Panels B to D are in Appendix Table B1. Standard errors
(in parentheses) are double clustered at the bank and quarter level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ denote statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level. Time frame: 1995Q1-2013Q4 (Panel A); 2005Q1-2013Q4
(Panels B to D).

                           Panel A: Cross-sectional and within evidence

                           Net IR hedging                   Gross IR hedging                  Gross FX hedging

                      Pooled    Tobit     Within      Pooled        Tobit      Within      Pooled        Tobit     Within
                          ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
NWIndex              0.151    0.149   0.070          0.132    0.141   0.069               0.167    0.179   0.087∗∗∗
                      (0.023) (0.023) (0.010)         (0.025) (0.024) (0.011)              (0.022) (0.023) (0.012)
Exposure                 Y        Y         Y           Y              Y          Y           Y            Y         Y
Time FE                  Y        Y         Y           Y              Y          Y           Y            Y         Y
Bank FE                  N        N         Y           N              N          Y           N            N         Y
R2 /Within-R2          0.148    0.151     0.156       0.177          0.163      0.153       0.132        0.133     0.129
Obs.                  95,650    95,650    95,650      95,650        95,650     95,650      95,650        95,650    95,650

Size                 0.332∗∗∗ 0.345∗∗∗ 0.401∗∗∗ 0.357∗∗∗ 0.369∗∗∗ 0.412∗∗∗ 0.256∗∗∗ 0.297∗∗∗ 0.301∗∗∗
                      (0.017) (0.019) (0.021) (0.023) (0.026) (0.019) (0.034) (0.031) (0.029)
Exposure                 Y        Y         Y           Y              Y          Y           Y            Y         Y
Time FE                  Y        Y         Y           Y              Y          Y           Y            Y         Y
Bank FE                  N        N         Y           N              N          Y           N            N         Y
R2 /Within-R2          0.201    0.223     0.179       0.231          0.235      0.201       0.179        0.177     0.147
Obs.                  95,650    95,650    95,650      95,650        95,650     95,650      95,650        95,650    95,650


                Panel B: Difference-in-differences and triple differences estimation

                                                    Net IR hedging           Gross IR hedging Gross FX hedging

Postt ×Treatedi                                    -0.158∗ 0.011    -0.198∗∗              0.010   -0.103∗    0.046
                                                   (0.079) (0.056) (0.080)               (0.036) (0.050) (0.079)
Postt ×Treatedi ×MidREi                                     -0.129                        -0.175            -0.218
                                                           (0.087)                       (0.998)           (0.199)
Postt ×Treatedi ×HighREi                                  -0.255∗∗∗                     -0.287∗∗∗         -0.425∗∗∗
                                                           (0.079)                       (0.079)           (0.162)
Postt ×MidREi /HighREi                                 Y          Y             Y           Y              Y          Y
Exposure                                               Y          Y             Y           Y              Y          Y
Time FE                                                Y          Y             Y           Y              Y          Y
Bank FE                                                Y          Y             Y           Y              Y          Y
Within-R2                                            0.017      0.019         0.018       0.020          0.020      0.021
Obs.                                                45,770     45,770         45,770     45,770         45,770     45,770

                                                       19
                                                      Appendix – For Online Publication


    Table B2 (continued) – Hedging and net worth: Bank-level evidence

                           Panel C: Effect of treatment on net worth

                                                          NWIndex                             Size
                                                           ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗
Postt ×Treatedi                                      -0.371        -0.213          -0.189          0.014
                                                      (0.054)       (0.054)         (0.061)       (0.063)
Postt ×Treatedi ×MidREi                                              -0.056                      -0.262∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.053)                       (0.056)
Postt ×Treatedi ×HighREi                                           -0.283∗∗∗                     -0.517∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.051)                       (0.053)
Postt ×MidREi /HighREi                                  Y              Y              Y                 Y
Exposure                                                N              N              N                 N
Time FE                                                 Y              Y              Y                 Y
Bank FE                                                 Y              Y              Y                 Y
Within-R2                                             0.016          0.017          0.016             0.018
Obs.                                                  45,770        45,770          45,770           45,770


                         Panel D: Effect of treatment on risk exposure

                                       Maturity gap              Duration gap           FX exposure
Postt ×Treatedi                        0.025      0.024         -0.009    -0.003       0.059          0.060
                                      (0.028)   (0.027)        (0.030)   (0.031)      (0.075)        (0.075)
Postt ×Treatedi ×MidREi                           0.013                   -0.013                      0.055
                                                (0.015)                  (0.033)                     (0.066)
Postt ×Treatedi ×HighREi                         -0.018                   -0.022                      0.019
                                                (0.021)                  (0.034)                     (0.020)
Postt ×MidREi /HighREi                  Y         Y                Y       Y             Y             Y
Exposure                                N         N                N       N             N             N
Time FE                                 Y         Y                Y       Y             Y             Y
Bank FE                                 Y         Y                Y       Y             Y             Y
Within-R2                             0.019     0.020            0.022   0.026         0.021         0.024
Obs.                                  45,770    45,770          45,770   45,770        45,770        45,770




                                                20
                                                               Appendix – For Online Publication


      Figure B1 – Net interest rate hedging conditional on maturity gap
This figure shows the distribution of the net interest rate hedging position of banks in the first and fourth
quartiles of the maturity gap distribution. The bank-level measure of net interest rate hedging is defined
in equation (B1). Time frame: 1995Q1-2013Q4.


                      0.2
                                                                          Maturity gap > 75th percentile
                     0.18
                                                                          Maturity gap < 25th percentile
                     0.16

                     0.14

                     0.12
           Density




                      0.1

                     0.08

                     0.06

                     0.04

                     0.02

                        0
                       −0.2   −0.15   −0.1   −0.05        0        0.05        0.1       0.15        0.2
                                                     Net hedging




                                                       21
