                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




LABOR MARKET SHOCKS AND THE DEMAND FOR TRADE PROTECTION: EVIDENCE
                      FROM ONLINE SURVEYS

                                        Rafael Di Tella
                                         Dani Rodrik

                                     Working Paper 25705
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25705


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2019




We are grateful to Bruno Cardinale Lagomarsino and Pascuel Plotkin for excellent research
assistance. We also thank Alejandro Lagomarsino, Bruno Cardinale Lagomarsino, and
participants in a seminar at MIT for very useful comments. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Rafael Di Tella and Dani Rodrik. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Labor Market Shocks and the Demand for Trade Protection: Evidence from Online Surveys
Rafael Di Tella and Dani Rodrik
NBER Working Paper No. 25705
March 2019
JEL No. F16

                                          ABSTRACT

We study preferences for government action in response to layoffs resulting from different types
of labor-market shocks. We consider the following shocks: technological change, a demand shift,
bad management, and three kinds of international outsourcing. Respondents are given a choice
among no government action, compensatory transfers, and trade protection. In response to these
shocks, support for government intervention generally rises sharply and is heavily biased towards
trade protection. Demand for import protection increases significantly in all cases, except for the
“bad management” shock. Trade shocks generate more demand for protectionism, and among
trade shocks, outsourcing to a developing country elicits greater demand for protectionism than
outsourcing to a developed country. The “bad management” shock is the only scenario that
induces a desired increase in compensatory transfers. Effects appear to be heterogeneous across
subgroups with different political preferences and education. Trump supporters are more
protectionist than Clinton supporters, but preferences seem easy to manipulate: Clinton
supporters primed with trade shocks are as protectionist as baseline Trump voters. Highlighting
labor abuses in the exporting country increases the demand for trade protection by Clinton
supporters but not Trump supporters.


Rafael Di Tella
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field Rd
Boston, MA 02163
and CIFAR
and also NBER
rditella@hbs.edu

Dani Rodrik
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 J.F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dani_rodrik@harvard.edu
         1. Introduction
        Economists have long known that opening up to trade can have significant labor
market consequences. Exposure to trade changes domestic relative prices of goods, which in
turn can have magnified effects in labor markets. A well-known paper by Stolper and
Samuelson (1941) showed that in a two-good, two-factor economy with perfect factor
mobility, one of the two factors must end up worse off with the opening to trade. In
particular, in an economy such as the United States, with comparative advantage in skill-
intensive products, real wages of unskilled labor must fall. Even though the original Stolper-
Samuelson theorem relies on highly special assumptions, the conclusion that free trade hurts
some groups is quite general (Rodrik 2018). 1
        The distributive effects of trade operate through adjustments in labor and other
factor markets. As the relative price of imported goods falls, the import-competing sector
becomes less profitable and must shrink in size. Factories must close or downsize, and
workers are displaced. Recent empirical work has documented these consequences in detail
for the case of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA, Hakobyan and
McLaren, 2016) and China’s entry into the WTO (Autor, Dorn, and Hanson, 2013). The
shock to local labor markets can, in turn, produce political reactions. The rise of
protectionist and nativist political movements in the U.S. and Europe has been linked to the
labor market shocks emanating from globalization (Becker et al., 2016; Autor, et al., 2016;
Colontane and Stanig, 2107).
         However, international trade is neither the only, nor even the most important source
of shocks in labor markets. The bulk of labor-market churn has little to do with trade, which
typically accounts for only a minor share of layoffs or involuntary separations (Davis,
Haltiwanger, and Schuh, 1998; Kletzer, 2001; Edwards and Lawrence, 2013, pp. 47-52).
Most U.S. workers are employed in services and are shielded from the forces of international
competition. Manufacturing, where the bulk of trade-related job losses occur, is a small part
of the economy – less than 10 percent of non-farm payrolls in the U.S. -- and has been on a
shrinking path for decades. Even within manufacturing, changes in domestic demand and
technology (e.g., automation) play a much greater role. Acemoglu et al. (2016) estimate that
the China trade shock accounts for 10 percent of the job loss in manufacturing during the
2000s (or at most nearly 20 percent when the indirect effects are taken into account).
Similarly, most studies attribute the lion’s share of the increase in inequality and rise in skill
premium to skill-biased technological change rather than international trade per se.
       Yet we don’t see much political opposition to technological change or to shifts in
domestic demand patterns. International trade looms much larger in our political debates.
Where does the anti-trade sentiment come from? It could be that voters exaggerate the

1Essentially, it depends only on the assumption of incomplete specialization. In other words, the home
economy produces import-competing goods (see Rodrik 2018).



                                                                                                         1
relative significance of trade shocks, relative to other labor-market disruptions. Or they
could be more easily swayed by demagogues who target foreign nations. Alternatively, they
might view trade shocks as inherently different from other kind of shocks, deserving of a
stronger government response.
       In this paper we provide evidence on the role played by different kinds of labor-
market shocks in shaping individuals’ policy preferences. Specifically, we study how people’s
opinions about trade protectionism and compensatory financial transfers changes when
presented with six different types of shocks, all of which have the same effect on local labor
markets (a plant closure leading to unemployment and lower wages).
        Our data comes from the U.S. where we implemented a large-scale online survey in
which subjects were exposed to a piece of news formatted as a newspaper article on an
impending garment plant closure. Subjects were divided randomly into six treatment groups
corresponding to the six different scenarios described in the “news article”: (i) a drop in the
demand for the good produced by the factory (“demand shock”); (ii) disruption in
production due to new, labor-saving technology (“technology shock”); (iii) mistakes by
management (“bad management”); (iv) international outsourcing to an advanced country; (v)
international outsourcing to a developing country; and (vi) international outsourcing to a
developing country with an emphasis on poor labor standards. In addition to these six
treatments, we had a control scenario where the news article discussed some changes in the
factory without mentioning job losses. Our subjects were then asked about their support for
various types of government action. They could choose to do nothing, provide government
transfers to the displaced workers, or impose trade protection.
        Our results indicate that people respond strongly to job losses. Exposure to our
news stories about labor-market shocks results in a sharp increase in support for government
action. The desired government response is heavily biased towards trade protection rather
than financial assistance. There is a small increase in the demand for government transfers
(of 10 percent or less), while demand for trade protection increases by a magnitude that
ranges between 20 and 200 percent.
        A second take away is that people do not treat different types of job loss uniformly.
They distinguish among labor market shocks according to what produces them; the elasticity
of the response depends on the operative mechanism. Non-trade shocks such as technology
and demand shocks do increase the demand for protection, but trade shocks elicit a much
more protectionist response by a factor between 2 and 3. Among trade shocks, our
respondents exhibit greater sensitivity to trade with a developing nation than to trade with a
developed nation. Simply changing the name of the country to which production is
outsourced, from France to Cambodia, increases the demand for import protection by 6
percentage points (which is more than half the baseline level of demand for trade
protection.)




                                                                                                  2
        Surprisingly, shocks unrelated to trade, such as a technology shock or a demand
shock, generate little change in demand for transfers. By contrast, job losses due to
management failures do have some positive and significant effect on transfers, and do not
increase much the demand for protection.
        These results are in line with the last of the hypotheses above, namely that people
view trade shocks as being inherently different from other kinds of shocks. More broadly,
the evaluative frames that shape our respondents’ views on the desirability of government
action of some kind (and trade protection in particular) seem to depend not just on
prospective outcomes – the job losses – but also on the causal channels. In other words,
people seem to have preferences over distributive mechanisms as well.
         Economists typically argue that the best way to respond to adverse labor market
developments when we care about distributive outcomes is through transfers to workers
rather than protectionism. Trade protection is a highly distortionary way of compensating
the losers: it (over-)taxes a narrow range of commodities (imports) and encourages
inefficient domestic production. The baseline preferences of our sample (as revealed by the
control group) are consistent with this. Unemployment compensation and training assistance
are preferred to import protection by a very large margin. Yet our treatments produce a
much greater boost in favor of protectionism. We find that trade protection is nearly always
the favored response to labor-market shocks, even when job losses are due to non-trade
factors such as technology and demand shocks. Evidently, our respondents perceive trade
protection as a more appropriate instrument for helping displaced workers than financial
transfers. This is so even though they show little enthusiasm for trade protection in general.
        An interesting exception is the case of job losses caused by management failures. In
this case, it is the demand for compensatory transfers that goes up without much of a rise in
the demand for protection, as noted above. Unlike transfers, trade protection helps
employers as well as employees. Our respondents seem unwilling to reward management
through import protection when job losses are due to management failure -- and hence the
preference for direct transfers to labor in this scenario.

        Political ideology plays an important role in shaping protectionist preferences.
Trump supporters are on average more protectionist than Clinton supporters and react
much more strongly in favor of protectionism when primed with a trade shock. But the
impact of the trade treatment on Clinton supporters is still sizable: Clinton supporters
primed with trade shocks are as protectionist as baseline Trump voters. This finding attests
to the power of even relatively simple vignettes to shape preferences over public policy. It is
suggestive of the ease with which political campaigns can manipulate policy attitudes by
supplying appropriate narrative frames.

      Interestingly, highlighting labor abuses in the exporting country increases the
demand for trade protection by “liberals” (Clinton voters) while decreasing it among Trump



                                                                                                  3
voters. We expected priming for labor abuses abroad would increase the salience of concerns
about unfair trade and render our respondents more willing to protect workers at home
through import tariffs. Our results indicate this is true only for respondents on the liberal
end of the political spectrum.

         Trade protection is the result of both demand- and supply-side determinants (Rodrik
1995). On the demand side, we have preferences of individuals and organized interest
groups. On the supply side, there are politicians, parties, and the structure of political
institutions. These interact to produce a political-economic equilibrium in which tariffs and
other trade policies are determined (e.g., Grossman and Helpman, 1994). In this paper, our
focus is strictly on the demand side – individual preferences. There is an extensive empirical
literature on these preferences. Previous research has looked at the role of education, skills,
gender, sectoral trade exposure, social status, and many other factors (Balistreri, 1997;
Scheve and Slaughter, 2001; Beaulieu, 2002; Mayda and Rodrik, 2005; Beaulieu and Napier,
2008; Blonigen 2011; Lu et al. 2012). Our paper extends this literature in two directions.
First, we are able to compare how people respond to labor market difficulties linked not only
to imports and international outsourcing, but also to other types of shocks. Among trade
shocks, we differentiate trade with developed and developing countries. Second, we are able
to assess individuals’ preferences with respect to alternative policy options -- trade protection
versus compensatory transfers. This allows us to document the elasticity of demand for
protection in a particularly stark way.
        A second literature to which our paper contributes is the recent work on the role of
ideas and persuasion as determinants of individual preferences (Frank 2007; DellaVigna and
Kaplan, 2007; DellaVigna and Gentzkow, 2010; Lopez and Leighton, 2012; Blyth, 2013;
Rodrik, 2014; Shiller 2017; Mukand and Rodrik, 2018). Political economy work by
economists has traditionally assumed policy attitudes are driven by material interests. In
trade policy, for example, this means preferences on import protection are determined by an
individual’s education or sector of employment. To the extent that ideology, or worldview,
enters the picture, it is implicitly assumed to be largely immutable. But there is plenty of
evidence from psychology and political science that worldviews can be shaped by “priming”
-- exposure to news stories with a particular slant, specific cultural references, or simply
advertising. Our results not only confirm this, but also indicate the quantitative magnitudes
can be significant. Where preferences towards import protection are concerned, a simple
news story about job losses due to outsourcing to a developing country can transform a
“Clinton voter” into a “Trump voter”
         The outline of the paper is as follows. In the next two sections we describe the data
and the empirical strategy. In section 4 we report our main results, while in section 5 we
provide additional results on interactions with respondents’ ideology and educational level as
well as recast our findings in terms of a measure of persuasion introduced by DellaVigna and
Kaplan (2007) and DellaVigna and Gentzkow (2010). In section 6 we offer some concluding
comments.


                                                                                                    4
         2. Data Description and Representativeness
         The data for this project come from a survey that we designed and administered to
subjects through Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, an internet-based market for tasks. One
advantage of this approach is that there is no need to physically connect to subjects and
compensate them for their travel (this and other aspects of online labor markets are
reviewed in Horton, Rand, & Zeckhauser 2011). There is a small literature that uses these
type of data to study questions in different fields of economics, including the effect of peers’
wages on job satisfaction (Card et al. 2012), the effect of inequality on preferences for
redistribution (Kuziemko et al. 2015), the relationship between reference points and
preferences for redistribution (Charité et al. 2015), the effect of trust in desired tax rate (Di
Tella, et al., 2017), or views about social preferences (Weinzierl 2014 and Saez and
Stantcheva 2016), amongst others.
         We invited subjects on the mTurk platform by offering a small reward (1 dollar) for
taking a brief survey (less than 10 minutes, approximately) to “help us learn more about the
relationship between the economy and government in America”. We explained participation
was anonymous 2 and restricted access to the survey to individuals who had done a good job
in previous tasks. (We set visibility to “Private” so that only workers with a Human
Intelligence Task approval rate equal to or higher than 80% could preview our survey.) We
also used a pop-up window that appeared whenever an individual tried to go to the next
window before answering all the questions in the current window. The pop-up indicated the
number of questions that were not answered and asked whether the respondent wanted to
continue without answering all the questions.
        The main survey was conducted in two waves between late June and early July 2018.
Table 1a presents a complete list of variable definitions. This first wave included 2,135
observations from New York, Massachusetts, Florida, and California. The second wave
included 4,220 observations from the rest of the country. The survey was taken by 6,355
individuals from the USA, but only 6,328 individuals finished it (for an attrition rate of less
than 1%).
        We apply two additional filters to our data. First, there were 37 individuals who
admitted not to have devoted full attention to the questions, and they thought we should not
use their responses for the study (attention check). Second, we collected data on the time
spent by subjects on each of the windows that were presented during the survey. We noted
that several subjects took far less time than the minimum amount of time required to read
the questions. We only kept responses from individuals whose answers are among the 90%



2 We allowed individuals up to 50 minutes to complete the survey. Subjects were paid automatically after 8

hours of completing the survey.



                                                                                                             5
that took more time to finish the survey. 3 The total number of observations after applying
these two filters is 5,685. We refer this sample as the restricted sample. The mean number of
minutes spent answering the survey for the restricted sample is 6.7 minutes.
        Table 1a lists the questions used to code the variables from the survey. The first
group of questions is used to generate an initial set of demographic controls (gender, age,
race, education level, labor status, etc.). This is followed by a small group of questions to
capture subjects’ values and beliefs.
         Table 1b presents the summary statistics for our sample, the basic data for pre-
treatment characteristics, and compares it with other samples. Of course, a key feature of our
survey is that it is conducted hiring voluntary participants. Thus, those who choose to
participate may be different from those that do not (even if they are identical in terms of
observables). Still, it is instructive to compare these data with other samples. Columns 2 and
3 split the data according to ideological inclination and reveals reasonable patterns, in
particular that Trump supporters on average across all treatments are almost twice as
protectionist as Clinton supporters but significantly less inclined to support transfers.
         The table also shows that our sample is, by and large, representative of the US
population in terms of demographics (although our sample is younger, more educated) and
in terms of policy preferences. In column 4 we compare our sample with that of Di Tella et
al. (2017) and in column 5 with that of Kuziemko et al. (2015), who also conduct their
studies through Amazon’s mTurk. The main conclusion comparing column 1 with 4 and 5 is
that the populations are strikingly similar. Kuziemko et al. (2015) collected their sample
between January 2011 and August 2012, and at least with respect to observables, it is quite
similar to the sample collected by Di Tella et al. (2017) in November 2015 and by us in mid-
2018.
         In terms of beliefs and policy preferences, the dimensions considered show
consistent patterns with those in Di Tella et al. (2017) and the US sample of the World Value
Survey (6th Wave, 2010-14), which has been widely used in politics and economics (column
6). When individuals are asked whether most people can be trusted on a 0-10 scale (with 0
on absolute agreement with “Need to be very careful” and 10 on complete agreement with
“Most people can be trusted”), the mean response in our survey was 5.1 while in the Di
Tella et al. (2017) is 4.9. When asked about competition on a 0-10 scale (with 0 on absolute
agreement with “Competition is good. It stimulates people to work hard and develop new
ideas” and 10 on complete agreement with “Competition is harmful. It brings out the worst
in people”), the mean response in our survey was 3.4 while in the WVS is 2.7 and in Di Tella
et al. (2017) is 2.6. When asked whether they agree more with “People should take more
responsibility to provide for themselves” or “The government should take more


3We took into account the fact that those who chose the option “The Government should provide financial
assistance ....” mechanically had to take longer because they had an extra question to answer.



                                                                                                          6
responsibility to ensure that everyone is provided for”, we obtain a mean response of 4.3
while in the WVS is 4.2 and in Di Tella et al. (2017) is 3.9.
         With respect to similarity in demographics, the two exceptions are age and education
(our sample being younger and more educated). The mean age in our sample is 37.1 while in
the WVS is 46.5. The fraction of people with a postgraduate degree is slightly higher in our
sample (17.7% in our study and 11.5% in the WVS) but there is a large difference in the
fraction of people with no college degree (32.6% in our sample and 63.7% in the WVS).
Finally, in column 7 we show results from the 2015 American Community Survey which
comprises a well-known large and representative sample of US population. By comparing it
to our sample, we again see that our sample is broadly similar, except for age and education.
         In Table 1c we look at the distribution of respondents across US states to assess our
sample’s representativeness on this dimension. The distribution closely follows that of the
American Community Survey 2015 and Di Tella et al. (2017), although we seem to have
slightly oversampled Florida.
        Table 1d presents the data summarized across treatments. The first column focuses
on the control group and subsequent columns show summary statistics for each treatment
group. All summary statistics are computed using the restricted sample. It suggests that the
data are balanced across treatments, at least with respect to observables, consistent with a
successful randomization.


        3. Empirical Strategy
         We study the effects of six treatments that result in an identical labor market effect: a
plant closure leading to unemployment and lower wages. Each treatment takes the form of a
news article with a different type of labor market shock introducing unemployment. In all
cases, we describe the outcome in the following way at the outset: “Nine hundred jobs are at
risk at the YGF garment plant in Creekstown, which is facing closure.” This is followed by a
second part that discusses the nature of the underlying shock. A YGF spokesman is quoted
as describing a specific source, depending on the treatment:
        1. Investment in automation and other new technologies (T1=“technology shock”);
        2. Reduced demand for the type of products made by the plant (T2=“demand
           shock”);
        3. Management failures in the plant (T3=“bad management”);
        4. Global competition and the outsourcing of production to an advanced country,
           France (T4=“advanced nation”);
        5. Global competition and the outsourcing of production to a developing country,
           Cambodia (T5=“developing nation”);




                                                                                                     7
         6. Global competition and outsourcing of production to a developing country,
            Cambodia, with an emphasis on poor labor standards (T6=“developing nation
            PLS”).
The news article then explains that these changes require the plant to be phased out and
operations to be consolidated in other plants in the country. The vignette ends with a quote
from an employee about the “devastating consequences” for the workers: “Many will
become unemployed and the rest will have to accept lower-paying jobs.”
        We note that T4 and T5 are identical except for a single word, which is the name of
the country to which the plant’s production is being outsourced (France in T4 versus
Cambodia in T5). T6, by contrast, differs from T4 in that, in addition to naming a different
country, it includes a description of poor labor standards -- “labor abuses such as unsafe
working conditions and use of child labor” -- that “can be common in developing
countries.”
        There is also a control group, which is not exposed to factory closure or job losses.
Individuals in the control group were presented with a news article stating: “The YGF
garment plant in Creekstown, employing nine hundred workers, announced its plans for the
year.” Then it mentions efforts made by the plant to improve on all dimensions included in
treatments. In Appendix 1 we describe the scenarios in detail.
       Following the treatment/control scenario, participants are then asked a question on
what they think the response of the federal government should be. There are three options 4:
         1. “do nothing,”
         2. “provide some financial assistance to workers who lose their jobs (e.g.,
            unemployment compensation or training assistance,” or
         3. “restrict imports of garments from overseas, by placing import tariffs on such
            imports for example.”
        Accordingly, we code three separate binary indicator variables, which take the value
of one if the participant says the government should “do nothing” (Do nothing), “provide
some financial assistance to workers who lose their jobs” (Transfers), and “restrict imports
of garments from overseas” (Protectionism), respectively, and zero otherwise.
        Our preferred specifications are fitted with the logistic link function. 5 The reason for
using this link function is twofold. First, we are interested not only in marginal effects but

4 Although we are interested in the demand for protectionism, we include three different options in an effort to
avoid potential biases caused by experimenter demand effects. See Zizzo (2010), and Kagel and Roth (2016).
Experimenter demand effects are “changes in behavior by experimental subjects due to cues about what
constitutes appropriate behavior (behavior ‘demanded’ from them).” While it cannot be entirely ruled out,
there exist several strategies from the design point of view to minimize it.
5Our results are unchanged when we use different estimation approaches, such as multinomial logits, linear
probability models, or probits.



                                                                                                                   8
also in predicted probabilities and logits provide bounded predicted probabilities. Second,
we can easily interpret our main results as odds-ratios to give an intuitive reading (in addition
to displaying marginal effects from the control group). We include a set of demographic and
political preferences covariates and perform interactions. We also group between treatments
to address different hypotheses.

        As in all studies of this kind, we need to be concerned about “experimenter demand
effects” – the possibility that respondents change their behavior (in this case their stated
views) since they know they are subjects in an experiment. A recent paper by de Quidt et al.
(2018) has tried to bound these effects in a series of common tasks. It finds that potential
biases “are probably modest.” In our case, even if experimenter effects are present on
average, it is unclear how they would affect what we are most interested in, namely the
differences across treatments. Neither is it clear that respondents would know how to shade
their answers, given the ambiguity about the expected experimental effects in this case. We
are also comforted by the fact that our results on the effects of the demographic covariates
on the demand for protection are consistent with previous work based on surveys (as
discussed below). Finally, we note that our results are very similar when we restrict our
sample to men. 6 Since de Quidt et al. (2018) find that women respond more strongly than
men to “experimenter demand effects,” this is consistent with the absence of experimenter
demands in our survey.



            4. Main Results
        Table 2 provides a first pass at the data by exploring the general effect of our labor
market shocks by grouping all the treatments together. Thus, “Labor Shock” is a dummy
equal to 1 if the subject was shown any of the six treatments, and equal to zero for the
control group. We run the same specification for each our three binary indicators separately:
“Do nothing” (columns 1 and 2), “Transfers” (columns 3 and 4), and “Protectionism”
(columns 5 and 6). Estimates in columns 1, 3, and 5 are predicted probabilities from logistic
regressions. 7 Estimates in column 2, 4 and 6 can be interpreted as marginal changes relative
to the base category in percentage points or probability units. All regressions include
covariates capturing demographic characteristics and political preferences. The estimated
coefficients for the full set of covariates are shown in this initial table; we will skip their
presentation in subsequent tables to focus exclusively on the treatments. Standard errors are
clustered at the state level.



6   These results are not shown, but are available on request.
7   Multinomial logit specifications yield very similar results.



                                                                                                    9
        The estimated coefficients on the covariates in the Protectionism regression display
patterns that are consistent with previous work: women, less educated individuals, and those
who support/lean towards Trump tend to be more protectionist (column 6). There are no
detectable differences in attitudes towards protectionism across different categories of race
or employment status. The patterns displayed by the coefficients of the covariates are
reasonable and encouraging insofar as they enhance the credibility of the responses we get to
the treatments we are really interested in.
         Next, we look at the results for the control group across different types of
government action (first line in Table 2). These give us the distribution of baseline
preferences for government behavior. We note that the baseline level of preference for
Transfers is quite high: the probability of thinking that the government should provide
financial assistance is 0.70 (column 3). The baseline levels of Do nothing and Protectionism
are comparatively low (0.19 and 0.09, respectively). So our control group heavily favors
government intervention in the form of unemployment or training assistance, but shows
little support for import protection.
         The estimated effect of the grouped “Labor shock” treatment is shown on the
second line in Table 2. In column 2 we show that participants primed with Labor Shock
reduce by 9 percentage points their preference for the government to do nothing as opposed
to providing financial assistance or import protection. This amounts to a reduction of almost
50 percent in their preference for the government to do nothing after being primed with a
shock that causes unemployment. The estimates in columns 3 to 6 indicate that the
movement is almost exclusively towards protectionism. The demand for financial assistance
to workers who lose their jobs barely changes (columns 3 and 4). Instead, participants react
by increasing their demand for protectionism. The probability of thinking that the
government should restrict imports from overseas (as opposed to doing nothing or
providing financial assistance to workers who lose their jobs) is on average 0.09 in the
control (column 5). In column 6 we show that participants primed with unemployment
increase their preference for the government to restrict imports from overseas by 11
percentage points on average. One in five subjects think the government should restrict
imports from overseas after being exposed to unemployment from different sources. In the
control group, only one in ten participants says the same. Furthermore, this effect seems
fairly homogenous across different categories of subjects. Political preferences are one
notable characteristic showing consistently heterogeneous treatment effects. We will explore
this phenomenon later.
        We next look at individual treatments and the differences among them. Figure 1 and
Table 3, Panels A-C explore desired government interventions by type of unemployment
shock for each outcome as defined above (Do nothing, Transfers, and Protectionism). The
probability levels for the control group are the same as in Table 2. Figure 1 provides a visual
description of the impact of individual treatments, while the three panels of Table 3 displays
the detailed results.


                                                                                                  10
         We can see from Table 3, Panel A that there are some differences across treatments
for Do nothing, but they are not sizable. The preference for Do nothing drops (statistically
significantly) with each treatment, with the size of the drop varying from 6 percentage points
(“bad management”) to 13 points (“developing nation”). In Panel B, on the other hand, we
find there are some important differences for Transfers across treatments. Interestingly,
trade shocks (T4, T5 and T6) significantly reduce participants’ preferences for transfers from
control group levels. Non-trade shocks tend to have the opposite effect, but more weakly.
The probability of thinking that the government should provide financial assistance (as
opposed to doing nothing or providing import protection) increases from 3 to 7 percentage
points on average for non-trade shocks (column 4). But “bad management” (T3) is the only
shock that produces a statistically significant increase in demand for transfers. “Technology
shock” (T2) and “demand shock” (T1) have the same sign pattern as “bad management,”
and “technology shock” is borderline significant in the specification with the full set of
covariates (column 4).
       In Panel C we present results for import protection. In short, all shocks except for
“bad management” significantly increase participants’ preferences for protectionism.
“Technology” and “demand” shocks have quantitatively similar effects. And, perhaps
unsurprisingly, participants primed with trade shocks provide the strongest protectionist
response. It is interesting to note that the demand for protectionism from participants
primed with the “bad management” shock is not statistically different from the control
group’s preferences. One way to interpret this result is through theories that assign a large
emotional cost to policies that benefit people who have been deemed “unworthy” (see
Rotemberg 2003 and Di Tella and MacCulloch, 2009).
        In scrutinizing the results further, it is practical to group the results into three sub-
groups: non-trade shocks, trade shock with advanced nation, and trade shock with
developing nation. In Table 4 we show predicted probabilities for the demand for
protectionism in columns 1 and 3, and marginal changes from the control group in columns
2 and 4. The predicted probability of thinking that government should restrict imports from
overseas is on average 0.09 in the control group, 0.13 for participants primed with a non-
trade shock, 0.23 for those exposed to a trade shock form an advanced nation, and 0.29 for
those exposed to a trade shock form a developing nation. The marginal changes from the
control group are statistically different from zero in all cases.
        Hence, while adverse labor market shocks bolster the demand for protectionism in
general, the quantitative magnitudes differ depending on the shock in question. Non-trade
shocks have the smallest effect, though these are still statistically significant (except for the
case of management mistakes). Trade shocks have stronger effects. And among trade
shocks, it is trade with developing countries that elicits the greatest demand for protection
when it is associated with job losses. We can reject at 1% level a Wald test of equality
between coefficients for Trade shock (advanced nation) and Trade shock (developing
nation) in columns 2 and 4.


                                                                                                    11
         Remember that we have two distinct treatments which involve trade with a
developing nation, T5 and T6. These yield very similar results, although T6 includes a
specific mention to poor labor standards in developing nations. The jump in the desired
level of protection when we go from Developed to Developing (of 6 percentage points)
occurs between treatments T5 and T4, with T6 adding no further boost to protectionist
demand. Recall that the only difference between T5 and T4 is that we switch a single word,
the name of the country (from France to Cambodia). It is remarkable that changing the
identity of a country makes such a large difference to the preferences for protection. Job
losses that arise from trade with a less developed country seem to be regarded in a more
negative light than job losses from trade with a rich nation.

         It is perhaps also surprising that highlighting the issue of poor labor standards in
developing nations (T6) seems to make little difference to the results. T6 differs from T5 in
that it adds the following sentence: “Labor abuses such as unsafe working conditions and
use of child labor can be common in developing countries.” The fact that we did not get any
leverage out of labor-standards priming may be due to the fact naming the country was
enough to suggest the presence of poor labor standards, with the additional priming not
adding much. In other words, respondents may have already assumed poor labor standards
are endemic to developing countries. In this case the difference in responses to the France-
Cambodia cases could have been driven in part by such considerations. Or it could be that
the subjects did not particularly care about the labor situation in the exporting country (and
the differential response to France versus Cambodia is explained by differences between the
two countries that are not related to the treatment of workers).

         An alternative, intriguing possibility is that the response to poor labor standards
abroad may depend on respondents’ ideology and that the heterogeneity is masked by
aggregation. There is some suggestive evidence in our data that Clinton and Trump
supporters moved in opposite directions when we primed them specifically for labor
standards. These results are shown in Table 5. When we divide respondents into groups that
reflect political orientation, we find that that mentioning labor abuses increases the demand
for trade protection by “liberals” (Clinton voters) while decreasing it among Trump voters.
For respondents who identify themselves as pro-Clinton or leaning towards Clinton, there is
a 2-3 points increase in the demand for protection as we go from T5 to T6. For respondents
who identify with Trump, there is 4-6 points decrease. These differences are not statistically
significant, though a two-way split in the sample between the two political camps comes
close to borderline significance at the 10% level (p-value 0.114). These two effects in the
opposite direction cancel out in the aggregate, which is why we see no difference between
T5 and T6 in Table 4.

       Our prior at the outset of this study was that priming for labor abuses in the
exporting country would increase the salience of concerns about unfair trade (see discussion
in Rodrik 2019). Hence we expected our respondents to become more willing to protect


                                                                                                 12
workers at home through import tariffs. The findings with respondents on the liberal end of
the political spectrum are consistent with this expectation. The results for individuals at the
other end of the spectrum are more puzzling: highlighting labor abuses abroad seem to make
Trump supporters less sympathetic toward domestic workers.

        We scrutinize the effects of political ideology on demand for trade protection further
in the next section.



        5. Ideology, Education, and Persuasion
        The treatment effects we have discussed seem to operate fairly uniformly across
many demographic and other categories (age, race, employment status, attitudes towards
inequality, confidence in various institutions, etc.). In other words, there are not many strong
interaction effects with the covariates. But political preferences constitute one important
exception to this generalization.
        We show this in Figure 2, where we explore the relationship between the demand for
protectionism and political preferences. Subjects are grouped according to whether they
were pro-Clinton, Center (but leaning Clinton), Center (but leaning Trump), or pro-Trump.
We graph predicted probabilities for import protection against these political preferences
for, respectively, the control group, participants exposed to non-trade shocks, and
participants exposed to trade shocks. (Note that differential treatment effects for Trump or
Clinton supporters are shown with other covariates -including education levels- held
constant at their mean values.) We can see from the figure that the base level of demand for
import protection differs across Trump and Clinton supporters in the expected manner.
Beyond this, we find two interesting facts to note from Figure 2. First, respondents who
voted for Trump exhibit much more elastic demand for trade protection than those who
voted for Clinton. Secondly, however, even Clinton voters’ preferences appear to be quite
malleable: we find that a trade-shock primed Clinton voter is as protectionist as a baseline
Trump voter.
        With regard to the first point, Figure 2 shows that Trump supporters are particularly
sensitive to trade shocks. When primed with unemployment caused by a trade shock, Trump
supporters increase their preference for protectionism by 33 percentage points on average
while Clinton supporters increase their preference for protectionism only by 9 percentage
points on average. This is an effect more than three times as large among Trump voters as
among Clinton voters. We strongly reject the null hypothesis of equality in the magnitude of
the effect with a Wald test (p-value less than 1 percent, 0.000000012). Thus, although trade
shocks increase demand for protectionism across the board, the effect seems to amplify with
Trump supporters.
         Nevertheless, the impact on Clinton supporters of trade shocks is still quite large
relative to the baseline levels of demand for trade protection. In fact, Clinton supporters


                                                                                                   13
exposed to the trade shock demand virtually identical levels of protectionism as Trump
supporters in the control group. We cannot reject the hypothesis of equality of coefficients
with a Wald test (p-value is 0.942). This finding speaks to the power of narratives in shaping
preferences over policy choices. Whatever the underlying proclivities based on material
interests or ideologies, attitudes towards specific policies can be manipulated relatively easily
by exposing individuals to simple vignettes. 8
        We find also some heterogeneity with respect to education. The protectionist
response elasticity is broadly similar for less and medium-educated groups, but it is half the
magnitude for the most educated ones. This is shown in Figure 3, which is analogous to
Figure 2 (but with educational attainment on the horizontal axis instead of political
preferences). We see that protectionism levels are broadly the same in the control group on
average. The trade shocks push up the demand for trade protection by roughly 20
percentage points for less and medium educated groups. A Wald tests cannot reject the
hypothesis that these shifts are identical (p-value is 0.781). For the most educated groups,
the increase in the demand for trade protection is only 8 percentage points, and the change is
not statistically different from zero with 95 confidence intervals. We can strongly reject the
hypotheses that the shift is the same for the most educated and for the less or medium
educated (p-values are 0.0022 and 0.0015 respectively).
          Education tends to correlate negatively with protectionist preferences due to one or
both of two reasons. First, in a country like the U.S., more educated individuals are more
likely to be beneficiaries of free trade. Second, more educated individuals are likely to be
more familiar with the economic costs of trade barriers. Our finding that education does
moderate the protectionist response to trade gives support to these explanations, although
this is true only for post graduate education (only 17.7% of our sample has the highest
educational attainment). It suggests that the evaluative frames that people use in response to
job losses are affected by educational attainment.
        Finally, we summarize the power our treatments have over respondents’ policy
preferences by using a measure of persuasion due to DellaVigna and Kaplan (2007) and
DellaVigna and Gentzkow (2010). The “persuasion rate” is defined as the percentage of
recipients of a message that change their behavior among those that received the message
and were not already persuaded. In our case, the message is the news story about job losses
and persuasion refers to expressed demand for a policy response, either transfers or import
protection. The baseline levels of persuasion for the two policies are reflected in the control
group’s preferences.
        Given a binary behavioral outcome (persuaded or not), and denoting treatment and
control groups as T and C, respectively, DellaVigna and Gentzkow (2010) express the
persuasion rate f as follows:


8We note that these results on heterogeneity are robust to including interactions between treatments and the full set of
covariates (available on request).


                                                                                                                       14
                                               𝑦𝑦𝑇𝑇 − 𝑦𝑦𝐶𝐶   1
                                  𝑓𝑓 = 100 ∗               ∗
                                               𝑒𝑒𝑇𝑇 − 𝑒𝑒𝐶𝐶 1 − 𝑦𝑦0

where ei is the share of group i receiving the message, yi is the share of group i adopting the
behavior of interest, and y0 is the share that would adopt if there were no message. In their
words: “The persuasion rate captures the effect of the persuasion treatment on the relevant
behavior (𝑦𝑦𝑇𝑇 − 𝑦𝑦𝐶𝐶 ), adjusting for exposure to the message (𝑒𝑒𝑇𝑇 − 𝑒𝑒𝐶𝐶 ) and for the size of the
population left to be convinced (1 − 𝑦𝑦0 ).” Since we have a survey experiment with perfect
compliance, we can set 𝑒𝑒𝑇𝑇 = 1 and 𝑒𝑒𝐶𝐶 = 0. Also, we can rely on the control group to
estimate the size of the population left to be convinced, so (1 − 𝑦𝑦0 ) = (1 − 𝑦𝑦𝐶𝐶 ). With
these simplifications, the expression for the persuasion rate becomes:


                                                    𝑦𝑦𝑇𝑇 − 𝑦𝑦𝐶𝐶
                                       𝑓𝑓 = 100 ∗
                                                     1 − 𝑦𝑦𝐶𝐶


        We present the persuasion rates for transfers and protectionism in our various
treatments in Table 6. Persuasion rates are quite high on average: 11 percent in favor of
transfers in the case of non-trade shocks and 20 percent in favor of import protection in the
case of trade shocks. A 20 percent persuasion rate is at the very high end of the estimates
reported by DellaVigna and Gentzkow (2010) from a wide range of studies on consumer
and political marketing.
        While not as impressive, the persuasion rate for transfers in the case of non-trade
shocks (11 percent) is notable as well. Indeed, it may seem surprisingly large in light of the
modest econometric effects we reported previously. The apparent discrepancy is resolved by
considering the baseline level of support for transfers, which the persuasion rate takes into
account: the proportion of respondents not favoring transfers is small to begin with (see
Figure 1), reducing the denominator of the equation above. Finally, the persuasion rate for
transfers in the case of the trade treatment is negative, reflecting the decline in proportion of
respondents who favor transfers in the trade scenarios, as we noted previously.


        6. Conclusions
        We have studied policy preferences, and in particular the preferences for trade
protection versus transfers, when a labor market disruption has its origin in different types
of shocks. We find that the demand for trade protection is very responsive to news about
job losses in general. But not all job losses are evaluated in the same way. We have
uncovered interesting patterns regarding how people expect the government to respond
depending on the nature of the underlying labor market shocks.



                                                                                                        15
We reach the following specific conclusions:
1. The scenarios we present have a strong effect on people’s demand for
   government intervention: the probability that subjects choose “government
   should do nothing” as their desired response falls significantly depending on the
   scenario: the impact ranges from 36 percent (in the case for the “bad
   management” shock) to 63 percent (for the trade with a developing nation
   shock). Demand for trade protection increases by a proportion that ranges
   between 20 percent (insignificant, for the “bad management” shock) to 200
   percent (for the “developing nation” shock). The third category of policy
   response, provision of compensatory transfers to those affected, which is
   traditionally seen as the economist’s preferred option, exhibits smaller (10
   percent) or insignificant changes.
2. Trade shocks generate the highest demand for protectionism: we observe 2.5
   times the support for protectionism relative to the control group in the case of
   trade with a rich country and 3 times the support in the case of trade with a
   developing nation. Trade shocks generate comparatively small increases in the
   demand for government transfers.
3. Shocks unrelated to trade, such as a technology shock or a demand shock, also
   generate some demand for protectionism (approximately 1/3 in size of the effect
   of a trade shock) and, surprisingly, no change in demand for transfers. The only
   exception is the “bad management” shock, which causes a small increase in the
   desired transfers of 10% relative to the control group.
4. Effects appear to be heterogeneous with respect to political affiliation: Trump
   supporters exhibit a much more elastic demand for protection than Clinton
   supporters.
5. But the effects of the trade shock treatments are sizeable for Clinton supporters
   too, showing that attitudes towards trade policy can be manipulated relatively
   easily through shifts in narrative frames. In particular, we find Clinton voters
   experiencing a trade shock are as protectionist as baseline Trump supporters.




                                                                                       16
                                     Figures and Tables

                Figure 1: Distribution of answers over treatment status


        1.0

        0.9

        0.8

        0.7

        0.6
Share




        0.5

        0.4

        0.3

        0.2

        0.1

        0.0
              Control      T1          T2       T3          T4    T5       T6
                        Do nothing              Transfers          Protectionism




                                                                                   17
Figure 2: Predicted probabilities for protectionism, over presidential support




Notes. The figure is drawn with all covariates held at their mean value within categories.




                                                                                             18
    Figure 3: Predicted probabilities for protectionism, over education level




Notes. The figure is drawn with all covariates held at their mean value within categories.




                                                                                             19
                                                Table 1a: Variable definition

Variables                    Qa Description
Demographics
                                    Dummy equal to 1 if individual is male (0 if female and missing value if neither
Male                          1
                                    male/female).
Age                           2     Age in years.
White                         3     Dummy equal to 1 if indicated “White”.
Black                         3     Dummy equal to 1 if indicated “Black”.
Hispanic                      3     Dummy equal to 1 if indicated “Hispanic or Latino”.
Asian                         3     Dummy equal to 1 if indicated “Asian”.
Other race                    3     Dummy equal to 1 if indicated “Other”
                                    Dummy equal to 1 if highest level of education is Master´s Degree/Doctoral
Postgraduate degree           5
                                    Degree/Professional Degree (JD, MD, MBA).
                                    Dummy equal to 1 if highest level of education is 2-Year College Degree/4-Year
Only college degree           5
                                    College Degree.
                                    Dummy equal to 1 if highest level of education is Eight Grade or less/Some High
No college degree             6
                                    School/ “High School degree/GED” or Some College.
Full-time employee            6     Dummy equal to 1 if Full-time employee.
Part-time employee            6     Dummy equal to 1 if Part-time employee.
Self-employed                 6     Dummy equal to 1 if Self-employed or small business owner
Unemployed                    6     Dummy equal to 1 if unemployed and looking for work.
Student                       6     Dummy equal to 1 if student
Not in labor force            6 Dummy equal to 1 if not in labor force (for example: retired or full-time parent).
Beliefs and political preferences
                                    Variable taking 0 if “Need to be very careful” and 10 if “Most people can be trusted”
Trust                         7
                                    (scale: 0-10), when asked whether most people can be trusted.
                                    Variable taking 0 if “they did not make an effort” and 10 if “they were unlucky” (scale:
Poor were unlucky             8
                                    0-10), when asked the main reason poor people are poor.
                                    Variable that measures the participants agreement with the statement “the rich are
Rich work hard                9
                                    rich because they worked hard” (scale: 0-100).
                                    Variable that measures the participants agreement with the statement “the rich are
Rich were lucky              10
                                    rich because they were lucky” (scale: 0-100).
                                    Variable that measures the participants agreement with the statement “the rich are
Rich took advantage          11
                                    rich because they took advantage of others” (scale: 0-100).
                                    Variable taking 0 if “competition is good. It stimulates people to work hard and
Competition                  12     develop new ideas” and 10 if “competition is harmful. It brings out the worst of
                                    people” (scale: 0-10), when asked about their point of view about the statements.
                                    Variable taking 0 if “people should take more responsibility to provide themselves”
People/Gov more                     and 10 if “the government should take more responsibility to ensure that everyone is
                             13
responsibilities                    provided for” (scale: 0-10), when asked about their point of view about the
                                    statements.
Support Clinton              14     Dummy equal to 1 if supported Clinton
Center (leaning Clinton)     14     Dummy equal to 1 if was Center (leaning Clinton)
Center (leaning Trump)       14     Dummy equal to 1 if was Center (leaning Trump)
Support Trump                14 Dummy equal to 1 if was supported Clinton
a This column presents the question number in the main survey that was used to construct the variable.




                                                                                                                               20
                                                           Table 1b: Summary statistics

                                     All               Clinton           Trump           Di Tella, et al.    Kuziemko, et
                                                                                                                                WVS 6th Wave        ACS 2015
                                (our sample)        (our sample)      (our sample)          (2017)            al. (2015)
Demographics
Male                                46.4%               42.9%             52.1%              43.8%               42.8%               48.4%            48.6%
Age                                  37.1                 36                39                34.9                35.4                46.5             47.1
White                               73.1%               68.4%              81%               80.5%               77.8%               69.8%            74.8%
Black                                8.8%               11.3%              4.6%               9.2%               7.6%                10.4%            12.2%
Hispanic                              5%                 5.7%               4%                6.6%               4.4%                13.4%            15.5%
Asian                                6.3%                7.6%              4.2%               6.8%               7.6%                   -             6.2%
Other race                           6.6%                6.9%              6.2%               2.6%               2.6%                   -             2.8%
Postgraduate degree                 17.7%               18.8%             15.7%              13.3%               12.6%               11.5%            10.2%
Only college degree                 49.8%               50.4%             48.8%              47.4%               40.7%               24.8%            25.7%
No college degree                   32.6%               30.9%             35.4%              39.3%               46.7%               63.7%            64.1%
Full-time employee                   56%                56.1%             55.8%              46.7%               33.2%               42.7%            43.9%
Part-time employee                  11.7%               11.7%             11.7%              12.8%               13.3%                8.8%            16.7%
Self-employed                       12.2%               11.8%             12.8%              12.4%               10.5%                5.1%            7.2%
Unemployed                            5%                 5.2%              4.8%               8.0%               12.4%                9.4%            3.9%
Student                              5.5%                6.8%              3.4%               8.7%               15.8%                4.7%            3.8%
Not in Labor Force                  9.6%                 8.4%             11.5%              11.5%               14.8%               23.8%            31.7%
Beliefs and political preferences
Trust                                5.1                 5.2               5.1                 4.9                  -                   -                -
Poor were unlucky                    5.6                 6.3               4.5                  -                   -                   -                -
Rich work hard                      57.2%              51.1%             67.2%                  -                   -                   -                -
Rich were lucky                     59.7%              63.5%             53.5%                  -                   -                   -                -
Rich took advantage                 51.1%              54.2%              46%                   -                   -                   -                -
Competiton_Bad                       3.4                 3.7               2.8                 2.6                  -                  2.7               -
More_Gov_Resp                        4.3                 5.2               2.7                 3.9                  -                  4.2               -
Support Clinton                     37.5%              60.25%              0%                   -                   -                   -                -
Center (leaning Clinton)            24.8%              39.75%              0%                   -                   -                   -                -
Center (leaning Trump)              18.4%                0%              48.83%                 -                   -                   -                -
Support Trump                       19.3%                0%              51.17%                 -                   -                   -                -
Democrat                            62.3%               100%                0%               68.8%               67.5%                  -                -
Outcome variables after treatment (for control group)
Do nothing                          21.3%                14%              33.7%                 -                   -                   -                -
Transfers                           68.4%               78.2%             51.6%                 -                   -                   -                -
Protectionism                       10.3%                7.8%             14.7%                 -                   -                   -                -


Observations                        5,685               3,545              2,140              5,974              3,746               2,138          2,490,616
Notes. Column 1-3: We consider the regression sample, which corresponds to i) the sample of people who belong to the 90% that took more time to finish the
survey, separating those who answered financial assistance in the post treatment question from those who didn’t; and ii) people who answered affirmative the
attention check. Column 4: We considered the sample of people that spent at least three minutes in the main survey (not considering the candy experiment and
time spent in the treatment windows) and at least three seconds in every treatment (when applicable) of Di Tella, et al. (2017). Individuals primed with
punishment treatments are not included. Column 5: We considered the respondents that took any of the omnibus treatment surveys of Kuziemko, et al. (2015);
participants could only choose one ethnicity in this study; variable Democrat is actually a variable that takes value 1 if individual answered Clinton or Center
(leaning Clinton) when asked “In the last election, where did you stand politically?”; for the question on outcomes variables we considered the sample
corresponding to the control group (sample size 822). Column 6: data source is the 6th wave of the World Value Survey US sample; individuals whose employment
status was “Other” were omitted; variables Competition_Bad and More_Gov_Resp were constructed with the same questions than used in our study (the only
difference is that in the WVS answers range from 1-10 so we rescaled these answers to a 0-10 scale). Column 7: data source is the American Community Survey
2015; we considered individuals with 18 years old or older.




                                                                                                                                                             21
                             Table 1c: US states

                         Our sample        DDL (2017)           ACS 2015
State
                       (% of the total)   (% of the total)    (% of the total)
Alabama                       1.18               1.29               1.51
Alaska                        0.11               0.05               0.22
Arizona                       2.27               2.46               2.10
Arkansas                      0.74               0.85               0.92
California                   12.07               9.91              12.12
Colorado                      1.64               1.69               1.69
Connecticut                   0.88               0.97               1.14
Delaware                      0.25               0.39               0.30
District of Columbia          0.16               0.28               0.22
Florida                      10.92               7.08               6.52
Georgia                       3.38               3.41               3.11
Hawaii                        0.07               0.30               0.45
Idaho                         0.42               0.62               0.49
Illinois                      3.75               4.35               4.00
Indiana                       1.53               2.09               2.03
Iowa                          0.63               0.95               0.97
Kansas                        0.72               0.92               0.88
Kentucky                      1.71               1.49               1.38
Louisiana                     1.13               1.17               1.43
Maine                         0.23               0.50               0.43
Maryland                      1.74               1.84               1.88
Massachusetts                 2.30               2.01               2.18
Michigan                      3.03               3.47               3.11
Minnesota                     1.55               1.51               1.70
Mississippi                   0.83               0.70               0.91
Missouri                      1.58               2.13               1.89
Montana                       0.23               0.22               0.33
Nebraska                      0.46               0.65               0.58
Nevada                        0.83               0.89               0.90
New Hampshire                 0.26               0.50               0.43
New Jersey                    2.20               2.44               2.81
New Mexico                    0.56               0.67               0.64
New York                      6.97               5.71               6.29
North Carolina                3.43               3.92               3.13
North Dakota                  0.16               0.13               0.24
Ohio                          3.43               4.30               3.63
Oklahoma                      0.91               0.97               1.19
Oregon                        1.62               2.03               1.28
Pennsylvania                  4.20               4.72               4.08
Puerto Rico                   0.04               0.05                 -
Rhode Island                  0.32               0.25               0.34
South Carolina                1.57               1.39               1.54
South Dakota                  0.19               0.28               0.26
Tennessee                     1.57               2.08               2.06
Texas                         7.76               7.01               8.18
Utah                          0.72               0.82               0.84
Vermont                       0.33               0.23               0.21
Virginia                      2.83               2.93               2.63
Washington                    2.46               2.78               2.24
West Virginia                 0.53               0.54               0.59
Wisconsin                     1.46               1.91               1.81
Wyoming                       0.12               0.13               0.18
Notes. Column 2: data source is Di Tella, Dubra, and Lagomarsino (2017). Column
3: data source is the American Community Survey 2015; we considered individuals
with 18 years old or older.




                                                                                  22
                                                              Table 1d: Randomization

                                                                                            Treatment group
                 Variables                    Control            T1                 T2              T3               T4                T5               T6
Demographics
Male                                          44.69%          45.81%             43.72%           45.35%           46.40%          52.04%***         46.81%
                                               (0.50)          (0.50)             (0.50)           (0.50)           (0.50)           (0.50)           (0.50)
Age                                            36.38          37.85***            37.04           37.54**           37.00            36.72            37.27*
                                              (12.02)         (12.81)            (12.23)          (12.59)          (12.53)          (11.84)          (12.79)
White                                         72.87%         76.74%**            73.46%           73.55%           70.63%           72.56%           72.44%
                                               (0.44)          (0.42)             (0.44)           (0.44)           (0.46)           (0.45)           (0.45)
Black                                          9.12%          7.21%*              7.86%           10.51%            8.92%            8.65%            9.39%
                                               (0.29)          (0.26)             (0.27)           (0.31)           (0.29)           (0.28)           (0.29)
Hispanic                                       5.11%           4.98%              5.53%            4.82%            5.08%            4.70%            5.12%
                                               (0.22)          (0.22)             (0.23)           (0.21)           (0.22)           (0.21)           (0.22)
Asian                                          5.96%           5.35%              6.14%            6.67%            6.44%            6.55%            7.20%
                                               (0.24)          (0.23)             (0.24)           (0.25)           (0.25)           (0.25)           (0.26)
Other race                                     6.93%           5.72%              7.00%           4.45%**          8.92%*            7.54%            5.85%
                                               (0.25)          (0.23)             (0.26)           (0.21)           (0.29)           (0.26)           (0.23)
Postgraduate degree                           19.83%         16.04%**            17.81%           16.93%*          18.34%           17.31%*          17.07%*
                                               (0.40)          (0.37)             (0.38)           (0.38)           (0.39)           (0.38)           (0.38)
Only college degree                           51.58%          49.50%            46.81%**          51.79%           48.70%           49.44%           50.73%
                                                0.50            0.50               0.50             0.50             0.50             0.50             0.50
No college degree                             28.59%         34.45%***          35.38%***         31.27%          32.96%**         33.25%**          32.20%*
                                                0.45            0.48               0.48             0.46             0.47             0.47             0.47
Full-time employee                            56.45%          57.96%             54.79%           55.25%           54.89%           58.71%           54.02%
                                               (0.50)          (0.49)             (0.50)           (0.50)           (0.50)           (0.49)           (0.50)
Part-time employee                            13.26%          9.95%**            12.41%           11.37%           13.01%           10.75%*          10.85%*
                                               (0.34)          (0.30)             (0.33)           (0.32)           (0.34)           (0.31)           (0.31)
Self-employed                                 13.02%          11.19%             11.92%           14.09%           11.15%          10.26%**          13.41%
                                               (0.34)          (0.32)             (0.32)           (0.35)           (0.31)           (0.30)           (0.34)
Unemployed                                     5.23%           3.98%              5.28%            4.45%            5.08%            5.32%            5.98%
                                               (0.22)          (0.20)             (0.22)           (0.21)           (0.22)           (0.22)           (0.24)
Student                                        4.50%           5.72%              5.90%            5.81%            5.08%            5.69%           6.10%*
                                               (0.21)          (0.23)             (0.24)           (0.23)           (0.22)           (0.23)           (0.24)
Not in labor force                             7.54%         11.19%***           9.71%*            9.02%          10.78%**           9.27%           9.63%*
                                               (0.26)          (0.32)             (0.30)           (0.29)           (0.31)           (0.29)           (0.30)
Beliefs and political preferences
Trust                                           5.17             5.25              5.15             5.10             5.19             5.08             4.99*
                                               (2.46)           (2.34)            (2.41)           (2.43)           (2.39)           (2.43)            (2.42)
Poor were unlucky                               5.78            5.63*             5.56**           5.61*             5.75           5.50***             5.65
                                               (2.32)           (2.30)            (2.33)           (2.28)           (2.26)           (2.31)            (2.33)
Rich work hard                                 56.07           58.62**           57.70*            56.34           57.06**           58.22             56.22
                                              (24.18)          (22.69)           (24.22)          (23.19)          (23.32)          (23.35)           (24.23)
Rich were lucky                                61.30            60.02            59.30**           59.62*          59.22**          59.74*            58.93**
                                              (23.83)          (23.75)           (24.07)          (23.78)          (23.96)          (24.57)           (24.46)
Rich took advantage                            52.32           50.14**            51.74            51.42           49.68**           51.17             51.22
                                              (25.38)          (25.44)           (26.17)          (26.11)          (25.98)          (25.80)           (26.83)
Competition                                     3.39             3.43              3.42             3.36             3.38             3.27              3.27
                                               (2.37)           (2.42)            (2.44)           (2.38)           (2.35)           (2.39)            (2.35)
People/Gov more responsibilities                4.40             4.24             4.21*             4.45             4.28            4.10**            4.19**
                                               (2.91)           (2.83)            (2.96)           (2.87)           (2.85)           (2.89)            (2.86)
Support Clinton                               36.74%           35.70%            36.98%           40.42%*          39.28%           36.34%            37.56%
                                               (0.48)           (0.48)            (0.48)           (0.49)           (0.49)           (0.48)            (0.48)
Support Trump                                 19.59%           20.15%            20.76%           17.80%           17.60%           20.40%            18.54%
                                               (0.40)           (0.40)            (0.41)           (0.38)           (0.38)           (0.40)            (0.39)

Observations
                                                822              804               814              809              807              809               820
(regression sample)

Observations
                                               899              897               901             902             897                896                 901
(unrestricted)
 Notes. Mean value of the variable is presented in the first row; standard deviation is presented in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at
the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. All these statistics are computed using the regression sample. Regression sample corresponds to i) the sample of
people who belong to the 90% that took more time to finish the survey, separating those who answered financial assistance in the post treatment question
from those who didn’t; and ii) people who answered affirmative the attention check. Unrestricted sample corresponds to all the individuals (within
treatments) that took and finished the survey.


                                                                                                                                                              23
                                            Table 2: Unemployment and government intervention
                                                  (1)            (2)                     (3)              (4)                   (5)             (6)
                                                      Do nothing                                Transfers                           Protectionism
                                                 Mean     Marginal change              Mean        Marginal change             Mean       Marginal change

Control group (822)                             0.19***                               0.70***                                 0.09***
                                                (0.011)                               (0.013)                                 (0.010)
Labor shock (4,863)                             0.10***          -0.09***             0.69***            -0.02                0.20***           0.11***
                                                (0.004)          (0.012)              (0.007)           (0.015)               (0.005)           (0.012)
Gender
No female (2,630)                               0.13***                               0.69***                                 0.16***
                                                (0.006)                               (0.011)                                 (0.006)
Female (3,055)                                  0.09***          -0.04***             0.69***            -0.00                0.20***           0.05***
                                                (0.005)          (0.009)              (0.008)           (0.014)               (0.006)           (0.008)
Race
White (4,160)                                   0.11***                               0.68***                                 0.18***
                                                (0.005)                               (0.007)                                 (0.006)
Black (501)                                     0.08***          -0.03**              0.72***            0.04*                0.17***            -0.01
                                                (0.011)          (0.013)              (0.022)           (0.021)               (0.017)           (0.017)
Hispanic or Latino (287)                        0.11***            -0.01              0.66***            -0.03                0.21***            0.03*
                                                (0.021)          (0.024)              (0.034)           (0.038)               (0.016)           (0.019)
Asian (360)                                     0.11***            -0.01              0.68***             0.00                0.18***             0.00
                                                (0.015)          (0.016)              (0.023)           (0.026)               (0.018)           (0.017)
Other (377)                                     0.09***           -0.03*              0.72***            0.04*                0.17***            -0.01
                                                (0.014)          (0.014)              (0.026)           (0.023)               (0.016)           (0.016)
Education level
Low education – No college (1,852)              0.09***                               0.69***                                 0.20***
                                                (0.005)                               (0.010)                                 (0.009)
Medium education – College (2,831)              0.12***          0.03***              0.68***            -0.01                0.18***            -0.03**
                                                (0.006)          (0.009)              (0.010)           (0.014)               (0.006)           (0.011)
High education – Post-college (1,002)           0.12***           0.03**              0.71***             0.01                0.15***           -0.05***
                                                (0.012)          (0.014)              (0.017)           (0.021)               (0.012)           (0.015)
Employment status
Full time (3,184)                               0.11***                               0.68***                                 0.18***
                                                (0.005)                               (0.009)                                 (0.006)
Part-time (663)                                 0.09***          -0.02**              0.71***             0.03                0.18***            -0.00
                                                (0.010)          (0.011)              (0.017)           (0.018)               (0.017)           (0.019)
Self-employed (691)                             0.10***           -0.01               0.72***            0.04*                0.16***            -0.02
                                                (0.012)          (0.013)              (0.019)           (0.023)               (0.012)           (0.014)
Student (315)                                   0.11***           -0.01               0.67***            -0.01                0.20***             0.01
                                                (0.021)          (0.021)              (0.037)           (0.038)               (0.027)           (0.027)
Unemployed (287)                                0.09***           -0.02               0.74***            0.06**               0.16***            -0.03
                                                (0.015)          (0.015)              (0.028)           (0.030)               (0.020)           (0.021)
Not in labor force (545)                        0.12***            0.01               0.68***             0.00                0.18***            -0.01
                                                (0.010)          (0.011)              (0.017)           (0.016)               (0.016)           (0.015)
Supported past election
Clinton (2,136)                                 0.06***                               0.82***                                 0.11***
                                                (0.006)                               (0.007)                                 (0.006)
Center – leaning Clinton (1,409)                0.11***          0.05***              0.72***           -0.11***              0.16***           0.05***
                                                (0.008)          (0.010)              (0.012)           (0.015)               (0.008)           (0.011)
Center – leaning Trump (1,045)                  0.18***          0.12***              0.53***           -0.29***              0.27***           0.17***
                                                (0.012)          (0.015)              (0.016)           (0.016)               (0.014)           (0.015)
Trump (1,095)                                   0.19***          0.13***              0.45***           -0.38***              0.35***           0.24***
                                                (0.013)          (0.016)              (0.011)           (0.014)               (0.015)           (0.018)
Observations                                    5,685            5,685                  5,685            5,685                  5,685            5,685
Notes. Estimates come from a logistic regression. Standard errors clustered at state level in parentheses. A constant term is included in every regression. In
columns 1 and 2, dependent variable is a dummy variable that takes the value one if the participant thinks the government should “do nothing” (Do
nothing), and zero otherwise (transfers or protectionism). In columns 3 and 4, dependent variable is a dummy variable that takes the value one if the
participant thinks the government should “provide some financial assistance to workers who lose their jobs” (Transfers), and zero otherwise (do nothing
or protectionism). In columns 5 and 6, dependent variable is a dummy variable that takes the value one if the participant thinks the government should
“restrict imports from the contractor overseas” (Protectionism) and zero otherwise (do nothing or transfers). Labor shock is a dummy variable that takes
the value one for shocks priming participants with unemployment: T1 = technology shock, T2 = demand shock, T3 = bad management shock, T4 = trade
shock from advanced nation, T5 = trade shock from developing nation, or T6 = trade shock from developing nation with poor labor standards, and zero
otherwise. Estimates in columns 1, 3, and 5 are predicted probabilities. Estimates in column 2, 4 and 6 should be interpreted as marginal changes relative
to the base category in percentage points or probability units. All regressions include covariates regarding demographic and political preferences.
Regression sample corresponds to i) the sample of people who belong to the 90% that took more time to finish the survey, separating those who answered
financial assistance in the post treatment question from those who didn’t; and ii) people who answered affirmative the attention check. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                                                           24
                        Table 3, Panel A: Unemployment and government intervention by shock

                                                                           (1)              (2)                (3)              (4)
                                                                                          Marginal                            Marginal
                                                                    Pr[Do nothing]                      Pr[Do nothing]
                                                                                          change                              change

Control group                                                            0.22***                             0.19***
                                                                         (0.012)                             (0.011)
T1: Technology shock                                                     0.12***          -0.09***           0.10***          -0.09***
                                                                         (0.013)          (0.018)            (0.012)          (0.017)
T2: Demand shock                                                         0.13***          -0.08***           0.11***          -0.08***
                                                                         (0.011)          (0.015)            (0.011)          (0.013)
T3: Bad management shock                                                 0.14***          -0.07***           0.13***          -0.06***
                                                                         (0.010)          (0.016)            (0.010)          (0.014)
T4: Advanced nation                                                      0.12***          -0.10***           0.10***          -0.09***
                                                                         (0.008)          (0.015)            (0.008)          (0.014)
T5: Developing nation                                                    0.08***          -0.13***           0.06***          -0.13***
                                                                         (0.009)          (0.016)            (0.008)          (0.014)
T6: Developing nation (poor labor standards)                             0.09***          -0.12***           0.08***          -0.11***
                                                                         (0.008)          (0.017)            (0.008)          (0.015)

Observations                                                              5,685             5,685             5,685             5,685
Controls                                                                   No                No                Yes               Yes

Notes. Estimates come from a logistic regression. Standard errors clustered at state level in parentheses. A constant term (not shown) is
included in every regression. Dependent variable is a dummy variable that takes the value one if the participant thinks the government
should “do nothing” and zero otherwise (transfers or protectionism). T1 to T6 stand for shocks priming participants with
unemployment form different sources: T1 = technology shock, T2 = demand shock, T3 = bad management shock, T4 = trade shock from
advanced nation, T5 = trade shock from developing nation, or T6 = trade shock from developing nation with poor labor standards, and
zero otherwise. Estimates in columns 1 and 3 are predicted probabilities. Estimates in column 2 and 4 should be interpreted as marginal
changes relative to the control group in percentage points or probability units. Bonferroni's method adjusts p-values for multiple
comparisons. Controls refer to a set of demographic and political preferences covariates. Regression sample corresponds to i) the
sample of people who belong to the 90% that took more time to finish the survey, separating those who answered financial assistance in
the post treatment question from those who didn’t; and ii) people who answered affirmative the attention check. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1




                                                                                                                                     25
                     Table 3, Panel B: Unemployment and government intervention by shock

                                                                         (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)
                                                                                 Marginal               Marginal
                                                                   Pr[Transfers]          Pr[Transfers]
                                                                                  change                 change
Control group                                                         0.68***                0.70***
                                                                      (0.014)                (0.013)
T1: Technology shock                                                  0.72***      0.03      0.74***      0.04*
                                                                      (0.017)    (0.021)     (0.018)    (0.021)
T2: Demand shock                                                      0.70***      0.02      0.73***      0.03
                                                                      (0.019)    (0.024)     (0.018)    (0.023)
T3: Bad management shock                                              0.74***    0.06***     0.75***    0.05***
                                                                      (0.014)    (0.019)     (0.014)    (0.019)
T4: Advanced nation                                                   0.64***     -0.05*     0.64***    -0.06***
                                                                      (0.019)    (0.024)     (0.018)    (0.023)
T5: Developing nation                                                 0.61***    -0.07***    0.63***    -0.07***
                                                                      (0.014)    (0.020)     (0.019)    (0.023)
T6: Developing nation (poor labor standards)                          0.61***    -0.07***    0.62***    -0.08***
                                                                      (0.015)    (0.021)     (0.014)    (0.022)

Observations                                                            5,685           5,685           5,685            5,685
Controls                                                                 No              No              Yes              Yes

Notes. Estimates come from a logistic regression. Standard errors clustered at state level in parentheses. A constant term is
included in every regression. Dependent variable is a dummy variable that takes the value one if the participant thinks the
government should “provide some financial assistance to workers who lose their jobs” (Transfers), and zero otherwise (do
nothing or protectionism). T1 to T6 stand for shocks priming participants with unemployment form different sources: T1 =
technology shock, T2 = demand shock, T3 = bad management shock, T4 = trade shock from advanced nation, T5 = trade shock
from developing nation, or T6 = trade shock from developing nation with poor labor standards, and zero otherwise. Estimates in
columns 1 and 3 are predicted probabilities. Estimates in column 2 and 4 should be interpreted as marginal changes relative to the
control group in percentage points or probability units. Bonferroni's method adjusts p-values for multiple comparisons. Controls
refer to a set of demographic and political preferences covariates. Regression sample corresponds to i) the sample of people who
belong to the 90% that took more time to finish the survey, separating those who answered financial assistance in the post
treatment question from those who didn’t; and ii) people who answered affirmative the attention check. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1




                                                                                                                                     26
                      Table 3, Panel C: Unemployment and government intervention by shock

                                                                     (1)        (2)           (3)          (4)
                                                                              Marginal                   Marginal
                                                            Pr[Protectionism]          Pr[Protectionism]
                                                                              change                     change
Control group                                                    0.10***                    0.09***
                                                                 (0.011)                    (0.010)
T1: Technology shock                                             0.16***      0.06***       0.14***      0.05***
                                                                 (0.012)      (0.014)       (0.011)      (0.012)
T2: Demand shock                                                 0.17***      0.07***       0.15***      0.06***
                                                                 (0.013)      (0.017)       (0.011)      (0.014)
T3: Bad management shock                                         0.12***        0.01        0.10***        0.01
                                                                 (0.012)      (0.016)       (0.011)      (0.014)
T4: Advanced nation                                              0.25***      0.14***       0.23***      0.14***
                                                                 (0.019)      (0.024)       (0.017)      (0.022)
T5: Developing nation                                            0.31***      0.21***       0.29***      0.20***
                                                                 (0.014)      (0.017)       (0.017)      (0.020)
T6: Developing nation (poor labor standards)                     0.30***      0.20***       0.29***      0.20***
                                                                 (0.015)      (0.021)       (0.014)      (0.020)

Observations                                                       5,685              5,685              5,685              5,685
Controls                                                            No                 No                 Yes                 Yes

Notes. Estimates come from a logistic regression. Standard errors clustered at state level in parentheses. A constant term is included
in every regression. Dependent variable is a dummy variable that takes the value one if the participant thinks the government should
“restrict imports from the contractor overseas” (Protectionism) and zero otherwise (do nothing or transfers). T1 to T6 stand for
shocks priming participants with unemployment form different sources: T1 = technology shock, T2 = demand shock, T3 = bad
management shock, T4 = trade shock from advanced nation, T5 = trade shock from developing nation, or T6 = trade shock from
developing nation with poor labor standards, and zero otherwise. Estimates in columns 1 and 3 are predicted probabilities.
Estimates in column 2 and 4 should be interpreted as marginal changes relative to the control group in percentage points or
probability units. Bonferroni's method adjusts p-values for multiple comparisons. Controls refer to a set of demographic and political
preferences covariates. Regression sample corresponds to i) the sample of people who belong to the 90% that took more time to
finish the survey, separating those who answered financial assistance in the post treatment question from those who didn’t; and ii)
people who answered affirmative the attention check. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                                    27
 Table 4: People demand more protectionism when trade competition is with developing nations

                                                    (1)                 (2)                 (3)                 (4)
                                                                     Marginal                               Marginal
                                           Pr[Protectionism]                       Pr[Protectionism]
                                                                     change                                 change
Control group                                     0.10***                                0.09***
                                                  (0.011)                                (0.010)
Non-Trade shock                                   0.15***            0.05***             0.13***             0.04***
                                                  (0.008)            (0.012)             (0.007)             (0.011)
Trade shock (advanced nation)                     0.25***            0.14***             0.23***             0.14***
                                                  (0.019)            (0.024)             (0.017)             (0.023)
Trade shock (developing nation)                   0.30***            0.20***             0.29***             0.20***
                                                  (0.009)            (0.016)             (0.011)             (0.016)

Observations                                       5,685               5,685              5,685               5,685
Controls                                            No                  No                 Yes                 Yes
p-value                                                                0.003                                  0.009

Notes. All estimates come from a logistic regression. Standard errors clustered at state level in parentheses. A constant
term is included in every regression. Dependent variable is a dummy variable that takes the value one if the participant
thinks the government should “restrict imports from the contractor overseas” (Protectionism) and zero otherwise (do
nothing or transfers) after being primed with information. Treatment status has 4 categories and differentiate between
Control group, treatments associated with non-trade shocks (T1 = technology shock, T2 = demand shock, and T3 = bad
management shock), treatments associated with trade shocks from an advanced nation (T4 = trade shock from
advanced nation), and treatments associated with trade shock from a developing nation (T5 = trade shock from
developing nation, and T6 = trade shock from developing nation with poor labor standards). Estimates in columns 1
and 3 are predicted probabilities. Estimates in column 2 and 4 should be interpreted as marginal changes relative to
the control group in percentage points or probability units. Controls refer to a set of demographic and political
preferences covariates. In column 2 and 4, p-value corresponds to a Wald test of equality of marginal effects between
Trade shock (advanced nation) and Trade shock (developing nation). Regression sample corresponds to i) the sample
of people who belong to the 90% that took more time to finish the survey, separating those who answered financial
assistance in the post treatment question from those who didn’t; and ii) people who answered affirmative the attention
check. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                            28
                                      Table 5: Demand for protection and political ideology, by shock
                                                 (1)           (2)               (3)            (4)              (5)            (6)              (7)            (8)
                                                                                   Center                          Center
                                                     Clinton                                                                                           Trump
                                                                              (leaning Clinton)               (leaning Trump)
                                                           Marginal                     Marginal                        Marginal                            Marginal
                                            Prediction                      Prediction                      Prediction                       Prediction
                                                           change                        change                         change                              change

Control group                                 0.07***                         0.09***                         0.12***                          0.17***
                                              (0.015)                         (0.020)                         (0.027)                          (0.029)
T1: Technology shock                          0.08***         0.00            0.16***         0.07**          0.22***         0.09**           0.25***        0.08*
                                              (0.015)       (0.021)           (0.025)        (0.032)          (0.035)        (0.044)           (0.034)       (0.045)
T2: Demand shock                              0.09***         0.01            0.14***          0.05           0.24***        0.11***           0.29***       0.13***
                                              (0.016)       (0.022)           (0.025)        (0.032)          (0.034)        (0.044)           (0.035)       (0.046)
T3: Bad management shock                      0.05***        -0.02            0.11***          0.02           0.17***          0.05            0.22***         0.05
                                              (0.012)       (0.019)           (0.022)        (0.029)          (0.032)        (0.042)           (0.035)       (0.045)
T4: Advanced nation                           0.14***       0.07***           0.16***         0.08**          0.39***        0.27***           0.45***       0.28***
                                              (0.020)       (0.024)           (0.026)        (0.033)          (0.041)        (0.050)           (0.042)       (0.051)
T5: Developing nation                         0.16***       0.09***           0.24***        0.15***          0.42***        0.30***           0.56***       0.39***
                                              (0.022)       (0.026)           (0.032)        (0.037)          (0.039)        (0.048)           (0.039)       (0.049)
T6: Developing nation (poor
                                              0.19***        0.12***          0.26***        0.18***          0.38***        0.25***           0.50***       0.34***
labor standards)
                                              (0.022)       (0.027)           (0.031)        (0.036)          (0.040)        (0.048)           (0.041)       (0.051)
Observations                                   2,136          2,136            1,409          1,409            1,045          1,045             1,095          1,095
p-value partial: [T6-T5][(2)] =
                                               0.223
[T6-T5][(8)]
p-value: [T6-T5][(2)+(4)] =
                                               0.114
[T6-T5][(6)+(8)]
Notes. All estimates come from a logistic regression with the regression sample (5,685 observations). Standard errors clustered at state level in parentheses. A constant
term is included in every regression. Dependent variable is a dummy variable that takes the value one if the participant thinks the government should “restrict imports
from the contractor overseas” (Protectionism) and zero otherwise (do nothing or transfers) after being primed with information. T1 to T6 stand for shocks priming
participants with unemployment form different sources: T1 = technology shock, T2 = demand shock, T3 = bad management shock, T4 = trade shock from advanced
nation, T5 = trade shock from developing nation, or T6 = trade shock from developing nation with poor labor standards, and zero otherwise. Estimates in columns 1, 3,
5, and 7 are predicted probabilities. Estimates in column 2, 4, 6, and 8 should be interpreted as marginal changes relative to the control group in percentage points or
probability units. Controls refer to a set of demographic and political preferences covariates. In column 1, "p-value partial" corresponds to a Wald test of equality of
marginal effects between a trade shock in a developing nation with and without poor labor standards (T6 and T5 respectively), for Clinton supporters versus Trump
supporters. "p-value" corresponds to the same test but also using "center" supporters leaning either Clinton or Trump. Regression sample corresponds to i) the sample
of people who belong to the 90% that took more time to finish the survey, separating those who answered financial assistance in the post treatment question from
those who didn’t; and ii) people who answered affirmative the attention check. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                                                                                                                                                            29
                                       Table 6: Persuasion rates


                                                 Do nothing    Transfers   Protectionism



T1: Technology shock                                -11%           10%          7%
T2: Demand shock                                    -11%            5%          8%
T3: Bad management shock                             -9%           18%          1%
T4: Advanced nation                                 -12%           -14%        16%
T5: Developing nation                               -17%           -23%        23%
T6: Developing nation (poor labor standards)        -15%           -23%        22%



Non-trade shock                                     -15%           11%          5%
Trade Shock                                         -10%           -20%        20%



    Notes. See text for explanation.




                                                                                           30
References

Acemoglu, Daron, David Autor, David Dorn, Gordon H. Hanson, and Brendan Price. 2016. “Import
    Competition and the Great US Employment Sag of the 2000s.” Journal of Labor Economics 34 (S1), Part
    2: S141–98.

Autor, David, David Dorn, and Gordon Hanson. 2013. “The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market Effects
    of Import Competition in the United States.” American Economic Review 103 (6): 2121–2168.

Autor, David, David Dorn, Gordon Hanson, and Kaveh Majlesi. 2016. “Importing Political Polarization?
    The Electoral Consequences of Rising Trade Exposure.” MIT. Unpublished paper.

Balistreri, Edward J. 1997. “The Performance of the Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek Model in Predicting
     Endogenous Policy Forces at the Individual Level.” Canadian Journal of Economics 30: 1–18.

Beaulieu, Eugene. 2002. “Factor or Industry Cleavages in Trade Policy? An Empirical Analysis of the
    Stolper-Samuelson Theorem.” Economics and Politics 14 (2): 99–131.

Beaulieu, Eugene, and Michael Napier. 2008. “Why Are Women More Protectionist Than Men?” Mimeo.

Becker, Sascha O., Thiemo Fetzer, and Dennis Novy. 2016. “Who Voted for Brexit? A Comprehensive
    District-Level Analysis.” University of Warwick. Unpublished paper.

Blonigen, Bruce A. 2011. “Revisiting the Evidence on Trade Policy Preferences.” Journal of International
    Economics 85 (1).

Blyth, Mark. 2013. Austerity: The History of a Dangerous Idea. Oxford University Press.

Card, David, Alexandre Mas, Enrico Moretti, and Emmanuel Saez. 2012. “Inequality at Work: The Effect of
    Peer Salaries on Job Satisfaction.” American Economic Review 102 (6): 2981–3003.

Charité, Jimmy, Raymond Fisman, and Ilyana Kuziemko. 2015. “Reference Points and Redistributive
    Preferences: Experimental Evidence.” NBER Working Paper No. 21009.

Colantone, Italo, and Piero Stanig. 2017. “The Trade Origins of Economic Nationalism: Import
    Competition and Voting Behavior in Western Europe.” BAFFI CAREFIN Centre Research Paper
    Series No. 2017 (49).

Davis, Steven J., John C. Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh. 1998. Job Creation and Destruction. The MIT Press.

DellaVigna, S., & Kaplan, E. 2007. “The Fox News effect: Media bias and voting.” The Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, 122(3), 1187-1234.

DellaVigna, Stefano, and Matthew Gentzkow. 2010. “Persuasion: Empirical Evidence.” Annual Review of
     Economics 2 (1): 643–69.

De Quidt, Jonathan, Johannes Haushofer, and Christopher Roth. 2018. “Measuring and Bounding
    Experimenter Demand,” American Economic Review, 108(11), 3266–3302.



                                                                                                             31
Di Tella, Rafael, Juan Dubra, and Alejandro Lagomarsino. 2017. “Meet the Oligarchs: Business Legitimacy,
    State Capacity and Taxation.” NBER Working Paper No. 22934.

Di Tella, Rafael, and Robert MacCulloch. 2009. “Why Doesn’t Capitalism Flow to Poor Countries?”
    Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Economic Studies Program, The Brookings Institution 40 (1): 285–332.

Edwards, Lawrence, and Robert Z. Lawrence. 2013. Rising Tide: Is Growth in the Emerging Economies Good for the
   United States? Peterson Institute for International Economics.

Frank, Thomas. 2007. What’s the Matter with Kansas? How Conservatives Won the Heart of America. MacMillan.

Grossman, Gene, and Elhanan Helpman. 1994. “Protection for Sale.” The American Economic Review 84 (4).

Guiso, Luigi, Helios Herrera, Massimo Morelli, and Tommaso Sonno. 2017. “Demand and Supply of
    Populism.” CEPR Discussion Paper DP11871 (February).

Hakobyan, Shushanik, and John McLaren. 2016. “Looking for Local Labor Market Effects of NAFTA.”
    Review of Economics and Statistics 98 (4): 728–41.

Horton, John J., David G. Rand, and Richard J. Zeckhauser. 2011. “The Online Laboratory: Conducting
    Experiments in a Real Labor Market.” Experimental Economics 14 (3): 399–425.

Kagel, John H., and Alvin E. Roth, eds. 2016. The Handbook of Experimental Economics. Vol. 2. Princeton
    University Press.

Kletzer, Lori G. 2001. Job Loss from Imports: Measuring the Costs. Peterson Institute for International
     Economics.

Kuziemko, Ilyana, Michael I. Norton, Emmanuel Saez, and Stefanie Stantcheva. 2015. “How Elastic Are
    Preferences for Redistribution? Evidence from Randomized Survey Experiments.” American Economic
    Review 105 (4): 1478–1508.

López, Edward J., and Wayne A. Leighton. 2012. Madmen, Intellectuals, and Academic Scribblers: The Economic
    Engine of Political Change. Stanford University Press.

Lu, Xiaobo, Kenneth F. Scheve, and Matthew Slaughter. 2012. “Envy, Altruism, and the International
     Distribution of Trade Protection.” American Journal of Political Science 56 (3).

Mayda, Anna Maria, and Dani Rodrik. 2005. “Why Are Some People (And Countries) More Protectionist
    Than Others?” European Economic Review 49 (6): 1393–1430.

Mukand, Sharun, and Dani Rodrik. 2018. “The Political Economy of Ideas: On Ideas versus Interests in
   Policymaking.” NBER Working Paper No. 24467.

Rodrik, Dani. 1995. “Political Economy of Trade Policy.” In Handbook of International Economics, 3, edited by
    Gene M. Grossman and Kenneth A. Rogoff: 1457–94. ElSevier Publishing.

Rodrik, Dani. 2014. “When Ideas Trump Interests: Preferences, Worldviews, and Policy Innovations.” The
    Journal of Economic Perspectives 28 (1): 189–208.


                                                                                                                  32
Rodrik, Dani. 2018. “Populism and the Economics of Globalization.” Journal of International Business Policy 1.

Rodrik, Dani. 2019. “Towards a More Inclusive Globalization: An Anti-Social Dumping Scheme,”
    Economics for Inclusive Prosperity Policy Brief No. 9. (https://econfip.org/wp-
    content/uploads/2019/02/9.Toward-a-More-Inclusive-Globalization.pdf).

Rotemberg, Julio J. 2003. “Commercial Policy with Altruistic Voters.” Journal of Political Economy 111 (1):
    174–201.

Saez, Emmanuel, and Stefanie Stantcheva. 2016. “Generalized Social Marginal Welfare Weights for Optimal
     Tax Theory.” American Economic Review 106 (1): 24–25.

Scheve, Kenneth F., and Matthew J. Slaughter. 2001. “What Determines Individual Trade-Policy
    Preferences?” Journal of International Economics 54 (2): 267–92.

Shiller, Robert J. 2017. “Narrative Economics.” American Economic Review 107 (4): 967–1004.

Stolper, Wolfgang F., and Paul Samuelson. 1941. “Protection and Real Wages.” Review of Economic Studies 9:
     58–73.

Weinzierl, Matthew. 2014. “The Promise of Positive Optimal Taxation: Normative Diversity and a Role for
    Equal Sacrifice.” Journal of Public Economics 118: 128–142.

Zizzo, Daniel J. 2010. “Experimenter Demand Effects in Economic Experiments.” Experimental Economics 13
    (1): 75–98.




                                                                                                              33
Appendix 1: Main survey questionnaire The reader is referred to this web link for the full survey:
https://hbs.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV_9ny30jBYpcdAfRz

    1. Generally speaking would you say that most people can be trusted or that you need to be very
       careful in dealing with people?
           a. Need to be very careful (0)
           b. Most people can be trusted (10)

    2. Please think about poor people in the US: Do you think they are poor mainly because (choose the
       most important)
           a. They did not make an effort (0)
           b. They were unlucky (10)

    3. Please think about rich people in the US: Here are three reasons that are sometimes mentioned as
       playing a role. How much weight would you give to each?
           a. They worked hard (0-100%)
           b. They were lucky (0-100%)
           c. They took advantage of others (0-100%)

    4. Now I'd like you to tell me your views on two issues. How would you place your views on this scale?
       0 means you agree completely with the statement on the left; 10 means you agree completely with
       the statement on the right; and if your views fall somewhere in between, you can choose any number
       in between
           a. Competition is good. It stimulates people to work hard and develop new ideas (0)
           b. Competition is harmful. It brings out the worst in people (10)
           c. People should take more responsibility to provide for themselves (0)
           d. The government should take more responsibility to ensure that everyone is provided for (10)

    5. In the last election, where did you stand politically?
           a. Supported Clinton
           b. Center (but leaning Clinton)
           c. Center (but leaning Trump)
           d. Supported Trump

Survey goes on to one of these 7 categories (first line -not shown to subjects- provides the name given in the paper to this group):

    •    Control group
         Local garment plant facing changes
         The YGF garment plant in Creekstown, employing nine hundred workers, announced its plans
         for the year. An YGF spokesman said: “As we continue our quest to serve our consumers better,
         we have been making in our plant to keep it competitive in a changing world. This has required us
         to phase out old technologies, customize our production lines to new consumer demands, and
         change management practices. Our Creekstown operation has managed to make these changes
         while maintaining production and labor standards.” An employee at the plant, who has been
         employed there for eighteen years, said the changes at the plant had not been adequately
         communicated to the workers. “Many were unaware of the changes and were caught unprepared,”
         he added.


                                                                                                                                   34
•   Treatment 1: Technology shock
    Local garment plant facing changes
    Nine hundred jobs are at risk at the YGF garment plant in Creekstown, which is facing closure.
    An YGF spokesman said: “As we continue our quest to serve our consumers better, we have
    been making investments in automation and other new technologies. This has required that we
    phase out our Creekstown operation and consolidate manufacturing in our other plants in the
    country.” Many industries have been affected in recent years by technological progress, which
    lower costs and raises productivity.
    An employee at the plant, who has been employed there for eighteen years, said the closure of the
    plant would have devastating consequences for the workers. “Many will become unemployed and
    the rest would have to accept lower-paying jobs,” he added.

•   Treatment 2: Demand shock
    Local garment plant facing changes
    Nine hundred jobs are at risk at the YGF garment plant in Creekstown, which is facing closure.
    An YGF spokesman said: “As we continue our quest to serve our consumers better, we have had
    to adjust to lower consumer demand for the type of products we make here. This has required
    that we phase out our Creekstown operation and consolidate manufacturing in our other plants in
    the country.” Many industries have been affected in recent years by shifts in consumer tastes or
    spending habits.
    An employee at the plant, who has been employed there for eighteen years, said the closure of the
    plant would have devastating consequences for the workers. “Many will become unemployed and
    the rest would have to accept lower-paying jobs,” he added.


•   Treatment 3: Bad management shock
    Local garment plant facing changes
    Nine hundred jobs are at risk at the YGF garment plant in Creekstown, which is facing closure.
    An YGF spokesman said: “We have been hit by a number of management failures in our local
    operation. As we continue our quest to serve our consumers better, we have been making
    investments in automation and other new technologies. This has required that we phase out our
    Creekstown operation and consolidate manufacturing in our other plants in the country.” Many
    industries have been affected in recent years by bad management decisions, requiring significant
    adjustments in operations.
    An employee at the plant, who has been employed there for eighteen years, said the closure of the
    plant would have devastating consequences for the workers. “Many will become unemployed and
    the rest would have to accept lower-paying jobs,” he added.

•   Treatment 4: Trade shock (developed country)
    Local garment plant facing changes
    Nine hundred jobs are at risk at the YGF garment plant in Creekstown, which is facing closure.
    An YGF spokesman said: “As we continue our quest to serve our consumers better, we have to
    ensure we remain competitive with other global firms. This has required that we phase out our
    Creekstown operation and outsource the production to France.” Many industries have been
    affected in recent years by greater ease of trading with other nations, which lower costs and raises
    productivity.


                                                                                                       35
    An employee at the plant, who has been employed there for eighteen years, said the closure of the
    plant would have devastating consequences for the workers. “Many will become unemployed and
    the rest would have to accept lower-paying jobs,” he added.

•   Treatment 5: Trade shock (developing country)
    Local garment plant facing changes
    Nine hundred jobs are at risk at the YGF garment plant in Creekstown, which is facing closure.
    An YGF spokesman said: “As we continue our quest to serve our consumers better, we have to
    ensure we remain competitive with other global firms. This has required that we phase out our
    Creekstown operation and outsource the production to Cambodia.” Many industries have been
    affected in recent years by greater ease of trading with other nations, which lower costs and raises
    productivity.
    An employee at the plant, who has been employed there for eighteen years, said the closure of the
    plant would have devastating consequences for the workers. “Many will become unemployed and
    the rest would have to accept lower-paying jobs,” he added.

•   Treatment 6: Trade shock (developing country with poor labor standards)
    Local garment plant facing changes
    Nine hundred jobs are at risk at the YGF garment plant in Creekstown, which is facing closure.
    An YGF spokesman said: “As we continue our quest to serve our consumers better, we have to
    ensure we remain competitive with other global firms. This has required that we phase out our
    Creekstown operation and outsource the production to Cambodia.” Many industries have been
    affected in recent years by greater ease of trading with other nations, which lower costs and raises
    productivity.
    Labor abuses such as unsafe working conditions and use of child labor can be common in
    developing countries. An employee at the Creekstown plant, who has been employed there for
    eighteen years, said the closure of the plant would have devastating consequences for the workers.
    “Many will become unemployed and the rest would have to accept lower-paying jobs,” he added.



6. What, if anything, do you think should be the response of the government?
     a. Government should do nothing
     b. Government should provide some financial assistance to workers who lose their jobs (e.g.,
           unemployment compensation or training assistance)
     c. Government should restrict imports of garments from overseas, by placing import tariffs on
           such imports for example

7. I am going to name nine organizations/groups. For each one, could you tell me how much
   confidence you have in them: (0= none at all, 3-4= not very much confidence, 6-7= quite a lot of
   confidence, 10= a great deal of confidence)
       • Your neighbors
       • Lawyer
       • Major companies
       • The press
       • Federal government



                                                                                                       36
        •   Local government

8. During the last presidential election there was a lot of criticism towards Donald's Trump
   campaign. Here are two opinions about it. How do they match your own views? (0-10 scale)
      a. While I don't agree with everything Trump said, his campaign focused on many issues that
          need fixing in our country
      b. While I don’t disagree with everything Trump said, his campaign played on people’s fears
          and missed on the important issues that need fixing in our country

9. Now we would like to ask you about the income tax rates* that you think different people should
   pay. The income tax rate is the percentage of your income that you pay in federal income tax. For
   example, if you earn $30,000 and you pay $3,000 in income taxes, your income tax rate is 10%. (We
   consider only the Federal income tax, which is a tax on household income. If you receive a regular
   paycheck, this tax is automatically taken out of your pay. When you file a federal tax return each
   year, you calculate the exact amount you owe, and you get a tax refund from the federal government
   if you paid more than you owe. To keep things simple, we do not include other taxes such as social
   security taxes, state income taxes or sales taxes.)
        a. The top 1% (richest)
        b. The next 9% (1% of the households earn more than them, but 90% earn less)
        c. The next 40% (10% earn more than them, but 50% earn less)
        d. The bottom 50% (poorest)

10. This question refers to four professions and the people that choose them. In your opinion, people
    choosing the following professions are more or less selfish than the average American?
       • Lawyer
       • General manager / Top executive
       • Production line worker
       • Doctor

11. The final question is a request for feedback about the responses you provided so far. It is vital to our
    study that we only include responses from people who devoted their full attention to this study. This
    will not affect in any way the payment you will receive for taking this survey. In your honest opinion,
    should we use your responses, or should we discard your responses since you did not devote your
    full attention to the questions so far?
         a. Yes, I have devoted full attention to the questions so far and I think you should use my
             responses for your study
         b. No, I have not devoted full attention to the questions so far and I think you should not use
             my responses for your study




                                                                                                         37
