                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


          LOCAL LABOR MARKETS IN CANADA AND THE UNITED STATES

                                         David Albouy
                                         Alex Chernoff
                                         Chandler Lutz
                                         Casey Warman

                                      Working Paper 25709
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25709


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2019

We appreciate helpful feedback from David Autor, David Card, Brian Kovak, Peter Kuhn, Ethan
Lewis, Lance Lochner, Phil Oreopolous, and Matt Notowidigdo, as well as comments from
participants at the 2016 NBER conference “Public Policies in Canada and the United States” in
Gatineau, QC, the 2016 Canadian Economic Association Meetings in Ottawa, ON, and the 2016
Atlantic Canadian Economic Meetings in Sackville, NB. The Canadian Census analysis presented
in this paper was conducted at the Atlantic Research Data Centre (ARDC), which is part of the
Canadian Research Data Centre Network (CRDCN). The services and activities provided by the
Atlantic Research Data Centre are made possible by the financial or in-kind support of the
SSHRC, the CIHR, the CFI, Statistics Canada and Dalhousie University. The views expressed in
this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of Canada, the
CRDCN, the partners of the CRDCN, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. The
Securities and Exchange Commission disclaims responsibility for any private publication or
statement of any SEC employee or Commissioner. This article expresses the authors views and
does not necessarily reflect those of the Commission, the [other] Commissioners, or [other]
members of the staff. We are grateful to ARDC staff Heather Hobson for her assistance, as well
as Yasmine Amirkhalkhali, Mark Bennett, Min Hu, and Lachlan MacLeod. We thank Norman
Chalk, Danny Leung, and Jiang Li from the Canadian Centre for Data Development and
Economic Research for their assistance with the Canadian business micro data. The results have
been institutionally reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is revealed. The U.S.
Census data comes from the IPUMS-USA, University of Minnesota, www.ipums.org (Ruggles et
al., 2015). All errors are our own.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by David Albouy, Alex Chernoff, Chandler Lutz, and Casey Warman. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Local Labor Markets in Canada and the United States
David Albouy, Alex Chernoff, Chandler Lutz, and Casey Warman
NBER Working Paper No. 25709
March 2019
JEL No. J21,J31,J61,N32,R12

                                        ABSTRACT

We examine local labor markets in the U.S. and Canada from 1990 to 2011 using comparable
household and business data. Wage levels and inequality rise with city population in both
countries, albeit less in Canada. Neither country saw wage levels converge despite contrasting
migration patterns from/to high-wage areas. Local labor demand shifts raise nominal wages
similarly, although in Canada they attract immigrant and highly-skilled workers more, while
raising housing costs less. Chinese import competition had a weaker negative impact on
manufacturing employment in Canada. These results are consistent with Canada's more
redistributive transfer system and larger, more-educated immigrant workforce.


David Albouy                                          Chandler Lutz
Department of Economics                               Securities and Exchange Commission
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign            100 F St, NE
214 David Kinley Hall                                 Copenhagen, Denmark
Urbana, IL 61801-3606                                 Washington, DC 20002
and NBER                                              USA
albouy@illinois.edu                                   lutzc@sec.gov

Alex Chernoff                                         Casey Warman
234 Laurier Ave W                                     Department of Economics
Ottawa, ON                                            Dalhousie University
K1A 0G9                                               6214 University Avenue, Room A23
Canada                                                Halifax, NS B3H 4R2
achernoff@bankofcanada.ca                             CANADA
                                                      and NBER
                                                      warmanc@dal.ca
1       Introduction

The cities of Canada and the United States share much in common, and there are many

reasons to believe that local labor markets in the two countries should operate similarly.

Both countries have a similar history of settlement, and their cities resemble each other in

age and construction. Each country is the other’s largest trading partner, and they share

the longest land border in the world.

    Nevertheless, local labor markets in Canada and the U.S. may operate differently for

several reasons. While both countries share similar labor market institutions, unions and

legal protections for workers tend to be stronger in Canada. Transfers to individuals and to

local governments are also much larger in Canada. These factors may cause Canadian workers

to respond less to local economic conditions. Furthermore, Canada selects immigrants more

strongly on economic criteria than the U.S., and hence Canadian immigrants may respond

more to local economic opportunities.

    In this paper, we analyze U.S. and Canadian local labor markets in a unified empirical

setting with comparable data.1 By using similar data, time periods, and methods, we can

draw clearer conclusions about how the two countries differ and, in many ways, also resemble

each other. In contrast, most other work on growth and inequality across regions — see

Barro et al. (1991) for the U.S. and Coulombe and Lee (1995) for Canada — has focused

on differences across large areas using macro data. Analyses using metropolitan areas across

countries are quite rare, especially using micro data.

    Our analysis begins with a descriptive comparison of wage rates, wage inequality, skill

sorting, and economic convergence across metro areas in Canada and the U.S., involving

several of the canonical approaches outlined in Moretti (2011). Mirroring previous studies,

we find a strong positive association between city size and both wage levels and inequality

in the U.S.2 These associations are much weaker in Canada. When we compare cities of the

same size we find university graduates sort similarly towards larger cities in both countries.

However, we find that immigrants sort towards larger cities more in Canada than in the U.S.3
    1
      We take metropolitan areas to be “local” labor markets in both countries.
    2
      See Glaeser and Maré (2001) for wage levels, and Baum-Snow and Pavan (2013) for wage inequality.
    3
      Moretti (2013) and Diamond (2016) document rising levels of sorting of university graduates in the U.S.
Lee (1999) argues that regional minimum wages reduced local inequality for lower percentiles. Fortin and
Lemieux (2015) find similar results for Canadian provinces, and find that resource booms lifted wages and
reduced inequality in several provinces.




                                                     1
We additionally consider whether wages across cities converge over time. In both countries,

wage disparities across cities appear stubbornly persistent. This similarity is remarkable

given that in Canada we find that workers moved to higher-wage areas, while in the U.S.

they did not (Ganong and Shoag, 2018). Overall, these descriptive analyses of the differences

between local labor markets across both countries provide a valuable baseline for our ensuing

analysis of the effect of local labor demand shifts.

    The persistence of wage differences, together with contrasting migration patterns across

Canada and the U.S., motivates the second part of our analysis. This part considers the

causal impact of local labor demand shifts within a standard spatial equilibrium framework.

We model these shifts using two key and well-known approaches. First, we consider changes

in labor demand predicted by nationwide sectoral shifts, as in Bartik (1991), providing the

first such analysis for Canada.4 Leveraging variation in business and household data for each

country, we make novel use of two “Bartik” shift-share instruments.

    We find that the Bartik shift-shares predict similar increases in employment and nominal

wages in either country, implying similar elasticities of local labor supply to nominal wage

levels. However, when we exclude American megacities and reweight Canadian cities to

resemble U.S. demographics, U.S. labor supply begins to look more elastic. Furthermore,

we find that university graduate and immigrant responses to local labor market demand

shocks are relatively higher in Canada. We also find Canadian housing costs responded less

to demand changes, meaning that the real wages of Canadians responded more.

    We finish by examining how the U.S. and Canada responded differently to increased im-

port competition from Chinese manufacturing, following Autor et al. (2013). Our results

indicate that this competition had a weaker effect on manufacturing employment in Canada

than in the U.S. This result is consistent with the moderate decline of Canadian manufac-

turing relative to the U.S. from 1990–2007. While our data limit the ability to identify the

exact cause of the discrepancy, it may be explained by differences in the demographics of

places most affected by Chinese competition.

    Overall, the U.S.–Canada differences we observe are consistent with differences in policy
   4
      The Bartik method was popularized by Blanchard and Katz (1992), who argue that wages and worker
migration cause unemployment effects of demand shifts to disappear over the long run. Other work examines
differential effects by skill group (Bound and Holzer, 2000), transfer payments (Autor and Duggan, 2003),
and housing costs (Notowidigo, 2011). Studies on other countries (e.g., Détang-Dessendre et al. (2016) for
France) are generally not done in tandem with others, except for macro studies, such as Decressin and Fatas
(1995), who consider 51 regions within the European Union.



                                                    2
on immigration and in personal transfers. Canada’s more numerous and educated immi-

grants appear more oriented towards urban opportunities. Their responsiveness to changes

in economic conditions suggest that they may indeed “grease the wheels” of the national

labor market even more than their American counterparts (Borjas, 2001; Cadena and Ko-

vak, 2016). At the same time, there is no more evidence in Canada than in the U.S. that

within-country migration does much to depress persistent wage disparities across cities.

    A number of facts also indirectly support the notion that individual and intergovern-

mental transfers lower geographic mobility. Once we control for differences in Canada–U.S.

demographics and exclude America’s housing-inelastic megacities, Canadians do appear to

be slightly less mobile. This finding is in line with Notowidigo’s (2011) hypothesis that

greater individual transfers may hinder geographic mobility.5 The point is arguably rein-

forced by the fact that Canadian housing costs were less responsive to labor demand shifts

than in the U.S. Tax and transfer programs (both individual and intergovernmental), which

redistribute nominal wage differences across cities, should depress demand shifts’ effects on

housing prices. If instead housing cost changes were orthogonal to demand shifts by acci-

dent, then Canadian workers did receive a greater proportion of the benefits and costs of

these changes through their real wages. In either case, demand shifts were passed on to local

property owners to a greater extent in the U.S.

    In section 2 we briefly discuss theoretical considerations and key features of the U.S. and

Canadian institutions and transfer systems that could affect local labor market outcomes in

both countries. In section 3, we outline the Census, business, and other data used in the

analysis. In section 4, we examine how cross-sectional labor market patterns vary by metro

population. In section 5, we then consider more dynamic changes, with a brief overview of

aggregate trends, wage persistence, and labor mobility. Then, in sections 6 and 7 we examine

how local labor markets respond to demand shifts. In section 8, we conclude by discussing

the possible sources of Canada–U.S. differences.
   5
     We find that local labor demand shocks increase the university-educated share of the population to a
greater extent in Canadian cities. This may be the result of higher transfers in Canada discouraging the
mobility of those with lower education, as suggested by Notowidigo (2011). Alternatively, this may be due to
the influx of university-educated immigrants to Canadian cities during our study period, as documented in
Warman and Worswick (2015).




                                                     3
2       Spatial Equilibrium, Fiscal Policy, and Institutions in Local Labor Mar-
        kets in the U.S. and Canada

In this section we provide an overview of local labor market theory to guide our empirical

analysis. Additionally, we discuss how immigration and government transfer policies in

Canada and the U.S. may affect labor mobility in each country.

2.1      Theory of Local Labor Market Equilibrium

The standard model of local labor markets assumes that workers move across cities to max-

imize utility, while firms and capital achieve equal returns across cities. It produces dif-

ferences in wage and employment outcomes in spatial equilibrium mainly due to variation

in productivity and quality of life across cities. Using an augmented version of the Rosen

(1979)–Roback (1982) model, Albouy (2016) and Albouy et al. (2013) argue that level (or

persistent) differences in wages across cities in the U.S. and Canada are largely driven by

underlying firm productivity. Productivity differences, key in determining labor demand,

are driven by many factors, including urban agglomeration economies, natural advantages,

and access to export markets.6

      Quality-of-life amenities, enjoyed by households, increase the supply of workers for a

given wage. In equilibrium, these amenities lower real wages, as workers accept lower con-

sumption levels to enjoy them. These lower real wages, in turn, are manifested primarily

through higher costs of living, for example, in housing costs. How the supply of labor to

cities responds to (nominal) wages or amenities depends critically on the supply of housing

(Moretti, 2011). Cities where the supply of housing adjusts little to demand may experience

large cost increases but little employment growth. The other main determinant of local labor

supply is moving costs, psychic and otherwise. It is generally assumed that these costs follow

an increasing schedule, meaning that, on the margin, workers require higher real wages to

expand their supply.7 Existing (inframarginal) workers in an expanding local labor market

are made better off by such real wage increases. Local property owners are made better off
    6
       In larger metro areas, agglomeration economies potentially benefit workers through reduced search fric-
tions, better matching, and greater human capital accumulation (Baum-Snow and Pavan, 2013). Arguably,
frictions created by institutions may lower this return while also reducing the inequality they engender. Larger
cities also offer a greater variety of consumer products and neighborhood public goods. See Baum-Snow and
Pavan (2012) and Baum-Snow et al. (2018) for work on causal mechanisms.
     7
       These costs are often microfounded through smooth variability in preference heterogeneity, e.g., Diamond
(2016).




                                                       4
when demand shifts raise local land values through increases in housing costs.

      This standard model of location and mobility can be amended to handle unemployment

outcomes and worker heterogeneity. Kline and Moretti (2013) incorporate a search model and

find that higher productivity levels lower equilibrium unemployment and raise employment-

to-population ratios. Modeling heterogeneous workers, Black et al. (2009) find that highly

educated workers — more common to the U.S. — sort toward high-wage areas as they can

better afford higher housing costs.

2.2     Immigration Policy and Local Labor Markets

Canada admitted over twice as many legal immigrants as the U.S. per capita over our study

period.8 Since Canada admits a higher fraction of immigrants, this should make the Canadian

population more mobile on average, ceteris paribus. Canada–U.S. differences in the criteria

for selecting immigrants may further strengthen the relative importance of immigrants on

issues related to mobility. In the U.S., most immigrants enter under family reunification and

may locate based on where existing family live. This contrasts with Canadian immigration

policy, as over half of Canadian immigrants are selected based on economic criteria (Warman

et al., 2019). Therefore, immigrants to Canada may be more likely to follow economic

incentives when choosing where to live. Canada’s immigration policy also favors university-

educated immigrants, which may change the level of education in cities.

      In general, immigrants appear to be more mobile than the native-born population, and

more willing to move to places with greater economic opportunities (Borjas, 2001; Cadena

and Kovak, 2016). A more debatable issue is whether immigrants have an important effect

on local wage levels. Simple models of local labor markets with fixed factors imply that an

influx of workers to a city will lower its wages. In this case, labor mobility can reduce wage

differences across cities, as workers move to higher-wage areas (Ganong and Shoag, 2018).

Thus, higher immigrant numbers could reduce interregional wage differences, if markets are

not already in equilibrium. It is worth noting that such theories are at odds with urban

agglomeration models that predict wages to rise with the number of workers. Indeed, work

by Card (2001) and others has generally found little effect of immigrants on local wages.
    8
      However, this may overestimate the relative fraction of the foreign-born population in our Census sample.
For example, it will depend on how undocumented migrants, which make up a higher fraction of the U.S.
population, are captured in the Census data. As well, differences in out migration may also impact the
relative importance of the foreign-born population. Aydemir and Robinson (2008) estimate very high rates
of out migration in Canada, particularly for young working-age male immigrants.



                                                      5
      Lastly, immigrants may sort across markets differently from natives. They may have

stronger tastes for certain amenities (Albouy et al., 2018). Or they could be more attracted

to high-cost, high-wage areas, as many make remittances and consume relatively little locally

(Albert and Monras, 2019).

2.3     Fiscal Policy: Taxes and Transfers to Governments and Individuals

Canada’s more redistributive interregional policies should arguably reduce how much Cana-

dians move relative to Americans in the pursuit of higher wages. While federal taxes in

both countries reduce incentives to move to high-wage areas (Albouy, 2009), Canada pro-

vides larger social insurance transfers to individuals, and larger local government transfers

through equalization payments. This generally benefits lower-wage regions, such as the At-

lantic provinces. The U.S. has no explicit form of equalization outside of a few programs that

operate at a smaller scale, such as Empowerment Zones.9 Accounting for intergovernmental

transfers, the typical dollar earned through worker migration is implicitly taxed by over 30

percent in the U.S., while in Canada the tax is roughly double that percentage (Albouy,

2012).

      The means-testing of individual transfers should further dull incentives, as various claw-

backs raise the effective marginal tax rate even further. Although programs differ by location

and individual, these disincentives appear to be generally stronger in Canada (Hoynes and

Stabile, 2017). However, as noted in Milligan and Schirle (2017), the relative generosity of

the U.S. disability insurance system could do more to pull U.S. workers out of the labor

force.10

      In analyzing labor markets, unemployment insurance is an especially important transfer.

The Canadian insurance program is generally more centrally run. Incomplete experience-

rating and regional targeting causes areas with higher unemployment rates to effectively

receive greater net transfers.11
   9
      See Busso et al. (2013). Note the U.S. does potentially subsidize low-wage areas by providing them
with greater intergovernmental transfer match rates, e.g., Federal Medical Assistance Percentages. But since
total payments rely on local generosity, these higher match rates rarely lead to greater federal transfers
(Chodorow-Reich et al., 2012).
   10
      The lack of universal insurance in the U.S. over our period could lower U.S. mobility rates by reducing
turnover through “job lock” (Madrian, 1994), or raise mobility as those without insurance may move to
procure it, i.e., through “employment lock” (Garthwaite et al., 2014).
   11
      Unemployment insurance and unemployment duration have traditionally been higher in Canada than
in the U.S. This was especially true up until the late 1990s, when Canadian unemployment benefits fell
precipitously after a series government cuts. See, for example, Battle (1998). Further, at the end of our
sample period unemployment benefits jumped in the U.S., as American policy makers sought to offset the



                                                     6
      All in all, one would expect larger transfers to discourage mobility in Canada relative

to the U.S. This may be especially true for lower-income workers. Furthermore, transfers

should dampen the effect of nominal wage increases on local housing costs. While it may

appear that Canadians are seeing greater responses in real wages, the effects may be greatly

muted through redistribution.

      In concluding this section, we note that higher unionization rates and minimum wages

might also affect local labor markets, reducing mobility and stiffening wage adjustments.12

3     Data and Methods

3.1     Census Data

3.1.1     U.S. Public Use and Canadian Master File Data

We draw much of our analysis from geographically detailed Census data. For the U.S.,

public use geographic identifiers are generally adequate for defining metro areas, which have

populations above 50,000. Therefore, we use the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series

(IPUMS) from Ruggles et al. (2015) using the 1990 and 2000 Census 5 percent samples,

and the American Community Survey (ACS), pooling the years 2005 to 2007 (referred to

as “2007”) and 2009 to 2011 (“2011”). Overall, this leaves us with a sample of 264 metro

areas.13 We use the terms “cities” and “metros” interchangeably throughout this paper.

      Public use micro data files from the Census for Canada are generally inadequate for

studying most local labor markets since they identify few metro areas. We circumvent these

problems by using the restricted access 20 percent Canadian Master File Census data for
effects of the Great Recession. Generally, the paths of unemployment duration document the stark differences
in the severity of the Great Recession across the U.S. and Canada.
    12
       See Card and Riddell (1993) for an early U.S.–Canada comparison. Union coverage rates have declined
in both countries but remain more than 10 percentage points higher in Canada (see panel G of table A1). In
fact, few U.S. metros have unionization rates as high as those found in the least unionized Canadian metros.
This makes it difficult to compare. Nevertheless, unions are thought to increase employment stability and
reward seniority, thereby reducing geographic mobility and making wage structures more rigid (Zimmerman,
2008). The minimum wage is determined provincially in Canada; in the U.S., the federal government provides
a wage floor, which some states top up. Recent work on local labor markets by Monras (Forthcoming) argues
that minimum wages raise local wages but drive workers away. Such effects would likely play a larger role in
Canada, where real minimum wages rose over this period, than in the U.S., where they fell. See DiNardo and
Lemieux (1997) for an earlier analysis.
    13
       Large metro areas use the Consolidated Metropolitan classification, so that Oakland is joined to San
Francisco, and Stamford to New York. These areas are defined using 1999 Office of Management and Budget
definitions. For New England, we use New England County Metro Area (NECMAs) definitions to make
better use of county-level data. In a small number of cases, we use a probabilistic matching system based
on the overlap between Public Use Microdata Areas (PUMAs) and metropolitan areas. Because PUMAs
generally comprise populations of 100,000 or more, this largely precludes analyzing areas with less than
50,000 populations. Analyzing them would require restricted access U.S. data, which are not currently at our
disposal.



                                                     7
1991, 2001, and 2006 (referred to as 1990, 2000, and 2007, respectively, in our tables/figures

to remain consistent with the reference years for our U.S. data).14 Thus, while the population

of Canada is smaller than the U.S., it is drawn from a sample large enough to be very precise.

We also use the restricted access 2011 National Household Survey data.15 To compensate for

the smaller number of cities in Canada, we consider a lower population threshold than for

the U.S. to determine whether an area is included in the sample, namely that of a working

age population of 15,000 or more in 1990. This leaves us with 82 Canadian metro areas.16

3.1.2    Overlap in Population Size

Together, the metro areas in our sample account for about four-fifths of the population in each

country. However, nine U.S. metros are bigger than the largest Canadian metro (Toronto).

These U.S. megacities appear to have difficulty growing (Rappaport, 2018), which may have

something to do with tighter housing supply.17 Twenty-eight Canadian agglomerations are

smaller than our smallest U.S. metro (Enid). Given this, we examine how sensitive our

results are to excluding the smallest Canadian and largest U.S. cities, with the lower and

upper bounds given by Enid and Toronto. The cities that are dropped based on this exclusion

account for 37% of workers in the U.S. and less than 5% of workers in Canada.

3.1.3    Timing of Samples and Macroeconomic Conditions

One issue we face with comparing the U.S. and Canada is slight differences in time periods.

The U.S. Decennial Census data correspond to April 1, 1990, and 2000, for outcomes such

as employment, and to the previous calendar year for earnings. In Canada, the Census day

is in mid-May, with the previous week being the reference week for employment, and the

previous calendar year for earnings.18
   14
      We also provide Bartik estimates in the appendix using the 1980 U.S. Census and 1981 Canadian Census
data. However, our main analysis does not include these data in order to remain consistent with the available
years of Canadian Business Pattern data.
   15
      This data should be treated cautiously due to its non-mandatory nature. The response rate was around
68 percent in 2011, whereas it was over 95 percent in previous Censuses. The sample was increased to 33
percent of households instead of 20 percent of households in previous Censuses.
   16
      Canadian metro areas are formed from municipalities (Census subdivisions). From 2001 definitions, we
use 32 “Census Metropolitan Areas” as well as 50 “Census Agglomerations.” A small problem with comparing
Canadian metro areas to (Consolidated) U.S. ones is that the latter are somewhat broader in land area because
they are formed out of counties, which can be quite large. For example, Oshawa is a CMA separate from
Toronto, even though its Census subdivisions are still in the “Greater Toronto Area.”
   17
      According to numbers from Saiz (2010), the elasticity of housing supply in these cities is on average half
that of other U.S. cities.
   18
      Construction of weekly and hourly wage series is hampered by differences in how weekly hours are
reported in Canada, which apply only to a reference week, while the U.S. asks for typical hours. The annual
earnings and weeks worked are reported for the reference calendar year. We calculate weekly earnings for



                                                       8
    In the U.S., the recessions are dated to have started in July 1990, March 2001, and

December 2007, always after the data collection. In Canada, both the Census employment

reference week and earnings reference year occurred during the 1990–1992 recession. There-

fore, all variables for this Census were recorded amid the early 1990s recession in Canada.

For the American Community Survey, the U.S. data refer to broader periods of 3 years, but

2005–2007 and 2009–2011 are largely outside of recessions. We deflate the monetary values

into 2010 dollars using each countries’ respective Consumer Price Index, and then use the

2010 Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) to deflate the Canadian into U.S. dollars. We use a

OECD PPP for 2010 of 1.220 Canadian dollars per U.S. dollar.19

3.1.4     Location and Skill Indices

We decompose wage differences across metro areas according to what is explained by location

and what is explained by observed worker characteristics. Using the logarithm of weekly
        k , for worker i in city j in year t in country k, we fit regressions for each country-
wages, wijt

year of
                                         k      k k
                                        wijt = Xijt βt + µkjt + εkijt                                       (1)

where Xitk are location-invariant worker characteristics, whose returns βtk can vary by country

and year. The “fixed effects” µkjt are coefficients on indicator variables for each city in each

time period. With an orthogonal error term εkijt , the µkjt represent the average effect of

location j on the wages of a typical worker.20 Taking the expectation of wages by year and

metro area, the average metro-level wage is given by the sum of the skill and location index


                                 k            k            k k
                            Ei [wijt ]=     w̄jt       = X̄jt βt +          µkjt                            (2)
                                            |{z}         | {z }            |{z}
                                          metro wage     skill index   location index


where X̄jt = Ei [Xijt ] denotes the average characteristics, and Ei [εkijt ] = 0.

    For a simpler measure of skill, we consider the log of the university-educated share of the
people employed in the reference year so that the earnings calculations are more comparable for the two
countries and the wages better match the timing of the industry of employment information. For that reason,
we generally focus on comparisons of weekly wages.
    19
       This PPP is quite stable during our sample period with a mean value of 1.218 and coefficient of variation
of 1.2 percent for the years 1990–2011. Our OECD PPP is sourced from CANSIM table 36-10-0100-01.
    20
       Despite the tremendous potential for confounding unobservables, the overall pattern of wages across U.S.
and Canadian cities appear consistent with one of spatial equilibrium. In general, wage levels — controlling for
differences in observed worker characteristics — appear to compensate workers, by and large, for differences
in amenities as well as costs of living (Albouy et al. (2013), Albouy (2016)).




                                                        9
population (see appendix section B.1). This measure is only weakly correlated with the skill

index as the skill index is based on a finer measurement of education and includes variables

on minority status, immigrant background, and other characteristics.

      For wage dispersion within cities, we use two measures. The first is the log ratio of the

wages of university graduates to high school graduates; the second is the log ratio of the wage

at the 90th percentile to that of the 10th . The first is more a measure of the local return to

education; the second is a measure of overall local inequality.

3.2     Business Data

We obtain employment data from the U.S. County Business Patterns from the U.S. Census

and the Canadian Business Patterns from Statistics Canada. For brevity we jointly refer

to these datasets using the “CBP” moniker. Both CBP datasets for the U.S. and Canada

report the number of firms within employment ranges at the SIC/NAICS industry level.

For the U.S. CBP data, we first convert all industry codes to the SIC 1987 3-digit level of

aggregation and then impute actual employment within each industry following Autor et al.

(2013).

      A major limitation of the CBP is that the data are top coded and somewhat coarse,

especially in Canada. We enhance the Canadian Business Patterns data with the micro data

from the Annual Survey of Manufacturing (ASM). We access plant-level ASM data at the

Canadian Centre for Data Development and Economic Research (CDER) using an updated

version of the data from Baldwin and Li (2017). To align with our other data, we use the

ASM employment counts for 1991, 2001, 2007, 2011 (referred to as 1990, 2000, 2007, and

2011, respectively, in our tables/figures to remain consistent with the reference years for our

U.S. data). The ASM covers employment in all manufacturing establishments with revenue

above a low threshold.21

      We also use administrative micro data from CDER to create a crosswalk from SIC-E 1980

to NAICS 1997. The ASM micro data has NAICS industry classification for all our periods.

However, the Canadian CBP data for the 1990s uses the SIC-E 1980 industrial classification,
   21
     For much of the observation period the minimum annual threshold is $30,000, although there is some
variation in this cut-off across industries and over time. The updates to the Baldwin and Li (2017) ASM micro
dataset reflect efforts to address a change in survey population that was in effect during the period 2004–2006.
Administrative data were used to add back in the employment counts for plants that were excluded from the
ASM sample post-2004 due to the changes in the survey population during the 2004–2006 period. We thank
Jiang Li at CDER for her effort in updating the ASM micro dataset for this project.




                                                      10
requiring a crosswalk to convert them to NAICS 1997.22 The details of our SIC-E 1980 to

NAICS 1997 crosswalk are described in appendix section B.4.

3.3       Other Data

We also use additional data, which we discuss in the data appendix. See section B.3.1 for

the UN Comtrade Database, section B.3.2 for the Transfer Data, section B.3.3 for the Union

Data, and section B.3.4 for the World KLEMS Data.

3.4       Propensity-Score Reweighting

To examine the importance of the demographic and institutional differences between the

two countries, we reweight the Canadian sample to resemble the U.S. sample in terms of

available start period demographic, industry, and institutional characteristics. We use the

standard propensity score reweighting methodology, popularized by DiNardo et al. (1996).23

The first set uses the share of the population with a university degree and the share that are

foreign born. The second set adds the share of employment in manufacturing and in oil and

an institutional variable, namely minimum wages.24

4        Local Labor Market Patterns by Metro Area

4.1       Relationships with Metro Size

In this section we consider how wage levels, inequality, and worker sorting vary across metro

areas according to their size. These relate to important agglomeration issues discussed earlier

and the overall labor markets of cities.

      Table 1 presents a succession of descriptive regressions showing the relationship between

these outcomes and the standard regressor for city size, the logarithm of population. We

interact this regressor with a Canadian indicator to highlight differences between the U.S.

and Canada.25 Panel B uses our common city sample. These cities are shown in figure 1,
    22
      SIC-E 1980 is a Canadian industrial classification and differs substantially from the American SIC 1987
industrial classification. Therefore, the NAICS 1997 to SIC 1987 crosswalk from Autor et al. (2013) cannot
be used to crosswalk the Canadian CBP data.
   23                                                                                                    (p|X)
      We adjust the weight by multiplying the 1990 population weight by W = U S + (1 − U S) ∗ (1−(p|X))        .
U S is one if the city is in the U.S. and zero if it is in Canada. (p|X) is the conditional probability that the
city equals one. Table A2 shows the probit estimates used for reweighting for both the first and second sets
in columns (1) and (2), respectively. In table A3 we show the predicted probabilities for a select set of cities
for both specifications. We top code the top 5 odd ratios and bottom code the bottom 5 odds ratios.
   24
      Given the lack of common support for unionization rates in Canada and the U.S., we were not able to
include unionization rates in this analysis.
   25
      In addition, the model includes indicators and interactions with population for Québec and Hispanophone
communities. We also include decadal indicators interacted with a country indicator in each regression.



                                                      11
which plots wages relative to metro population in 1990. Panels C and D of table 1 consider

the role of aggregate city characteristics by reweighting the Canadian sample to resemble

the U.S. sample, as discussed in section 3.4.

    Column 1 of table 1 displays how wages differ across metropolitan areas. Across years in

panel A, the wage-population elasticity is 0.065 in the U.S. In Canada, the gradient is only

half that size. The interaction becomes weaker in panel B, as the gradient in the U.S. is

quite steep for its larger cities, as seen in figure 1. Panel C shows that putting more weight

on Canadian cities that resemble U.S. cities in terms of their demographic characteristics

further reduces the gap in the gradient. In panel D, we find that reweighting by start period

demographic, industrial, and institutional characteristics pushes the gap up slightly.

    This relationship from column 1 largely persists in column 2, which uses the wage location

index from (2), controlling for observable worker skills. The gap in the gradient is slightly

weaker as the skill index, seen in column 3, falls slightly, but insignificantly, with city size in

Canada. This difference becomes more pronounced once we control for common city sizes in

Panel B.

    Columns 4 and 5 address issues of skill and immigrant sorting. Here we see that university

graduates sort into larger cities in both countries, where there is no difference in the sorting

patterns of university graduates once we account for common city sizes. At the same time,

as we see in column 5, immigrants are much more likely to sort into larger cities as well.

Since immigrants earn less than comparable natives, this sorting lowers the “skill index”

or predicted wages workers command based on their observable characteristics. Immigrant

sorting to larger metros is even stronger in Canada than in the U.S. where in panel B, when

we drop the largest metros from the U.S. and smallest from Canada, the difference becomes

stronger. Further, when we reweight on start of sample demographics, including the (initial)

1990 share of the population that is foreign born, this difference becomes even larger.26

    It is well documented that wage inequality is greater in the U.S. than in Canada. The

point made here is that this inequality gap grows with metro population, as measured by

the university/high school wage premium in column 6, and the 90/10 differential in column
  26
     The reason why the Canadian slope coefficient gets larger can be seen by looking at the cities with
the largest predicted probabilities in table A3, which determine the magnitude of the DiNardo et al. (1996)
weight. Many of the cities with the highest weights (e.g., Rimouski and Chicoutimi) have relatively low
population and a small foreign share of the population. Heavily weighting these observations in the left tail
of the population distribution has a strong influence, pulling down the left side of the regression line and
making it steeper.


                                                     12
7. Furthermore, the gradient differences become weaker in panel B, since wage inequality

is greatest in the largest U.S. metros. The gap in the gradient does remain significant for

the 90/10 wage differential. In panel C, when we reweight according to demographic charac-

teristics, the differences between the Canadian and U.S. gradients are no longer statistically

significant, although this is partly due to the estimates losing precision.27 In general, the

return to education is larger in the U.S. than in Canada. This makes it advantageous for

the more-educated to move to the U.S., and the less-educated to move to Canada (Card,

2003). This advantage is magnified if we consider a move from a small Canadian city to

large American one.

     Finally, in the last column we note how housing costs increase with population size

(see appendix section B.2 for a brief discussion on how we construct this variable). While

the Canada–U.S. difference is large, it disappears without the largest U.S. cities. However,

the fact that wages rise more slowly in Canada than in the U.S. with population implies

that larger Canadian metros are less affordable than U.S. metros of comparable size. In an

equilibrium framework, this suggests that larger cities in Canada are relatively more desired

for their quality-of-life amenities.

     In sum, the equilibrium relationship studied here tells us that on the one hand urbaniza-

tion in Canada is associated with less of a wage premium and less income inequality than in

the U.S. On the other hand, larger Canadian cities are even more attractive to immigrant

workers and suffer more from affordability issues.

5        Changes in Labor Market Outcomes Over Time, Sector, and Space

In this section we present descriptive statistics that help link sectoral shifts over time with

local impacts on labor markets, setting up our next section on local demand shifts.
    27
      These inequality relationships did not exist in 1980, but have come to be a remarkable feature of large
cities (Baum-Snow and Pavan, 2012). In panel D, when we further add controls for start period industry
shares and minimum wage to our reweighting, the difference remains very similar to those in panel C. The
patterns of urban wage inequality in Canada are decidedly weaker. In fact, it appears that the urban wage
premium for university graduates relative to high-school graduates is growing at half the rate in Canada as
it is in the U.S. The top panel of figure A1 shows the scatter plots comparing the log university-high school
wage ratio for 1990 and 2011 for all the cities while the second panel shows the urban 90/10 differential. For
both measures, the inequality increased more in the U.S. than in Canada. While the urban 90/10 differential
in Canada in 1990 was typically lower in the larger cities than what was seen in the smaller cities, it grew at
a faster rate in the larger cities. Conversely, in the U.S., the 90/10 differential was generally greater in the
larger cities in 1990, and this difference has increased.




                                                      13
5.1     Aggregate Labor Dynamics by Sector

Figure 2 provides an overview of the annual variation in Canada and the U.S. over the

period 1980–2010.28 These four plots document the trends in hours worked and hourly labor

compensation by sector over this period using the World KLEMS data. It separates the

economy into 4 broad sectors.29 The top two plots show hours worked and mean hourly labor

compensation by sector, combining Canadian aggregates with much larger U.S. numbers.

The bottom two panels show values of these variables for Canada relative to the U.S.30

      Panel 1A of Figure 2 shows the steady growth in hours worked in the services sector

and decline in the manufacturing and resource/utilities sectors from 1980–2010. This recent

structural transformation has been a common trend in most advanced economies. While

manufacturing remained the largest of the non-services sectors, its share of hours fell by

over half. Panel 1B shows that hourly labor compensation in manufacturing did remain on

average higher than the other three sectors over this entire period.

      Panel 2A indicates that before 1995, Canadian manufacturing hours worked was, like the

population, about one-tenth of that in the U.S. In the late 1990s, it rose relative to the U.S.

before leveling off in the mid-2000s.

      The construction sector’s share of total hours worked was higher in Canada than in the

U.S. for almost every year between 1980–2010. The Canada–U.S. ratio of construction hours

worked was volatile, punctuated by a dramatic rise after the 2007–2008 financial crisis. Hours

fell precipitously in the U.S. as the housing marketed crashed, while Canadians suffered only

a minor temporary setback.

      Panel 2B shows that the resource/utilities sector’s share of hours worked is much higher

in Canada, especially from the mid-1980s onward. Oil and gas trends help explain the labor
  28
      Appendix table A1 provides a numerical overview of the aggregate labor markets in Canada and the U.S.
Panels B, C, and D show that employment and wages were initially higher in the U.S. in 1990, noting that
Census measures of unemployment differ from the U.S. Current Population Survey and the Canadian Labour
Force Survey. By 2011 these spreads narrowed or even reversed, as Canada experienced a mild recession in
the late 2000s while the Great Recession struck the U.S. Regarding demographics, U.S. workers began the
sample as more educated. This flipped towards the end of the sample. In terms of immigration, Canada
initially had a larger foreign-born share of the working age population, and while this metric grew in both
Canada and the U.S., it reached nearly 30% in 2011 in Canada.
   29
      We use the concordance in Gu (2012) to convert the KLEMS data from ISIC rev 3 to NAICS 2-digit.
The NAICS 2-digit classifications are as follows: resource/utilities - 11–22, construction - 23, manufacturing
- 31–33, and services - 41–91.
   30
      Hours worked is defined as the total hours worked by persons engaged in the sector. Hourly labor
compensation is defined as total labor compensation in the sector divided by hours worked. Canadian labor
compensation is converted to U.S. dollars at the average annual Canada–U.S. exchange rate downloaded from
the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, FRED.



                                                     14
dynamics of this sector. International demand caused oil employment to expand in the early

1980s, collapse in the mid-1980s before rapidly increasing in the early 2000s, and drop again

in the late 2000s.

      The aggregated data do not show how concentrated these sectors are regionally. For

instance, both countries share a “manufacturing belt,” corresponding to a parallelogram from

Baltimore, west to St. Louis, north to Green Bay, and east to Maine, with the last border

cutting into southern Ontario and Québec (Krugman, 1991). While these areas suffered

from manufacturing decline, this was less of the case north of border from the late 1990s

onward. Natural resource booms were especially impactful in the less dense areas of Alberta

and Saskatchewan as well as in Texas and North Dakota. Meanwhile, construction booms

and busts were important in high-growth areas like Las Vegas and Florida, and Toronto and

Vancouver in Canada.

5.2     Cross-Metro Differences and Changes in Labor Market Outcomes

From 1990 to 2011, local labor market outcomes did shift considerably across metro areas.

Yet, despite the variation in these shifts across sectors, we find that inequalities in wages

across areas were remarkably consistent over time. Figure 3 plots variation in three different

outcomes for each country separately: weekly wages, the employment-population ratio, and

the manufacturing share. Outcomes for the year 2011 are plotted against those in 1990.

For completeness, we present outcomes for non-metro areas, averaged by state or province,

represented with a triangle.31

      Looking first at the plots of the 1990 and 2011 weekly wage by metro (top of figure 3),

in 1990 wages in the U.S. were high in cities like New York, San Francisco, Washington, and

Detroit; in Canada, wages were high in Toronto, Ottawa, and Calgary, as well as in smaller

manufacturing and resource-oriented cities in the provinces of Québec and British Columbia.

Wages rose disproportionately in places like San Francisco, Washington, and all over Alberta.

Places like Detroit and non-metro Québec saw relative declines in wages. In both countries,

wage differences across cities appear to have grown between 1990 and 2011. More strikingly,

there was generally no wage convergence and, importantly, we still see persistent differences
  31
     For figure 3, we also include the additional nine Canadian metro areas as well as areas of
states/provinces/territories not part of metros. A city’s market is proportional to its population. These
additional metros and provinces/territories are not available in the CBP/ASM data and so are not included
in our main analysis.




                                                   15
between 1990 and 2011, with most cities close to the regression line.

    Unlike with wages, we do see imbalances in the employment-population ratio that mean-

reverted in both countries, as shown in panel 2 of figure 3. This reversion, even stronger

in Canada, is consistent with findings for the U.S. of Blanchard and Katz (1992) that such

imbalances are generally short-lived.

    Panel 3 of figure 3 presents the 2011 and 1990 manufacturing shares. While manufactur-

ing shares fell over the 20-year period, metros with high shares in 1990 still had above average

shares in 2011. For example, in Canada, Granby had the highest manufacturing share in

both years. In the U.S., the two highest ranked metros in 1990, Elkhart and Hickory, were

still in the top 3 in 2011. Yet in both Canada and the U.S., the slope of regression line is

below 1, thus indicating that local manufacturing shares generally fell from 1990 to 2011, in

line with figure 2.

    Figure 4 examines whether migration, or lack thereof, could be affecting wage conver-

gence. Panel 1A shows that places with higher wages in 1990 saw less growth than lower-wage

areas. Ganong and Shoag (2018) argue that this pattern, which they attribute to housing

supply, is responsible for the lack of income convergence shown above. But as we see in panel

1B, Canada saw a different pattern of higher population growth in places with high initial

wages. Nevertheless, wage levels do not appear to have converged any more in Canada. This

suggests that barriers to labor mobility may not be the main obstacle to income conver-

gence.32

6   Omnibus (“Bartik”) Sectoral Changes

Below we combine standard approaches to study local shifts in labor demand, following

Bartik (1991). This approach accounts for local demand shifts by predicting changes in

employment at the local level with the interaction of pre-determined industrial composition

and the national growth of workers in each industry. This omnibus approach benefits in its

generality by considering all industries with the overarching aim of causally estimating the

local impacts of labor demand changes and shocks on wages, mobility, welfare transfers, and

other key outcomes. The basis for this analysis extends back to Blanchard and Katz (1992).
   32
      In appendix figure A1, we also examine metro-level convergence in regards to the university-population
and foreign-born–population ratios. Broadly, we see little convergence in Canada and the U.S. in terms of
the university-population ratio. Concerning immigration (panel 4), we see slight convergence in the foreign-
born–population ratio for the U.S., but nearly no convergence in Canada.




                                                    16
Our innovation is to examine Canada and the U.S. in unison and how the so-called “Bartik”

shocks differentially affect local labor markets in the two countries.

    We contribute to the literature by considering two separately constructed Bartik instru-

ments simultaneously. Each of these predicts an aggregate labor demand shift given by

                                                    1990
                                                 X Ejl
                                        ∆Bjt =                        t
                                                                ∆ ln Elk                                    (3)
                                                       Ej1990
                                                   l


       1990 /E 1990 is the share of employment in city j that is in industry l in the base year;
where Ejl     j
          t is the first difference change in the log of overall employment in industry l of
and ∆ ln Elk

country k (i.e., Canada or the U.S.).33

    For any outcome, Y , the simultaneous equations system takes the form


                                   ∆ ln Ejt = αk ∆Bjt + ζkt + Xk θk + εEt
                                                                       j                                   (4a)

                                ∆ ln Yjt = βk ∆ ln Ejt + ηkt + Xk λk + εYj t                              (4b)


The first-stage (4a) simply regresses actual log employment changes, ∆Ejt , on projected

changes. The coefficients αk may vary by country, as can time effects, ζkt , and the coefficients

on the controls Xk , which in our benchmark specification include a set of region indicators

for each country. The second-stage involves a vector of labor results in Y .

    As the Bartik instrument relies on industrial classifications, it may be subject to errors.

This issue motivates our use of two separately constructed Bartik instruments: one using

Census data and the other constructed from the CBP for the U.S. and the CBP/ASM for

Canada. Census industrial classification is inferred from household responses, whereas for

the CBP data the classification is administratively determined by each country’s business

registry. Recognizing that there is error in both household and business reported data (Card,

1996), our approach of using two instruments leverages the strengths of each data source.

Indeed, the CBP data, for example, do not always provide an exact count of employees by

area, although they do provide the firm-size distribution. For both CBP datasets we impute
   33                     t                                                t
     We calculate ∆ ln Elk  using a leave-one-out approach. That is, ∆ ln Elk is city j specific and is computed
as the first difference change in the log of aggregate employment in industry l of country k, excluding the
change in employment in city j. We use this leave-one-out approach to mitigate concerns that pre-existing
trends at the city level may compromise the exogeneity of our Bartik instruments. To match the year of the
Census-derived outcome variables for each country, the base year is 1990 for the U.S. and 1991 for Canada.
To standardize our notation across both countries, we use the superscript 1990 to denote the base year in
each country.



                                                       17
employment counts, but for Canadian manufacturing data we use exact employment counts

from the ASM (in lieu of the CBP) to improve accuracy.34

6.1     Long Differences in the Reduced Form

To better see the relationship between the Bartik projection and observed outcomes, figure

5 illustrates reduced form outcomes using long differences between 1990 and 2011. This long

period may produce different estimates than higher-frequency ones because of the long-run

nature of the change. For brevity, we present only the Census Bartik projection relative

to employment and wages. In this simpler case, the indirect least squares (or instrumental

variable) estimate of the elasticity of the wage with respect to employment equals the ratio

of two slopes: that of the wage to that of employment. Since Bartik shocks are predictors of

demand growth, this elasticity is equal to the inverse elasticity of demand.

      In the U.S., cities with the lowest predicted growth, such as Hickory, Elkhart, and

Danville, saw major declines in their textile mills and other manufacturing. Conversely, cities

such as Las Vegas and Santa Fe grew from expansions in service industries. In Canada, the

metros with the greatest positive shifts occurred around natural resources, such as Calgary

and Wood Buffalo (which contains Fort McMurray): employment levels there grew by over

50 percent. On the other end are cities with relative declines, such as Campbell River, with

a struggling natural resource sector, and manufacturing cities, such as Sarnia. In general,

we see that the Bartik instrument does, on average, predict employment in almost equal

amounts in both the U.S. and Canada, with a 10 percent increase in projected employment

predicting a 17 and 18 percent increase, respectfully. However, the fit was closer for Canada,

as evinced by the larger R2 . The wage response in Canada was also slightly stronger. Thus,

a 10 percent increase in projected employment is associated with an 8.6 and 11.3 percent

increase in wages.

      Taking the ratio of the employment change in the first-stage to the wage change in the

reduced form provides an estimate of the elasticity of local labor supply to (nominal) wages.
   34
      From the Canadian and U.S. Census data, we construct 19 industries to calculate the Bartik instru-
ment. The industries include Agriculture, Forestry/Logging, Fish, Coal, Mining, Petroleum, Manufacturing,
Construction, Transportation, Communication/Utilities, Wholesale, Retail, Finance/Insurance/Real Estate,
Business Services, Public Administration, Education, Health/Social Service/Professional, Accommodations,
Other Services. For the Canadian CBP data, we use NAICS 1997 4-digit classification, which has 321 industry
groups. Our U.S. CBP data have 3-digit SIC classification, providing 373 industries in the U.S. We exclude
NAICS 4-digit industries that we are unable to concord over NAICS vintages 1997–2007, or because of zero
employment counts in any NAICS or SIC industry. The Business Pattern data cover only the private sector.
Our algorithm for CBP imputation is from Autor et al. (2013).



                                                    18
In the U.S. this elasticity is 2.0, while in Canada it is 1.6. Thus, this simple evidence suggests

that the elasticity of local labor supply is somewhat elastic in both countries, albeit slightly

more in the U.S.

6.2     First-Stage Bartik Results

Table 2 examines each instrument’s first-stage relationship with metropolitan changes in

log employment using differenced data spanning 1990 to 2000, 2000 to 2007, and 2007 to

2011. The analysis here examines the predictive power of the Bartik instrument along three

dimensions: across household (Census) and business (CBP/ASM) surveys, in Canada relative

to the U.S., and for our benchmark sample (columns 1–3) versus one with a common city

size support (columns 4–6). The regressions are weighted by start of sample population, and

robust standard errors are clustered at the state/province level.35

      In column 1, the elasticity of employment with respect to the Census Bartik instrument is

1.2 and 1.1 for the U.S. and Canada, respectively; however, this coefficient is more precisely

estimated in Canada. This may be due to the more detailed and greater quantity of data

in the Canadian master file data. Panel C pools data across the U.S. and Canada.36 The

resulting coefficient on the Bartik averages both countries and thus skews towards the U.S.

given population weighting. The bottom of the table also lists the p-value associated with

the null that the coefficients are equal across the U.S. and Canada. We cannot reject the

hypothesis that coefficients are the same. Thus, the Census instruments are correlated

similarly to actual employment changes across both countries.

      Column 2 uses only the CBP/ASM instrument, and the estimated elasticities are 0.6 and

0.5 for the U.S. and Canada, respectively. Relative to column 1, the first-stage F-statistic

increases for the U.S., but in both columns the instrument is stronger for Canada.37 Again,

we cannot reject the hypothesis that the coefficients on the CBP/ASM Bartiks are equal
   35
      The regressions, set in first differences, include indicators for time periods and regions. Appendix table
A5 presents estimates for the 1980s separately, since only the Census instrument is available for that period.
Employment is measured with Census data and includes both public and private sector employment. For the
U.S., we use Census divisions. For Canada we define five Canadian regions as follows: Atlantic (Newfoundland
and Labrador, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, and Prince Edward Island); Québec; Ontario; Prairies (Alberta,
Manitoba, and Saskatchewan); and British Columbia.
   36
      For these estimates, we interact decadal indicators with a country indicator.
   37
      We found that using only the Canadian CBP data, without the ASM data, resulted in a much weaker first-
stage relationship between the instrument and employment. The coarseness of the Canadian CBP employment
data, particularly for larger firms, motivated our use of the ASM data. Our CBP/ASM Bartik estimates use
confidential Statistics Canada micro data. Although these micro data are not publicly available, our Canadian
CMA-level CBP/ASM Bartik estimates have been vetted and are available upon request for future research.




                                                      19
across countries.

      In column 3 we use both the Census and CBP/ASM Bartik instruments in tandem. For

Canada, both instruments have predictive power; however, the Census Bartik is stronger

both in magnitude and significance. Only the CBP Bartik remains statistically significant

for the U.S. Not surprisingly, the same holds true in the pooled sample.

      In columns 4–6 of table 2, we repeat these estimates for the common city size sample to

show the effect from forcing a common city size support. Comparing columns 1 to 3 with 4 to

6 in panel A shows that the U.S. F-statistics increase across each of the specifications when we

use common city sizes: oddly, the first-stage is stronger without American megacities.38 For

Canada in panel B, dropping the smallest cities lowers the coefficients, and, not surprisingly,

the first-stage F-statistics as the number of observations falls. Yet congruent with columns

1 to 3, the Census Bartik outperforms the CBP/ASM Bartik in Canada for the common

city size sample. The pooled regression in panel C again reflects a weighted average across

Canada and the U.S.

      In summary, the CBP/ASM Bartik instrument is the stronger of the two instruments

for the U.S., while the Census Bartik instrument performs better in Canada. We therefore

use the first-stage specifications with both instruments (columns 3 and 6) in our Two-Stage

Least Squares (2SLS) analysis in section 6.3, since each instrument has its relative strengths

in each country. However, our second-stage results do not differ much if we use only the

CBP/ASM or the Census Bartik instrument in the first-stage, as shown in tables A7 and

A8, respectively.39

6.3     Second-Stage Bartik Results

Table 3 presents the results of 2SLS regressions for several outcomes of interest on the

change in log employment. These outcomes correspond to a number of issues studied above.

They include controls for decadal and regional fixed effects (see footnote 35). Our table 3

estimates can be interpreted as elasticities of the outcome with respect to employment, as

all the outcomes are expressed in logarithms.

      For wages, the U.S. and Canada estimates are similar: as measured by the location index
  38
       Changing tastes for city amenities (Davidoff, 2016) or inelastic housing supply may dull employment
effects in these cities.
    39
       In table A5 of the appendix we show that the Census Bartiks also perform well in the 1980s, with large
first-stage F-statistics in both countries. Note, the Canadian CBP/ASM data were unavailable for this earlier
period.



                                                     20
in column 1, a 10 percent increase in employment predicts a wage increase of slightly over

5 percent in either country. This estimate — which controls for the composition of workers

— provides the inverse elasticity of labor supply with respect to (nominal) wages. Thus, the

elasticity of labor supply with respect to wages is just below 2 in either country. This value is

similar to what is seen in the literature cited earlier, although it differs slightly from the long

difference estimates in section 6.1, where Canada’s supply elasticity was slightly smaller.

   In column 2, the results for the population elasticity are below 1 in both the U.S. and

Canada, meaning that the population growth in response to a local employment demand

shock is less than one-for-one in either country. The elasticity is significantly higher for

Canada relative to the U.S. Column 7 provides evidence that immigrant population growth in

response to local labor demand shocks may explain the relatively higher population elasticity

in Canada. For Canada, a 10 percent increase in employment predicts a 15 percent increase

in the fraction of the population that is foreign born. For the U.S., this elasticity is negative

and insignificant, while the Canada–U.S. difference in the estimates is highly significant.

The higher population elasticity for Canada also explains the results in column 3. Because

the population rises more with employment in Canada, the elasticity of the employment-

population ratio, seen in column 3, is more modest.

   The effects on the unemployment rate, seen in column 4, are similar in both countries.

While the magnitude of the effect is slightly smaller in logarithms in Canada, the effect on

the unemployment rate in percentage points is more similar, since Canada has on average

a higher unemployment rate. In column 5 we find that unemployment benefits, which are

much higher in Canada, have a relatively larger elasticity for the U.S. However, for the

unemployment rate and unemployment benefits, the difference in elasticities across the two

countries is too imprecise to be statistically distinguishable.

   In column 6 we investigate the response of the composition of worker skills to employment

shocks. The wage skill index in both countries falls by roughly 2.5 percentage points for a

10-point increase in employment. In other words, the labor demand shifts predicted by

the Bartik shocks on average appear to attract a less-skilled work force. Thus, observed

unadjusted weekly wages rise by less than what the wage location index would imply. Not

accounting for these composition changes would thus bias the labor supply elasticity upwards.

   In columns 7 and 8, we see significant differences between the U.S. and Canada with



                                                21
respect to the elasticities for the fraction of the population that is foreign born and the

fraction that is university educated. For Canada, the elasticity for the fraction with a

university education is positive and highly significant; while for the U.S., the elasticity is

close to zero and insignificant. As previously discussed, the elasticity for the fraction that is

foreign born is positive and highly significant for Canada, but not for the U.S.

    Warman and Worswick (2015) show that the percent of new immigrants to Canada with

a university degree increased in the early 1990s from around 25 percent to over 50 percent.

This influx may help explain why the fraction of university educated and foreign born reacted

so much in Canada. At the same time, the greater responsiveness of university graduates in

Canada implies a lower responsiveness of non-graduates. This implication appears consistent

with Canada’s more generous income transfer programs, which can especially dull incentives

for lower-skilled workers to move (Notowidigo, 2011).

    Columns 9 and 10 show the employment elasticity of two measures of pay inequality: the

wage difference between university- and high school–educated workers, and the difference in

pay between the 90th and 10th percentiles. The results are rather imprecise, showing positive

point estimates for the elasticities of both inequality measures in both countries, although

none of the estimates are significantly different from zero at conventional sizes.

    Finally, in column 11 we estimate the elasticity of housing costs to local labor demand

shocks. Here we see a strong and positive effect of an employment demand shock on housing

costs in the U.S., but not in Canada. Because employment and housing demand track each

other rather well, this implies that housing supply was much more elastic in the Canadian

cities that saw demand shifts predicted by the instrument.40

    Since housing costs reduce the purchasing power of labor income, this result implies that

(pre-tax-and-transfer) real wages rise more in Canada than in the U.S. in response to a

positive labor demand shock. Therefore, residents in Canada, particularly renters, stand to

gain more from positive demand shocks and possibly lose more from negative shocks. At
  40
      The three sub-plots in figure A2 show the Canadian Bartik instrument plotted against the difference
in the log of housing prices for the periods 1990–2000, 2000–2007, and 2007–2011. The slope coefficient is
negative and significant for the 1990–2000 period, and positive for the latter two periods. This suggests
that the lack of responsiveness in Canadian housing costs to local labor demand shocks is largely driven by
the data from the 1990–2000 period. Consistent with this explanation, in our sensitivity analysis we found
that the Canadian housing cost elasticity is much closer to that of the U.S. when the sample is restricted
to exclude the 1990–2000 data. These results are available upon request. Using data on housing prices in
Canadian cities, Allen et al. (2009) also find that housing prices responded inconsistently across Canadian
cities to labor force changes during the period 1985–2005. Explaining why the elasticity of housing costs in
Canada becomes more similar to that of the U.S. after 2000 is an important topic for future research.



                                                    22
the same time, the lower elasticity of housing costs in Canada may be the result of greater

individual and intergovernmental transfers that act as insurance across regions. Places hit

with negative shocks receive greater transfers, helping to prop up falling prices. Those hit

with positive shocks see fewer of those gains realized locally, raising prices by less.

    The results in table 4 focus on the Canada–U.S. differences in the elasticity estimates

under several alternative specifications.41 Panel A replicates the differences from table 3 to

provide a benchmark for comparison. Panel B shows the Canada–U.S. differences when the

elasticities are estimated using the common city size sample.42 Here we see that the wage

elasticity difference grows to 0.231, although this difference is not statistically significant at

the 10 percent level. At the same time, the Canada–U.S. difference in the population and

employment-to-population responses are smaller and no longer significant, as population

growth tracks employment growth more closely in the U.S. outside of its largest metros.

Most of the other differences remain the same, although the housing-cost estimate shrinks

somewhat.

    Panel C of table 4 shows the Canada–U.S. differences when we use the common city

size sample and the DiNardo et al. (1996) method to reweight Canadian cities to resemble

U.S. cities in terms of their demographic characteristics, which we discuss in section 3.4.

Under this specification the difference in the wage elasticities grows from panel B and is

statistically significant at the 5 percent level. This provides evidence that labor supply

is more elastic in the U.S. than in Canada when we compare cities that are similar in

population and demographics. As in panel B, there is no statistically significant difference

in the elasticities for population and the employment-population ratio in the reweighted

specification. Interestingly, the Canada–U.S. difference in the elasticity of the university to

high school wage ratio is positive and becomes statistically significant at the 10 percent level,

as the magnitude of the difference increases only slightly and the standard errors shrink. In

all other respects the elasticity estimates in panel C are similar to those in panels A and B.

    Finally, in panel D, we further reweight the Canadian sample with additional controls for

the minimum wage and the start of sample shares of employment in manufacturing and in oil.

Generally, the coefficients are analogous to those in panel C, with a few minor exceptions.
  41
    See table A6 for the corresponding estimates for the 1980–1990 period.
  42
    A complete set of 2SLS results for the common city size specification is provided in table A4 in the
appendix.




                                                  23
     The takeaway from this section is that most local labor market responses to demand

shifts respond similarly in Canada and the U.S. However, the differing results on housing

costs suggest the labor supply elasticity in terms of real wages is much lower in Canada.

This could be the result of transfer programs or because of higher unobserved moving costs.

Comparing cities similar in characteristics, it also appears that the supply elasticity in terms

of nominal wages is lower in Canada, possibly from similar factors. The greater respon-

siveness of university-educated and immigrant populations could also be due to transfer or

immigration policy, or to institutional factors we did not account for.43

7        Import Competition from Chinese Manufacturing

Our second approach to studying the local labor market responses to economic shocks focuses

on import competition from China, following Autor et al. (2013). Relative to the Bartik

analysis, this approach is more specific in its focus on the effect of Chinese import competition

on manufacturing industries in Canada and the U.S. It also has a more plausible form of

exogeneity, since it depends on the rise in Chinese exports seen worldwide, not just sectoral

shifts in the U.S. and Canada, which shift for unobserved reasons. However, these “China

shocks” are smaller than the Bartik shocks, which makes it harder to identify their effects on

broad local labor market outcomes. Indeed, the goal here is to determine how Chinese import

competition impacted local manufacturing through very specific manufacturing subsectors,

whose local intensity varied considerably.

     In line with previous work, our proxy for local import competition from China is given

by imports per worker (IPW) for each city j, in year t, in country k:

                                                         t
                                            t
                                                      X Ejl ∆M t    lk
                                       ∆IP Wjk =                                                          (5)
                                                           Ejt Elk
                                                                t
                                                       l


       t /E t is the ratio of city j employment in industry l relative to the total employment,
where Ejl  j

Ejt , in city j in year t. ∆Mlk
                             t is the first difference change in imports from China in industry

                  t is total employment in industry l in country k.44 Our data are set in
l for country k. Elk
    43
      We note that that our elasticity estimates are qualitatively different for the 1980–1990 period, as seen
in table A5. For instance, the wage response was much smaller in Canada. We suspect this may have had
something to do with stronger unions. We see a relatively small and non-significant Canada–U.S. difference
for the elasticity of the fraction of university educated. The fraction of foreign born are more responsive to
employment changes in both countries, possibly more so in Canada, but not significantly.
   44
      Autor et al. (2013) use a 10-year lag of manufacturing sector employment in the construction of their
instrument. Here we use contemporaneous employment since our NAICS 1997 classified manufacturing em-
ployment data for Canada begins in 1990. Note that all the import measures are recorded in U.S. dollars.


                                                     24
differences and cover two periods, 1990–2000 and 2000–2007, congruent with Autor et al.

(2013).

      The change in IPW varies at the local level due to specialization in (1) manufacturing

relative to non-manufacturing sectors, and (2) local manufacturing industries with greater

import exposure risk, e.g., exposed textile versus non-exposed defense manufacturing. The

empirical structure rests on the claim that variation in IPW over time is due to structural

changes as China shifted more towards a market-based economy and ascended to the World

Trade Organization (WTO) in 2001.

      Import competition from China could have increased because domestic demand shifted

to products supplied by the Chinese or because domestic industries faltered. If so, ordinary

least squares estimates of the effect of changes in IPW on local outcomes will be biased.

We thus follow Autor et al. (2013) by constructing an instrument using Chinese imports to

other Western countries.45 By using other Western countries’ Chinese imports, this instru-

ment is intended to isolate the influence of growth in Chinese exports on the Canadian and

U.S. manufacturing sectors as distinct from contemporaneous domestic factors. To make the

first-stage estimates more comparable across the U.S. and Canada, we normalize the instru-

ment for Canada by multiplying by the ratio of the American to Canadian manufacturing

employment in 1990.

7.1     First-Stage Results

Table 5 presents results from the first-stage relationships between IPW and its instrument.

We follow Autor et al. (2013) by including a control start of sample (Census-based) manufac-

turing share, as well as regional indicators. Due to slight differences in geography, our results

are not identical to Autor et al. (2013); yet we find a highly similar first-stage relationship

for the U.S.

      For Canada, the coefficient on the IPW instrument is smaller, by an amount that is

statistically significant. Without the normalization, the effect would be smaller still, although

we note that our second-stage 2SLS results are independent of instrument normalization.

Indeed, it is the strength of the first-stage relationship that is of primary importance. In this

respect the IPW instrument performs well for Canada, as the first-stage F-statistic is 43.30.
  45
     For both Canada and the U.S. we use a common set of other Western countries in constructing our
instrument, namely Australia, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Japan, New Zealand, Spain, and Switzerland.




                                                25
As an archetypal small open economy, it is not surprising that our instrument, which uses

other Western countries’ Chinese imports, is strongly predictive of Canadian IPW.

      In the bottom panel B of table 5, we show the same first-stage regressions but using

the common city size sample. This amounts to removing the largest cities in the U.S. and

the smallest cities in Canada (see section 3.1.2). The magnitude of the coefficient estimates

on the instrument change little when we estimate the first-stage IPW regressions using a

common city sample. However, the first-stage F-statistics decline considerably, particularly

for Canada, due to the large sample size reduction.

7.2      Two-Stage Least Squares Estimates

Table 6 presents the 2SLS results for the core labor market outcomes. In panel A column

1, our estimate for manufacturing employment for U.S. metro areas of -4.4 log points differs

by only 0.2 log points from the estimate of -4.2 for U.S. commuting zones, as reported by

Autor et al. (2013). Our level of precision is also quite similar. For Canada, the decline in

manufacturing employment in response to imports from China is smaller than in the U.S.

The column 1 point estimate is -1.3 log points for Canada, and the precision of this estimate

is very similar to the U.S. with the standard error in either country being near 1 log point.

The Canada–U.S. difference in the point estimates is statistically significant, with a p-value

of 0.04; yet the Canadian point estimate is not statistically significant.

      We see similar results for the employment-population ratio.46 The point estimate for

Canada is half that of the U.S., but no less precise. There is evidence that increased IPW

from China decreased the employment-population ratio in Canada, but the magnitude and

statistical significance of this effect is much stronger in the U.S. Thus, it appears that import

competition from China had a smaller effect on manufacturing employment in Canada than

in the U.S. This is consistent with the aggregate trends outlined in figure 2, which show

that the decline in Canadian manufacturing over the period 1990–2007 was moderate in

comparison to the U.S.

      Our point estimates hint that the increase in Chinese imports may have lowered manu-

facturing wages, but the estimates are insignificant in both countries. For Canada, we find

little evidence that Chinese imports had any effect on the unemployment rate. For the U.S.,

we find a positive and statistically significant effect on the unemployment rate, as in Autor
  46
       Employment includes manufacturing as well as non-manufacturing employment.



                                                   26
et al. (2013).

     Table 7 presents differences in the Canada–U.S. estimates under several alternative spec-

ifications. For the common city size specification, panel B shows that the Canada–U.S.

difference for the manufacturing employment point estimate falls from 0.31 to 0.22 and is

now insignificant.47 In panel C, we reweight based on the start of sample share of the popula-

tion with a university degree and the share of foreign born. In this specification, we find the

Canada–U.S. difference in manufacturing employment shrinks and switches sign, although

it becomes very imprecise, pointing to limits in the reweighting strategy. In panel D, when

we reweight further using start of sample manufacturing and oil shares as well as minimum

wage, the Canada–U.S. difference in manufacturing employment goes back up to 0.21 but

remains imprecise.

     In sum, it appears that Chinese import competition had a milder effect on manufacturing

sector employment in Canada relative to the U.S. We also saw milder effects on unemploy-

ment and the employment-to-population ratio, although the difference was not significant.

However, when comparing similar-looking cities, we found the differences became less dis-

tinct, but unfortunately, the instrument gets much weaker when we eliminate the smaller,

harder-to-compare Canadian cities.

     It is worth contrasting these China shock results to the Bartik analysis. While the Bartik

instrument captures omnibus (typically positive) demand shocks, the China shock is more

specific in its focus on the (negative) employment effects of Chinese import competition. We

would expect to see similarities in the Canada–U.S. differences in the response to each of the

two shocks. In the first-stage Bartik results (panels A and B of table 2), we saw that the

coefficient on the Bartiks for the U.S. are nearly all larger than for Canada, although the

difference is only statistically significant in column (4). With the China shock we also saw

a stronger negative response to manufacturing employment for the U.S. relative to Canada.

Therefore, both sets of results suggest that local labor markets in the U.S. are slightly more

responsive to external demand shocks.

8        Conclusion

Our analysis provides a novel examination of labor market dynamics across two major

economies, the United States and Canada. While both countries have experienced similar
    47
         The 2SLS estimates for the common city size specification are reported in table A9 in the appendix.



                                                        27
structural transformations — such as declines in their manufacturing sectors and increased

import competition from China — they differ moderately in institutions, transfer generosity,

and immigration policy. Building upon other studies that examined the U.S. in isolation,

we provide a unique synthesis and careful side-by-side comparison with Canada. Studying

the U.S. and Canada in tandem also provides a unique opportunity to examine the exter-

nal validity of prior research on the U.S. while learning more about local Canadian labor

markets.

   In both countries, we see greater concentrations of income and inequality in larger cities,

but in the U.S. this association is considerably stronger. We also see more pronounced

patterns of urban sorting in Canada among its larger and more educated foreign-born pop-

ulation. In both countries, we observe persistent differences in earnings across cities. This is

true despite the fact Canadians have moved more towards high-wage areas, while Americans

have not.

   We also find much in common across both countries when we examine the causal responses

to changes in local labor market conditions. In reaction to omnibus local labor demand shifts,

it appears that cities in the U.S. and Canada face similar upward-sloping supply curves in

terms of nominal wage changes. When we compare Canadian and U.S. cities that have

similar features, the U.S. supply curve looks slightly more elastic. The U.S. supply curve

also looks more elastic in terms of real wages, as housing-cost increases eroded nominal

wage gains more than in Canada. At the same time, Canadian cities saw immigrants react

more proportionally to demand shifts, even while they represent a heavier share of workers.

Relative to the U.S., university graduates in Canada were also more responsive than non-

graduates. We also saw hints that U.S. employment rates were slightly more sensitive to

shifts in demand. This difference between the U.S. and Canada is more pronounced when

we examine how Chinese import competition reduced manufacturing employment.

   The reasons for U.S.–Canada differences in local labor markets remain open questions:

they could be due to institutional or structural reasons our methods could not isolate. How-

ever, our results do suggest potential paths for future research. That immigrants in Canada

were more heavily urban and responsive to labor demand shifts may be due to Canada’s more

skill-oriented immigration policy. Because the emphasis on family reunification is weaker, it

would be interesting to see if immigrant enclaves in Canada predict population growth less



                                              28
in Canada. More skilled immigrants may also provide greater positive spillovers by providing

skill complementarities that raise the wages of lower-skilled workers, or by establishing more

firms.

   In Canada, the greater responsiveness to demand of nominal wages and university grad-

uates, and the lower responsiveness of housing costs, are consistent with the country’s more

generous transfer policies. The link is still tenuous, and so it would be useful for future

researchers to collect transfer data at the individual level to assess how important these poli-

cies were in affecting employment and migration decisions. Indeed, many Americans want

to know if more generous transfers would protect American communities from future eco-

nomic changes, while Canadians may want to know if market-oriented reforms may encourage

greater mobility to high-growth labor markets.




                                              29
References
Albert, Christoph and Joan Monras. 2019. Immigration and spatial equilibrium: the role
  of expenditures in the country of origin. Tech. Rep. 12842, Center for Economic Policy
  Research.

Albouy, David. 2009. The unequal geographic burden of federal taxation. Journal of Political
  Economy 117, no. 4:635–667.

———. 2012. Evaluating the efficiency and equity of federal fiscal equalization. Journal of
 Public Economics 96, no. 9:824–839.

———. 2016. What Are Cities Worth? Land Rents, Local Productivity, and the Total Value
 of Amenities. Review of Economics and Statistics 98, no. 3:477–87.

Albouy, David, Heepyung Cho, and Mariya Shappo. 2018. Immigration and the pursuit of
  amenities. Mimeo, University of Illinois.

Albouy, David, Fernando Leibovici, and Casey Warman. 2013. Quality of Life, Firm Produc-
  tivity and the Value of Amenities across Canadian Cities. Canadian Journal of Economics
  46, no. 2:379–411.

Allen, Jason, Robert Amano, David P. Byrne, and Allan W. Gregory. 2009. Canadian
  city housing prices and urban market segmentation. Canadian Journal of Economics 42,
  no. 3:1132–1149.

Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson. 2013. The China syndrome: Local
 labor market effects of import competition in the United States. American Economic
 Review 103, no. 6:2121–2168.

Autor, David H. and Mark G. Duggan. 2003. The rise in the disability rolls and the decline
 in unemployment. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, no. 1:157–205.

Aydemir, Abdurrahman and Chris Robinson. 2008. Global labour markets, return, and
 onward migration. Canadian Journal of Economics 41, no. 4:1285–1311.

Baldwin, John R. and Jiang Li. 2017. The changing importance of foreign control in Cana-
  dian manufacturing. Statistics Canada Analytical Studies Branch Research Paper Series
  11F0019M, no. 387:1–25.

Barro, Robert J., Xavier Sala i Martin, Olivier Jean Blanchard, and Robert E. Hall. 1991.
  Convergence Across States and Regions. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1991,
  no. 1:107–182.

Bartik, Timothy J. 1991. Who benefits from state and local economic development policies?
  Books from Upjohn Press. W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research. URL https:
  //ideas.repec.org/b/upj/ubooks/wbsle.html.

Battle, Ken. 1998. Transformation: Canadian social policy since 1985. Social Policy &
  Administration 32, no. 4:321–340.

Baum-Snow, Nathaniel, Matthew Freedman, and Ronni Pavan. 2018. Why has urban in-
  equality increased? American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 10, no. 4:1–42.

Baum-Snow, Nathaniel and Ronni Pavan. 2012. Understanding the city size wage gap. Review
  of Economic Studies 79, no. 1:88–127.


                                            30
———. 2013. Inequality and city size. Review of Economics and Statistics 95, no. 5:1535–
 1548.

Black, Dan, Natalia Kolesnikova, and Lowell Taylor. 2009. Earnings functions when wages
  and prices vary by location. Journal of Labor Economics 27, no. 1:21–47.

Blanchard, Olivier and Lawrence Katz. 1992. Regional evolutions. Brookings Papers on
  Economic Activity 1992, no. 1:1–75.

Borjas, George J. 2001. Does Immigration Grease the Wheels of the Labor Market? Brook-
  ings Papers on Economic Activity 2001, no. 1:69–133.

Bound, John and Harry Holzer. 2000. Demand shifts, population adjustments, and labor
  market outcomes during the 1980s. Journal of Labor Economics 18, no. 1:20–54.

Busso, Matias, Jesse Gregory, and Patrick Kline. 2013. Assessing the incidence and efficiency
  of a prominent place based policy. The American Economic Review 103, no. 2:897–947.

Cadena, Brian C. and Brian K. Kovak. 2016. Immigrants equilibrate local labor markets:
  Evidence from the great recession. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 8,
  no. 1:257–290.

Card, David. 1996. The effect of unions on the structure of wages: A longitudinal analysis.
  Econometrica 64, no. 4:957–979.

———. 2001. Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts of
 Higher Immigration. Journal of Labor Economics 19, no. 1:22–64. URL https://ideas.
 repec.org/a/ucp/jlabec/v19y2001i1p22-64.html.

———. 2003. Canadian emigration to the United States. Mimeo .

Card, David and W. Craig Riddell. 1993. A comparative analysis of unemployment in
  Canada and the United States. In Small differences that matter: Labor markets and
  income maintenance in Canada and the United States, eds. David Card and Richard B
  Freeman, chap. 5. University of Chicago Press, 149–190.

Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, Laura Feiveson, Zachary Liscow, and William Gui Woolston. 2012.
 Does State Fiscal Relief During Recessions Increase Employment? Evidence from the
 American Recovery and Reinvestment Act. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy
 3, no. 4:118–145.

Coulombe, Serge and Frank C. Lee. 1995. Convergence across Canadian provinces, 1961 to
  1991. Canadian Journal of Economics 28, no. 4a:886–898.

Davidoff, Thomas. 2016. Supply constraints are not valid instrumental variables for home
  prices because they are correlated with many demand factors. Critical Finance Review 5,
  no. 2:177–206.

Decressin, Jörg and Antonio Fatas. 1995. Regional labor market dynamics in Europe. Eu-
  ropean Economic Review 39:1627–1655.

Détang-Dessendre, Cécile, Mark Partridge, and Virginie Piguet. 2016. Local labor market
  flexibility in a perceived low migration country: The case of French labor markets. Regional
  Science and Urban Economics 58:89–103.



                                             31
Diamond, Rebecca. 2016. The determinants and welfare implications of US workers’ diverging
  location choices by skill: 1980-2000. American Economic Review 106, no. 3:479–524.

DiNardo, John, Nicole M. Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux. 1996. Labor market institutions
  and the distribution of wages, 1973-1992: A semiparametric approach. Econometrica 64,
  no. 5:1001–1044.

DiNardo, John and Thomas Lemieux. 1997. Diverging male wage inequality in the United
  States and Canada, 1981-1988: Do institutions explain the difference? Industrial and
  Labor Relations Review 50, no. 4:629–651.

Fortin, Nicole and Thomas Lemieux. 2015. Changes in wage inequality in Canada: An
  interprovincial perspective. Canadian Journal of Economics 48, no. 2:682–713.

Ganong, Peter and Daniel Shoag. 2018. Why Has Regional Income Convergence in the U.S.
 Declined? Journal of Urban Economics 102:76–90.

Garthwaite, Craig, Tal Gross, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2014. Public health insurance,
 labor supply, and employment lock. Quarterly Journal of Economics 129, no. 2:653–696.

Glaeser, Edward L. and David C. Maré. 2001. Cities and skills. Journal of Labor Economics
  19, no. 2:316–42.

Gu, Wulong. 2012. A comparison of official and EUKLEMS estimates of MFP growth for
 Canada. Statistics Canada .

Ho, Mun S., Dale W. Jorgenson, and Jon Samuels. 2012. A prototype industry-level pro-
  duction account for the United States, 1947–2010. Second World KLEMS Conference,
  Harvard University 2.

Hoynes, Hillary and Mark Stabile. 2017. How do the U.S. and Canadian social safety nets
  compare for women and children? Working Paper 23380, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin M. Murphy. 1992. Changes in relative wages, 1963-1987:
 Supply and demand factors. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, no. 1:35–78.

Kline, Patrick and Enrico Moretti. 2013. Place based policies with unemployment. The
  American Economic Review 103, no. 3:238–243.

Krugman, Paul. 1991. Geography and trade. MIT Press.

Lee, David. 1999. Wage inequality in the United States during the 1980s: Rising dispersion
  or falling minimum wage? Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, no. 3:977–1022.

Madrian, Brigitte C. 1994. Employment-based health insurance and job mobility: Is there
 evidence of job-lock? Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, no. 1:27–54.

Milligan, Kevin and Tammy Schirle. 2017. Push and pull: Disability insurance, regional
 labor markets, and benefit generosity in Canada and the United States. Working Paper
 23405, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Monras, Joan. Forthcoming. Minimum Wages and Spatial Equilibrium: Theory and Evi-
 dence. Journal of Labor Economics .

Moretti, Enrico. 2011. Local labor markets. Handbook of labor economics 4:1237–1313.


                                           32
———. 2013. Real wage inequality.         Applied Economics Journal: Economic Policy 5,
 no. 1:65–103.

Notowidigo, Matthew J. 2011. The incidence of local labor demand shocks. Working Paper,
  Northwestern University , no. 17167.

Rappaport, Jordan. 2018. The faster growth of larger, less crowded locations. Economic
  Review 103.

Roback, Jennifer. 1982. Wages, rents, and the quality of life. The Journal of Political
  Economy 90, no. 6:1257–1278.

Rosen, Sherwin. 1979. Wage-based indexes of urban quality of life. In Current issues in urban
  economics, eds. P. Mieszkowski and M. Straszheim. Johns Hopkins University Press, 74–
  104.

Ruggles, Steven, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, and Matthew Sobek. 2015.
 Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 6.0 [Machine-readable database]. IPUMS-
 USA, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota. URL www.ipums.org.

Saiz, Albert. 2010. The geographic determinants of housing supply. The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 125, no. 3:1253–1296.

Warman, Casey, Matthew D. Webb, and Christopher Worswick. 2019. Immigrant category
 of admission and the earnings of adults and children: how far does the apple fall? Journal
 of Population Economics 32, no. 1:53–112.

Warman, Casey and Christopher Worswick. 2015. Technological change, occupational tasks
 and declining immigrant outcomes: Implications for earnings and income inequality in
 Canada. Canadian Journal of Economics 48, no. 2:736–772. URL https://ideas.repec.
 org/a/cje/issued/v48y2015i2p736-772.html.

Zimmerman, Seth. 2008. Labor market institutions and economic mobility. Research report,
  Urban Institute.




                                             33
                                                                                              Figure 1: Urban Weekly Wage Differences by Metro Population, Ages 24 to 59, and Common-City Size Cutoffs



                                                                               0.2                                                                                                                                               New York
                                                                                                                                                                                                           San Francisco
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Los Angeles

                                                                                                Campbell River
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Washington
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Boston
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Chicago
                                                                                              Baie−Comeau                                                                                     Detroit
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Philadelphia
                                                                                            Sept−Iles         Timmins                                                                           Dallas
                                                                                               Rouyn−Noranda


                                                                                                   Val−d'Or
                                                                               0.0
                                                                                        Leamington      Midland Salaberry
                                                                                         Williams Lake       Chatham
                                                                                          Alma       Penticton Sorel
                                                                                               Brockville Courtenay
                                                                                            Orillia         Vernon




34
                                                                                     Corner Brook Joliette       Medicine Hat
                                                                                       Moose Jaw        Bathurst
                                                                                          Prince Albert    Victoriaville
                                                                                             New Glasgow
                                                                                                        Brandon
                                                                              −0.2                            Truro




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           United States




         Location Wage Index, Log Differential Relative to National Average
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Canada


                                                                                                                            50                                 400                                        3000                              15000
                                                                                                                                 Population, Ages 24 to 59, in Thousands, Logarithmic Scale
     Notes: The points and the regression line are weighted by population aged 24–59. Metros names are printed for metros that are cutoff in the common city support sample. See the notes to table 1
     for details.
                                                                             Figure 2: Aggregate Hours and Mean Hourly Labor Compensation by Sector in Canada and the U.S., 1980–2010

                                                                         1A: Aggregate Hours Worked in Canada and the U.S. by Sector                                                               1B: Mean Hourly Labor Compensation in Canada and the U.S. by Sector
                                                            80
                                                                                                                                                                                           1.2

                                                            40
                                                                                                                                                                                           1.1


                                                            20                                                                                                                             1.0



                                                            10                                                                                                                             0.9



                                                             5
                                                                                                                                                                                           0.8




               Hours Worked − Sector/All Industries (%)
                                                                                                                                              Labor Compensation − Sector/All Industries
                                                                  1980                   1990                  2000                    2010                                                      1980                  1990                  2000                   2010

                                                                                  2A: Hours Worked by Sector − Canada/US                                                                                  2B: Hourly Labor Compensation by Sector − Canada/US




35
                                                                                                                                                                                           1.0
                                                          0.175

                                                                                                                                                                                           0.9
                                                          0.150
                                                                                                                                                                                           0.8


                                                          0.125
                                                                                                                                                                                           0.7




               Hours Worked − CA/US
                                                          0.100                                                                                                                            0.6
                                                                                                                                              Hourly Labor Compensation − CA/US




                                                                  1980                   1990                  2000                    2010                                                      1980                  1990                  2000                   2010

                                                                                                     Resource/Utilities Construction Manufacturing Services Total (All Industries)
     Notes: Data are from World KLEMS. Sector labels are defined by NAICS 2-digit codes as follows: Resource/Utilities - 11–22; Construction - 23; Manufacturing - 31–33; Services - 41–91. Hours
     worked is defined as the total hours worked by persons engaged in the sector. Hourly labor compensation is defined as total labor compensation in the sector divided by hours worked. Canadian
     labor compensation is converted to U.S. dollars at the average annual Canada–U.S. exchange rate downloaded from FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
                                                            Figure 3: Local Labor Market Outcomes in 2011 versus 1990 in the U.S. and Canada

                                                                   1A: U.S. −− Weekly Wage (2010 US$)                                                                                                                      1B: Canada −− Weekly Wage (2010 US$)
                                                                                                                      Washington                                                                                                                                               Calgary
                                                                                                                                    San Francisco
                                        1200                                                                                            New York                                                              Slope = 1.23 (0.18)
                                                                                                                               Boston                                                                                                                                                NW
                                                                                                              RI                                                                                  1200        R−Squared = 0.53
                                                                                                                      Rochester
                                                                                                                               Chicago                                                                                                                      Edmonton
                                                                                                            Seattle
 2011 Weekly Wage




                                                                                                                                                           2011 Weekly Wage
                                                Slope = 1.06 (0.07)                                                                                                                                                                                         Red Deer
                                                                                                    Denver                                                                                                                                 AB                                   Ottawa Toronto
                                        1000    R−Squared = 0.86
                                                                                                                                  Detroit
                                                                                                                   Houston
                                                                                                   Pittsburgh                                                                                                                                                               Hamilton Oshawa
                                                                                                                      Los Angeles                                                                 1000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Kitchener    Vancouver
                                                                                                Orlando                                                                                                                                                                  Baie−Comeau
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Montreal
                                                           Bismarck                                                                                                                                                                                              Windsor        Campbell River
                                         800                                                                                                                                                                          Moose Jaw
                                                                                                                                                                                                              SK
                                                       ND
                                                      Jonesboro                                                                                                                                                     Brandon
                                               SD                                                                                                                                                  800
                                                     NE      AR                                                                                                                                                     MB                                 Salaberry
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Truro
                                                                      TN                                                                                                                                                               Shawinigan
                                                          MO                                                                                                                                                 Drummondville
                                                                Brownsville                                                                                                                                                       QC
                                         600                                                                                                                                                                     Victoriaville
                                                      Laredo     McAllen                                                                                                                                                         PE
                                                          600                          800                              1000                                                                                  600                                              800
                                                                                 1990 Weekly Wage                                                                                                                                               1990 Weekly Wage
                                                                2A: U.S. −− Employment−Population Ratio                                                                                                                2B: Canada −− Employment−Population Ratio
                                                                                                                           Fargo     Madison                                                                                                                                  Quebec     Regina
                                                                                                     Bismarck ND              Iowa City Sioux Falls                                                                                                                                  Brandon    Calgary
 2011 Employment−Population Ratio (%)




                                                                                                                                                           2011 Employment−Population Ratio (%)

                                                                                                        Grand Forks             Rochester                                                                                                                                             Saskatoon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Saint−Jean               Guelph
                                                                                                                                             Lincoln                                                                   Slope = 0.46 (0.09)                                               Ottawa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AB
                                                                                                                                                                                                    80                 R−Squared = 0.51                                        Kitchener
                                                          Slope = 0.77 (0.05)                                                     Bloomington                                                                                                                                                     Barrie
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Hamilton Toronto
                                          80              R−Squared = 0.59                                                Washington                                                                                                                                 Montreal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Vancouver     SK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Salaberry
                                                                                                                                  Denver
                                                                                  Pittsburgh                            Seattle
                                                                                                        Houston
                                                                                                                         Orlando
                                                                                                New York Chicago                                                                                                                 Shawinigan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Bathurst               Windsor
                                               Houma                                                                                                                                                                                                NB                          Cornwall
                                                                                             Los Angeles                                                                                            70                                     Corner Brook
                                                   Laredo
                                          70
                                                McAllen                               Detroit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Cape Breton                        NW
                                                    WV
                                                           Brownsville         AL
                                                    Huntington         Redding
                                                          Yuba City             Anniston                                                                                                                      NL
                                                                    Gadsden
                                                                                                                                                                                                    60
                                                                            70                                     80                                                                                                                 60                              70                           80
                                                                  1990 Employment−Population Ratio (%)                                                                                                                        1990 Employment−Population Ratio (%)
                                                                      3A: U.S. −− Manufacturing Share                                                                                                                         3B: Canada −− Manufacturing Share
                                                                                                                                          Elkhart
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Granby

                                                                                                            Sheboygan                                                                                                                                                              Drummondville
                                                                Slope = 0.64 (0.03)
 2011 Manufacturing Share (%)




                                                                                                                                                           2011 Manufacturing Share (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Midland
                                          30                    R−Squared = 0.83                                                            Hickory                                                            Slope = 0.60 (0.05)                                         Guelph          Sorel
                                                                                                                Appleton                                                                            20         R−Squared = 0.80                                                Kitchener      Windsor
                                                                                                              IN                                                                                                                                                           Baie−Comeau Leamington
                                                                                                   Lima               Kokomo

                                                                                                               Rockford
                                                                                                                               Danville                                                                                                                                           Salaberry
                                          20                                                                             TN                                                                                                                                                   Hamilton
                                                                                                  Detroit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Montreal

                                                                                 Chicago                                                                                                            10                                                 Toronto
                                                               Houston Seattle Los Angeles
                                               Cheyenne        Denver Pittsburgh                                                                                                                                                       Vancouver
                                          10                                                                                                                                                             Charlottetown
                                                          Bismarck     New York                                                                                                                                        Calgary
                                               Springfield     Orlando                                                                                                                                         SK Rimouski
                                                     Las Vegas Washington                                                                                                                                Fredericton     Ottawa
                                               Naples
                                                       Fort Myers Myrtle Beach
                                                Great Falls                                                                                                                                              NW     Victoria        Prince Albert
                                               Laredo        Santa Fe Jacksonville                                                                                                                           Timmins Courtenay
                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                            10                   20                   30                        40                                                                       0                            10                         20                           30
                                                                           1990 Manufacturing Share (%)                                                                                                                               1990 Manufacturing Share (%)


                                                                                                                                       Metro           Non−Metro

Notes: The points and the regression line are weighted by population aged 24–59. Text within each plot shows the slope of the weighted
regression line with its heteroskedasticity robust standard error in parentheses.




                                                                                                                                                      36
                                                                                Figure 4: 20-Year Population Growth Rate Relative to Initial Wage in 1990

                                                                                            1A: United States                                                                                                                                                        1B: Canada
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Chatham
                                                1.00
                                                                                                            Las Vegas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Barrie
                                                           McAllen                                                           Slope = −0.35 (0.08)
                                                                               Provo            Austin                                                                                                                                    Lethbridge
                                                0.75                                                                         R−Squared = 0.08                                                                                                                  Red Deer
 Change in Log Pop, 1990−2011




                                                                                                                                                                      Change in Log Pop, 1990−2011
                                                                     Fayetteville    Boise City                                                                                                                                                    Kelowna                    Calgary                         Wood Buffalo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.50
                                                       Laredo                                          Naples                                                                                                                 Brandon
                                                                  Myrtle Beach                                                                                                                                                                                                Oshawa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Chilliwack Abbotsford
                                                                                     Fort Myers                                                                                                                                                                        Vancouver Toronto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Drummondville
                                                                                                       Orlando                     Atlanta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Kitchener
                                                0.50 Brownsville                                                                                                                                                     0.25    Charlottetown Granby                     Windsor
                                                                                                                            Houston                                                                                                                                               Ottawa
                                                                                                                 Denver                                                                                                      Victoriaville Joliette
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Montreal          Hamilton     Campbell River
                                                       Jonesboro                                                                                                                                                             Moose Jaw
                                                                     Missoula                                         Seattle                                                                                                                                             Sudbury
                                                       Bismarck                                                                                                                                                      0.00        Truro Saint−Hyacinthe
                                                                                                                            Rochester        Washington                                                                                                         Sault             Sarnia
                                                0.25             Rapid City
                                                                                                                          Los Angeles                                                                                                    Cape Breton Salaberry         Timmins
                                                        Sioux City                                                                       San Francisco                                                                                                             Bathurst
                                                                                                                                Chicago                                                                                                           Midland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Shawinigan                               Baie−Comeau
                                                                  San Angelo                                             Philadelphia Boston New York
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −0.25                        Corner Brook
                                                                                     Elmira                         Pittsburgh
                                                0.00       Great Falls                                                                 Detroit
                                                                              Wheeling Muncie Binghamton                                                                                                                                                                                  Slope = 0.86 (0.16)
                                                                                Pine Bluff Mansfield   Decatur                                                                                                      −0.50                                                                 R−Squared = 0.21
                                                                                                     Youngstown
                                                                               Steubenville

                                               −0.25                                                   New Orleans                                                                                                                                     Williams Lake

                                                         6.4           6.5           6.6          6.7               6.8             6.9          7.0            7.1                                                                6.5             6.6                 6.7              6.8             6.9            7.0
                                                                                      Initial Log Weekly Wage                                                                                                                                               Initial Log Weekly Wage

Notes: The points and the regression line are weighted by population aged 24–59. Text within each plot shows the slope of the weighted
regression line with its heteroskedasticity robust standard error in parentheses.



Figure 5: Reduced-Form Relationships between Realized Employment and Wage Changes and Projected Employment
Change

                                                                               1A: U.S. −− Employment Change                                                                                                                                    1B: Canada −− Employment Change
                                                                                                                                McAllen                                                                                                          Chatham
                                                                                                                                              Las Vegas                                                              0.8
 Log Employment Change: 1990 to 2011




                                                                                                                                                                      Log Employment Change: 1990 to 2011




                                                            Slope = 1.696 (0.488)                                                  Laredo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Barrie
                                                                                                                     Provo
                                               0.75         R−Squared = 0.104                                                                                                                                                                                           Lethbridge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Wood Buffalo
                                                                                                                              Austin                                                                                                                                           Red Deer
                                                                                              Fayetteville                                                                                                                                                      Kelowna
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Calgary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.4                                             Vancouver
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Kitchener
                                                                                                                            Orlando                                                                                                                           Toronto       St. John's
                                               0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Granby Windsor         Montreal Ottawa    Victoria
                                                                                                                          Houston          Fort Myers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Leamington                                   Halifax
                                                                                                                                       Bryan                                                                                              Sorel             Hamilton
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Campbell River  Salaberry
                                                                                                                     Denver          Punta Gorda Columbia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.0                Timmins         Sarnia
                                               0.25                                                      Seattle                                  Gainesville
                                                                                                           Los Angeles Washington                      Santa Fe                                                                     Baie−Comeau Belleville
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Corner Brook
                                                                Elkhart Greenville                                                                                                                                                               Midland
                                                                                                       Chicago
                                                                                Rockford
                                                                                                                            New York                                                                                                                                                           Slope = 1.804 (0.375)
                                               0.00                                                  Detroit        Pittsburgh                                                                                      −0.4                                                                       R−Squared = 0.247
                                                       Hickory
                                                                       Kokomo
                                                                                             Pine Bluff
                                                                                                             Muncie
                                                                 Danville       Mansfield                                                                                                                                                 Williams Lake
                                                                                                Decatur
                                                                                                                    New Orleans
                                                          0.0                                  0.1                                        0.2                                                                                            0.1                     0.2                          0.3                    0.4
                                                            Projected Log Employment Change (Bartik): 1990 to 2011                                                                                                                Projected Log Employment Change (Bartik): 1990 to 2011

                                                                              2A: U.S. −− Location Wage Change                                                                                                                                   2B: CA. −− Location Wage Change
 Change in Wage Location Index, 1990 to 2011




                                                                                                                                                                      Change in Wage Location Index, 1990 to 2011




                                                0.2                                                                                                                                                                  0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Wood Buffalo
                                                            Slope = 0.861 (0.203)
                                                                                              Fayetteville                                                                                                                                Slope = 1.132 (0.379)
                                                            R−Squared = 0.215                                                                                                                                                             R−Squared = 0.225
                                                                                                                     Provo
                                                                                                                          Austin                                                                                     0.4
                                                0.1
                                                                                                          Seattle             Laredo Bryan
                                                                                                                  Denver          Washington
                                                                                                             Houston New Orleans Las Vegas Santa Fe
                                                                                            Pine Bluff             McAllen           Gainesville                                                                     0.2                                                                      Calgary
                                                                                                        Pittsburgh                Columbia
                                                0.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Red Deer
                                                                                                             Orlando Punta Gorda                                                                                                    Williams Lake           Lethbridge
                                                                                                   Chicago
                                                                             Greenville                       New York Fort Myers                                                                                                               Timmins      Kelowna St. John's
                                                                                        Decatur
                                                                                                Muncie                                                                                                                               Kitchener      Corner Brook Ottawa Victoria
                                                       Hickory
                                                                     Danville Rockford                                                                                                                               0.0             Midland Hamilton Sarnia Barrie     Halifax
                                                                                  Mansfield        Los Angeles
                                               −0.1       Elkhart                                                                                                                                                                  Granby Windsor     Belleville Vancouver
                                                                       Kokomo                                                                                                                                               Leamington   Sorel Salaberry Montreal Toronto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Baie−Comeau Chatham
                                                                                             Detroit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −0.2        Campbell River
                                                          0.0                                  0.1                                        0.2                                                                                            0.1                     0.2                          0.3                    0.4
                                                                                    Census Bartik 1990−2011                                                                                                                                               Census Bartik 1990−2011

Notes: The points and the regression line are weighted by population aged 24–59. Text within each plot shows the slope of the weighted
regression line with its heteroskedasticity robust standard error in parentheses.




                                                                                                                                                                 37
Table 1: Urban Population Gradients for Local Labor Market Outcomes in the U.S. and Canada: 1990-2011 Pooled


                                                                  Dependent variable:
                      Log            Wage            Wage           Log           Log            Log             Log            Local
                     Weekly         Location          Skill        Univ/        Foreign/       Univ/HS          90/10          Housing
                     Wage            Index           Index          Pop           Pop           Wage            Wage            Costs
                       (1)             (2)             (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)             (7)             (8)

Panel A: Full Sample
Log                 0.065∗∗∗        0.067∗∗∗        −0.003        0.057∗∗∗      0.417∗∗∗       0.038∗∗∗        0.046∗∗∗        0.170∗∗∗
Population          (0.007)         (0.003)         (0.005)       (0.010)       (0.026)        (0.004)         (0.005)         (0.012)

Log Pop ×          −0.037∗∗∗       −0.028∗∗∗        −0.009         0.026∗∗        0.082        −0.016∗∗       −0.039∗∗∗       −0.045∗∗∗
Canada              (0.008)         (0.008)         (0.006)        (0.013)       (0.075)        (0.006)        (0.007)         (0.017)

Observations          1,384           1,384          1,384          1,384         1,384          1,384          1,384           1,384

Panel B: Common City Sizes (Prime Age from 24 thousand to 2 million)
Log                 0.057∗∗∗        0.057∗∗∗        0.0004        0.073∗∗∗      0.365∗∗∗       0.032∗∗∗        0.028∗∗∗        0.121∗∗∗
Population          (0.006)         (0.003)         (0.005)       (0.012)       (0.037)        (0.007)         (0.007)         (0.015)

Log Pop ×          −0.029∗∗∗        −0.013∗∗       −0.016∗∗         0.003        0.139∗         −0.008         −0.017∗          0.009
Canada              (0.007)          (0.007)        (0.006)        (0.016)       (0.083)        (0.010)        (0.010)         (0.019)

Observations          1,236           1,236          1,236          1,236         1,236          1,236          1,236           1,236

Panel C: Common City Sizes, Reweighted using demographic characteristics
Log Pop ×            −0.015          −0.006         −0.008         −0.010       0.218∗∗∗        −0.015         −0.015           0.002
Canada               (0.012)         (0.012)        (0.006)        (0.018)      (0.070)         (0.009)        (0.011)         (0.021)

Observations          1,236           1,236          1,236          1,236         1,236          1,236          1,236           1,236

Panel D: Common City Sizes, Reweighted using demographics, industries, and institutions
Log Pop ×           −0.021∗∗         −0.012         −0.009         −0.008        0.201∗∗        −0.011         −0.014          −0.004
Canada               (0.010)         (0.011)        (0.006)        (0.017)       (0.088)        (0.009)        (0.011)         (0.021)

Observations          1,236           1,236          1,236          1,236         1,236          1,236          1,236           1,236

Notes: Panel A corresponds to the full sample data, observed in 1990, 2000, 2007, and 2011 with 264 metros in the U.S. and 82 in Canada.
In Panel A, Canadian metro areas are those with population greater than 15,000 in 1990; U.S. metro areas have population greater than
50,000 in 1999. Panel B uses common city size support where cities are chosen so that 1990 24-59 metro population size across countries
has a common support. Specifically, the minimum city size within each country is equal to the minimum city size in the U.S. and the
maximum city size within each country is equal to the maximum city size in Canada based on start of sample population. This yields
255 metros in the U.S. and 54 in Canada. See table A2 for the reweighting model specifications. Regressions are weighted by start of
period population 24-59. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered at the state/province level and are in parentheses. *, **, ***
indicates statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                                                    38
Table 2: First Stage Estimates – Changes in Local Employment and Sectoral Shifts Predicted at the National Level
(Bartik): 1990 to 2011


                                                                     Dependent variable: Difference in
                                                                          Log Census Employment
                                                  (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)

           Panel A: United States
           Census Bartik                       1.246∗∗∗                     0.317      1.786∗∗∗                    1.133∗∗
                                                (0.467)                    (0.550)      (0.398)                    (0.516)

           CBP/ASM Bartik                                   0.621∗∗∗      0.541∗∗∗                   0.642∗∗∗      0.377∗∗
                                                             (0.175)       (0.199)                    (0.126)      (0.155)

           R2                                    0.507        0.520         0.520       0.567          0.565         0.574
           First Stage F-Statistic               7.128       12.548         6.240       20.109        26.138        14.965
           Regression Sample                    Full          Full          Full      Common        Common        Common
                                               Sample        Sample        Sample     City Size     City Size     City Size

           Panel B: Canada
           Census Bartik                       1.146∗∗∗                   0.776∗∗∗     0.968∗∗∗                    0.670∗∗
                                                (0.175)                    (0.283)      (0.195)                    (0.303)

           CBP/ASM Bartik                                   0.520∗∗∗       0.334∗                    0.448∗∗∗       0.286
                                                             (0.115)       (0.174)                    (0.163)      (0.222)

           R2                                    0.480        0.476        0.504        0.564         0.559          0.582
           First Stage F-Statistic              42.938       20.323        25.871       24.776        7.535         10.260
           Regression Sample                    Full          Full          Full      Common        Common        Common
                                               Sample        Sample        Sample     City Size     City Size     City Size

           Panel C: United States and Canada
           Census Bartik                       1.212∗∗∗                     0.491      1.502∗∗∗                    0.945∗∗∗
                                                (0.323)                    (0.350)      (0.304)                     (0.354)

           CBP/ASM Bartik                                   0.595∗∗∗      0.473∗∗∗                   0.596∗∗∗      0.374∗∗∗
                                                             (0.134)       (0.144)                    (0.100)       (0.122)

           R2                                    0.509        0.520         0.522       0.566          0.566         0.575
           First Stage F-Statistic              14.053       19.653         9.782       24.340        35.448        20.499
           Regression Sample                    Full          Full          Full      Common        Common        Common
                                               Sample        Sample        Sample     City Size     City Size     City Size
           US Bartik = CA Bartik pval            0.840        0.628         0.683       0.840         0.628         0.683

Notes: The Census and CBP/ASM Bartik instruments are calculated using census data and County (US) Business Patterns data or
Canadian (CA) Business Patterns along with ASM data, respectively. All regressions include decal and region fixed effects; panel interacts
decadal fixed effects by country. For the full sample (columns 1 - 3), Canadian metro areas have population greater than 15,000 in
1990; U.S. metro areas have population greater than 50,000 in 1999. In the common city cize sample (columns 4 - 6), cities are chosen
so that 1990 24-59 city population size has a common support. Specifically, the minimum city size within each country is equal to the
minimum city size in the US and the maximum city size within each country is equal to the maximum city size in Canada based on start
of sample population. Metros are observed in 1990, 2000, 2007, and 2011. Regressions are weighted by start of period population 24-59.
Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered at the state/province level and are in parentheses.




                                                                     39
                 Table 3: 2SLS Estimates – Local Labor Market Effects of Sectoral Shifts Predicted at the National Level (Bartik), 1990 to 2011


                                                                                          Dependent variable: Difference in
                                  Wage           Log         Log             Log              Log          Wage           Log         Log          Log          Log        Log
                                 Location       Popu-      Emp/Pop          Unemp           Unemp.          Skill       Foreign/     Univ/       Univ/HS       90/10      Housing
                                  Index         lation      Ratio            Rate          Insurance       Index          Pop         Pop         Wage         Wage        Cost
                                    (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)             (5)           (6)           (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)        (11)
                                       ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗               ∗∗∗             ∗∗            ∗∗∗
     ∆ Log Employment ×          0.533        0.581         0.419         −3.285           −3.782        −0.258         −0.634       0.005         0.131        0.359     1.653∗∗∗
     United States                (0.118)      (0.090)       (0.090)       (0.755)          (1.542)       (0.052)       (0.796)     (0.032)       (0.104)      (0.240)     (0.352)




40
     ∆ Log Employment ×          0.561∗∗∗     0.816∗∗∗      0.184∗∗∗      −2.191∗∗∗        −1.703∗∗      −0.227∗∗∗      1.545∗∗∗    0.171∗∗∗       0.178        0.163       0.097
     Canada                       (0.063)      (0.066)       (0.066)       (0.370)          (0.723)       (0.034)        (0.253)     (0.031)      (0.163)      (0.146)     (0.324)

     Observations                  1,038        1,038         1,038          1,038            966          1,038         1,038       1,038         1,038       1,038        1,038
     US = CA p-value               0.831        0.035         0.035          0.193           0.223         0.625         0.009       0.000         0.809       0.487        0.001

      Notes: See the notes for table 1. Sample consists of 264 metro areas in the United States and 82 in Canada observed in 1990, 2000, 2007, and 2011. Not all dependent variables
     are available for all metro areas. The CBP/ASM Bartik instrument is calculated using County (US) Businesss Patterns or Canadian (CA) Business Patterns along with the
     ASM data, respectively. The Bartik instruments are calculated using the start of sample as the base year. Within each panel, controls include decadal and census division/region
     fixed effects. The p-value in the bottom row is associated with the null hypothesis of equality on the coefficients (∆ Log Employment) across the United States and Canada. See
     the notes to table A1 for data sources and definitions. Regressions are weighted by start of period population 24-59. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered at the
     state/province level and are in parentheses. *, **, *** indicates statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.
     Table 4: Differences between the U.S. and Canada in Local Labor Market Outcomes due to Changes in Employment (Two Bartik Instrument Estimates), 1990 to
     2011


                                                                                             Dependent variable: Difference in
                                            (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)         (11)
                                          Wage          Log         Log           Log           Log         Wage         Log          Log          Log          Log         Log
                                         Location      Popu-      Emp/Pop        Unemp        Unemp.         Skill     Foreign/      Univ/       Univ/HS       90/10       Housing
                                          Index        lation      Ratio          Rate       Insurance      Index        Pop          Pop         Wage         Wage         Cost

                Panel A: Original Estimates
                ∆ Log Employment           0.029      0.235∗∗      −0.235∗∗       1.094        2.079        0.031      2.180∗∗∗     0.167∗∗∗       0.047       −0.195     −1.556∗∗∗
                CA - US                   (0.134)     (0.111)       (0.111)      (0.840)      (1.703)      (0.062)      (0.835)      (0.044)      (0.194)      (0.281)     (0.478)

                Observations               1,038        1,038        1,038        1,038         966         1,038        1,038        1,038        1,038        1,038        1,038

                Panel B: Common City Sizes (Prime Age from 24 thousand to 2 million)
                ∆ Log Employment           0.231        0.121       −0.121        0.198        0.344       −0.096      2.109∗∗∗     0.184∗∗∗       0.315        0.120     −1.361∗∗∗
                CA - US                   (0.149)      (0.121)      (0.121)      (0.858)      (0.982)      (0.066)      (0.766)      (0.043)      (0.258)      (0.229)     (0.521)




41
                Observations                927         927           927          927          883          927          927          927          927          927          927

                Panel C: Common City Sizes, Reweighted using demographic characteristics
                ∆ Log Employment          0.355∗∗      −0.039        0.039       −0.897        1.228       −0.016       2.172∗∗     0.160∗∗∗      0.337∗       −0.414     −1.383∗∗∗
                CA - US                   (0.174)      (0.148)      (0.148)      (0.963)      (1.314)      (0.094)      (0.987)      (0.055)      (0.172)      (0.261)     (0.491)

                Observations                927         927           927          927          883          927          927          927          927          927          927

                Panel D: Common City Sizes, Reweighted using demographics, industries, and institutions
                ∆ Log Employment          0.325∗       −0.017        0.017       −1.206        0.257       −0.011       2.053∗∗     0.188∗∗∗       0.352       −0.304      −1.236∗∗
                CA - US                   (0.176)      (0.131)      (0.131)      (1.282)      (1.136)      (0.091)      (1.030)      (0.058)      (0.282)      (0.246)      (0.485)

                Observations                927         927           927          927          883          927          927          927          927          927          927

     Notes: See the notes for table 1. The difference between Canada and the U.S. 2SLS Bartik estimates. Panel A corresponds to our original, full sample data. Panel B uses common city
     size support. See table A2 for the reweighting model specifications. Regressions are weighted by start of period population 24-59. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered at the
     state/province level and are in parentheses. *, **, *** indicates statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.
    Table 5: First-Stage “China Syndrome” Estimates: Change in Local Imports Predicted by Foreign Changes


                                                                                        Dependent variable:
                                                                                       ∆ imports from China
                                                                                            per worker
                                                                                          US          Canada
                                                                                          (1)              (2)

                      Panel A: Full Sample
                      ∆ imports from China to Other Countries                          0.770∗∗∗
                      per US worker                                                    (0.144)

                      ∆ imports from China to Other Countries                                         0.283∗∗∗
                      per Canadian worker                                                             (0.043)

                      Start of period manufacturing share                              0.028∗∗∗       0.059∗∗∗
                                                                                       (0.007)        (0.010)

                      Observations                                                        528              164
                      R2                                                                 0.559            0.805
                      First-Stage F-statistic                                            28.67            43.30

                      ∆IPW from China to Other: US = Canada pval                                  0.001
                      Start of Period Manufac Share: US = Canada pval                             0.009

                      Panel B: Common City Sizes
                      ∆ imports from China to Other Countries                          0.802∗∗∗
                      per US worker                                                    (0.175)

                      ∆ imports from China to Other Countries                                         0.283∗∗∗
                      per Canadian worker                                                             (0.084)

                      Start of period manufacturing share                              0.025∗∗∗       0.060∗∗∗
                                                                                       (0.009)        (0.011)

                      Observations                                                        510              108
                      R2                                                                 0.495            0.820
                      First-Stage F-statistic                                            21.08            11.44

                      ∆IPW from China to Other: US = CA pval                                      0.007
                      Start of Period Manufac Share: US = Canada pval                             0.011

Notes: See the notes for table 1. Panel A uses the full sample. In panel B, metros are chosen so that 1990 24-59 metro population size
has a common support. Specifically, the minimum metro size within each country is equal to the minimum metro size in the U.S. and
the maximum metro size within each country is equal to the maximum metro size in Canada using start of sample population. Metros
are observed in 1990, 2000, and 2007. In both columns, controls include decadal fixed effects and census division (column (1), U.S.)
or region (column (2), Canada) fixed effects. Predicted imports per workers are constructed using imports from Australia, Denmark,
Finland, Germany, Japan, New Zealand, Spain, and Switzerland (Other Countries). Imports from China to Other Countries for Canada
are adjusted using the 1990 relative manufacturing employment between the U.S. and Canada 0.1064. Regressions are weighted by start
of period population 24-59. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered at the state/province level and are in parentheses. *, **,
*** indicates statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                                                   42
     Table 6: Instrumental Variable Estimates of the Impact of Import Competition on Local Labor Markets in the U.S. and Canada, 1990 to 2007


                                                                               Dependent variable: Decadal Change in
                                                                      Log             Log           Log            Manufac         Log
                                                                     Manuf           Popu-        Emp/Pop          Location       Unemp
                                                                     Emp             lation        Ratio            Wage           Rate
                                                                       (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)

                              Panel A: United States
                              ∆ imports from China                 −0.044∗∗∗         0.001        −0.010∗∗∗         −0.004        0.057∗∗
                              to US per worker                      (0.011)         (0.010)        (0.004)          (0.004)       (0.026)

                              Start of Period                         0.002         −0.001         −0.0002         −0.002∗∗        0.003
                              Manufac Share                          (0.002)        (0.001)        (0.0003)         (0.001)       (0.003)

                              Observations                             528             528            528             528           528




43
                              Panel B: Canada
                              ∆ imports from China                   −0.013          0.010         −0.005∗∗         −0.006         0.005
                              to Canada per worker                   (0.010)        (0.013)         (0.003)         (0.005)       (0.030)

                              Start of Period                        −0.002         −0.0001        0.001∗∗∗        0.002∗∗∗       −0.002
                              Manufac Share                          (0.003)        (0.001)        (0.0002)        (0.001)        (0.005)

                              Observations                             164             164            164             164           164

                              ∆ IPW US = Canada pval                  0.040           0.577          0.250           0.751         0.179

                               Notes: See the notes for table 1. Sample consists of 264 metro areas in the United States and 82 in Canada
                              observed in 1990, 2000, and 2007. Not all dependent variables are available for all metro areas. See the notes
                              to table 5 for descriptions of the imports per worker variables. Controls include census division/region and
                              decadal fixed effects. See the notes to table A1 for data sources and definitions. Regressions are weighted by
                              start of period population 24-59. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered at the state/province
                              level and are in parentheses. *, **, *** indicates statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels,
                              respectively.
                 Table 7: Differences between the U.S. and Canada in Local Labor Market Outcomes Due to Import Competition from China, 1990 to 2007


                                                                                              Dependent variable: Difference in
                                                                               Log         Log         Log          Manufac            Log
                                                                              Manuf       Popu-      Emp/Pop        Location          Unemp
                                                                              Emp         lation      Ratio          Wage              Rate
                                                                                (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)              (5)

                                                  Panel A: Original Estimates
                                                  ∆ Imports from China        0.031∗∗      0.009        0.005        −0.002           −0.052
                                                  per worker (CA - US)        (0.015)     (0.016)      (0.004)       (0.006)          (0.038)

                                                  Observations                  692         692          692           692              692

                                                  Panel B: Common City Sizes (Prime Age from 24 thousand to 2 million)
                                                  ∆ Imports from China         0.022       0.006        0.002        −0.004           −0.029
                                                  per worker (CA - US)        (0.019)     (0.009)      (0.004)       (0.006)          (0.037)




44
                                                  Observations                  618         618          618           618              618

                                                  Panel C: Common City Sizes, Reweighted using demographic characteristics
                                                  ∆ Imports from China        −0.012      0.017∗∗       0.003        −0.020           −0.053
                                                  per worker (CA - US)        (0.067)     (0.007)      (0.004)       (0.022)          (0.040)

                                                  Observations                  618         618          618           618              618

                                                  Panel D: Common City Sizes, Reweighted using demographics, industries, and institutions
                                                  ∆ Imports from China         0.021       0.012        0.004        −0.007          −0.060∗
                                                  per worker (CA - US)        (0.035)     (0.007)      (0.003)       (0.009)         (0.035)

                                                  Observations                  618         618          618           618              618

     Notes: See the notes for table 1. The difference between Canada and the U.S. 2SLS imports per worker estimates. Panel A corresponds to our original, full sample data from table 6. Panel B
     uses common city size support as in table A9. See table A2 for the reweighting model specifications. Regressions are weighted by start of period population 24-59. Heteroskedasticity robust
     standard errors clustered at the state/province level and are in parentheses. *, **, *** indicates statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.
A    Appendix

Figure A1: University-High School, 90/10 Wage Ratios, University-Population, and Foreign Born-Population Ratios
                                                                                              1A: U.S. −− Log Univ/HS Wage                                                                                                                                      1B: Canada −− Log Univ/HS Wage
                                                             0.8
                                                                                      San Francisco New York              Houston                                                                                                                                                                                                   Calgary

                                                                                                          Tyler                                                  McAllen
                                                                                                                   Huntsville
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Toronto
                                                             0.7                                     Los Angeles                  Rochester
                                                                                                                                                Brownsville                                                                                 Slope = 0.61 (0.20)
                                                                                                 Chicago          Washington                                                                                                                                                                             Truro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.4          R−Squared = 0.20                                                              Chatham
                2011 Log Univ/HS Wage




                                                                                                                                                                                  2011 Log Univ/HS Wage
                                                                                       Detroit            Orlando                                                                                                                                                                                               Charlottetown
                                                                                                                           Las Cruces
                                                                                                 Denver                                                                                                                                                                                            Orillia
                                                             0.6                                               Pittsburgh Fort Walton Beach                                                                                                                                                                  Ottawa
                                                                                 Seattle                                                                                                                                                                                                      Montreal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MB
                                                                                                                                                           Laredo                                                                                                                                    Kitchener
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Hamilton
                                                             0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sherbrooke
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Windsor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Victoriaville
                                                                           Corvalis                                                                                                                                                                   Courtenay Vancouver                                                                           SK
                                                                              MA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Rimouski
                                                             0.4 Missoula
                                                                      Lawrence                                                                                                                                                                          Prince George            Salaberry
                                                                                        Grand Junction
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BC
                                                             0.3 Bellingham                            ND         Houma                                                                                                                                                          Moose Jaw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Nanaimo
                                                                                                                                  Slope = 1.07 (0.21)                                                                          0.2        Campbell River
                                                                            WY                              Bismarck              R−Squared = 0.31                                                                                                                        Alma
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Baie−Comeau                    Rouyn−Noranda
                                                                                             0.4                                   0.6                              0.8                                                                   0.1                             0.2                           0.3                            0.4
                                                                                                     1990 Log Univ/HS Wage                                                                                                                                                1990 Log Univ/HS Wage
                                                                                            2A: U.S. −− Log 90/10 Wage Ratio                                                                                                                                  2B: Canada −− 90/10 Log Wage Ratio
                                                                                                                                                 Santa Fe                                                                                                                                              NW
                                                                                                                    San Francisco                                                                                              2.2                                                                              Sarnia
                                                                                                                                                                      Provo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SK
                                                                                                                                          San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                           New York
                                                             2.1                                                                               Detroit
                2011 Log 90/10 Wage Ratio




                                                                                                                                                                                  2011 90/10 Log Wage Ratio
                                                                                                                                                                    UT                                                                                                                                          AB
                                                                                                                                         Los Angeles
                                                                      Slope = 0.51 (0.16)                                 Houston                                                                                                                                  Penticton                      Campbell River
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Calgary
                                                                      R−Squared = 0.11                                       Chicago                                                                                           2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Courtenay
                                                                                                             Washington                                        Saginaw                                                                                                     Windsor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Toronto          Vancouver
                                                                                                                         Denver
                                                                                                          Seattle                                Pittsburgh
                                                             1.9                                                                                                                                                                                                   Hamilton
                                                                                                        Orlando                                                                                                                                                                                                        MB
                                                                                                                                                                 ND                                                                         Montreal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.8
                                                                                                                                                                    Bismarck                                                                                  Kitchener
                                                                                      Goldsboro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ottawa
                                                                                                   NC                                                 Waterloo

                                                                                                 Joplin                                                                                                                              Saint−Jean
                                                             1.7                                                                                                                                                                               Salaberry                                                         Slope = 0.40 (0.23)
                                                                      Hickory
                                                                                            NH
                                                                                                                                  Sioux City                                                                                   1.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Granby
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PE                                                              R−Squared = 0.14
                                                                                                              St. Cloud                                                                                                              Quebec Saint−Hyacinthe
                                                                                             Elkhart
                                                                                                                      St. Joseph                                                                                                        Drummondville
                                                                                                                                       Wausau
                                                                                                   Sioux Falls                                                                                                                       Rimouski Victoriaville
                                                                    1.3                       1.5                          1.7                           1.9                                                                                1.6                             1.8                                 2.0                           2.2
                                                                                                   1990 Log 90/10 Wage Ratio                                                                                                                                            1990 90/10 Log Wage Ratio
                                                                                     3A: U.S. −− Log University−Population Ratio                                                                                                                      3B: Canada −− Log University−Population Ratio
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ottawa
                                                                                                                                          Iowa City                   Columbia                                                                                                                                               Toronto
                2011 Log (University / Population x 100)




                                                                                                                                                                                  2011 Log (University / Population x 100)




                                                                                                                                                     Bloomington
                                                                                                                                                                 Madison                                                                           Slope = 0.92 (0.07)                                                         Calgary
                                                                                       Slope = 0.90 (0.03)                                         Lawrence RI Champaign
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3.8                 R−Squared = 0.93                                                   Vancouver   Halifax
                                                             3.9                       R−Squared = 0.90                                        Washington Gainesville                                                                                                                                                         Guelph Fredericton
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Montreal
                                                                                                                                        New York        Denver Bryan
                                                                                                                                                Seattle Santa Fe                                                                                                                               Hamilton
                                                                                                                                       Chicago                                                                                                                                                          Kitchener
                                                                                                                          Pittsburgh
                                                                                                                                       Orlando                                                                                                                                               Windsor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3.6
                                                                                                                               Detroit       Houston
                                                             3.6                                                                     Los Angeles




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3.4
                                                             3.3
                                                                            Danville
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          QC    PE
                                                                                    KY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Salaberry
                                                                             McAllen LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NB          Cornwall
                                                                                  AL                         Yakima                                                                                                            3.2
                                                                             TN                                                                                                                                                                  SK         Leamington
                                                             3.0                                   Visalia     Merced                                                                                                                NL
                                                                      Houma                                                                                                                                                                              MB               NW
                                                                                             3.0                                          3.5                                                                                                     2.8                     3.0                     3.2                         3.4
                                                                                          1990 Log (University / Population x 100)                                                                                                                            1990 Log (Univsersity / Population x 100)
                                                                                 4A: U.S. −− Log Foreign Born−Population Ratio                                                                                                                    4B: Canada −− Log Foreign Born−Population Ratio
                                                                                                                                                                  Miami                                                                                                                                                                  Toronto
                                                              4                                                                                      Salinas McAllen                                                            4
                2011 Log (Foreign Born / Population x 100)




                                                                                                                                                                                  2011 Log (Foreign Born / Population x 100)




                                                                                 Slope = 0.78 (0.02)                                           New York Yuma     Laredo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Calgary Vancouver
                                                                                 R−Squared = 0.90                                           Houston Los Angeles                                                                                                                                                         Abbotsford
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Kitchener
                                                                                                                                       Washington Brownsville   El Paso
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Slope = 0.98 (0.03)                                         Montreal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Hamilton
                                                                                                                             Orlando Chicago                                                                                    3                         R−Squared = 0.93                                             Ottawa Windsor
                                                              3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Leamington
                                                                                                                                 Seattle
                                                                                                                          Denver


                                                                                                                        Detroit                                                                                                 2
                                                              2
                                                                       Jackson
                                                                                                    Pittsburgh
                                                                   Danville   TN                                                                                                                                                                                Victoriaville
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                          Florence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Rimouski         Salaberry
                                                              1
                                                                   Owensboro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Chicoutimi Rouyn−Noranda
                                                                           Huntington Lima
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0                  Shawinigan NL           Corner Brook
                                                                                Altoona                                                                                                                                                Alma
                                                                                           Steubenville                                                                                                                                                       Baie−Comeau
                                                                            Wheeling
                                                              0    Parkersburg
                                                                                0                       1                          2                      3                                                                                                         0                                       2                                       4
                                                                                       1990 Log (Foreign Born / Population x 100)                                                                                                                          1990 Log (Foreign Born / Population x 100)


                                                                                                                                                                 Metro           Non−Metro


Notes: The points, means, standard deviations, and the regression line are weighted by population aged 24–59. Text within each plot
shows the slope of the weighted regression line with its heteroskedasticity robust standard error in parentheses.




                                                                                                                                                                               45
                                                                                          Figure A2: Canadian Bartik Shocks and the Growth in Housing Costs

                                                                                1990 − 2000                                                                                                                       2000 − 2007
                                  0.4                                                                                                                                        0.3
                                                                                WoodBuffalo                                                                                                                                             WoodBuffalo
                                           Slope = −0.25 (0.16)                                                                                                                                   Slope = 0.45 (0.51)
                                           R−Squared = 0.05                                                                                                                                       R−Squared = 0.03
                                                                                                                                                                             0.2
                                                                                           WilliamsLake                                                                                                                                    Kelowna
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Nanaimo
                                  0.2                                                     Kamloops              Vernon                                                       0.1                                                                         Victoria
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Vancouver
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Montreal                                   Calgary
                                                                                                                                  Windsor                                                  CampbellRiver
                                                                                                                                                                             0.0                 Granby                             Toronto
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Rimouski
                                                                                                                Vancouver
                                  0.0    CapeBreton              MooseJaw                                                                                                          NewGlasgow
                                                                                                                                 Toronto                                    −0.1                                                                        CapeBreton
                                                          SeptIles                                                                     Ottawa




      Diff in Log Housing Costs
                                                                                                                                                Diff in Log Housing Costs
                                                                         Timmins                                                                                                                                                                               ValdOr
                                                                                                           TroisRivieres                                                                                                      ThunderBay
                                                                                           ValdOr                                                                           −0.2                                                                        RouynNoranda
                                                                                                     Midland           Montreal                                                                                  WilliamsLake                Bathurst

                                         −0.4                −0.3                  −0.2                 −0.1                0.0                                                                 −0.05             0.00                  0.05                    0.10
                                                                             CBP/ASM Bartik                                                                                                                     CBP/ASM Bartik




46
                                                                                   2007 − 2011
                                                                                                      Regina
                                            Slope = 0.94 (0.51)                      Saskatoon                 MooseJaw
                                   0.2      R−Squared = 0.06
                                                                     WoodBuffalo

                                   0.1

                                                                              Vancouver
                                                   PrinceGeorge                                                CapeBreton
                                   0.0                                 Montreal
                                          NewGlasgow                              Toronto
                                                                                                      Charlottetown
                                  −0.1
                                                 Oshawa




      Diff in Log Housing Costs
                                                                      Chatham
                                                                                                                            Leamington
                                  −0.2
                                                      Windsor
                                         −0.15                       −0.10                    −0.05                       0.00
                                                                              CBP/ASM Bartik
     Notes: The points and the regression line are weighted by population aged 24–59. Text within each plot shows the slope of the weighted regression line with its heteroskedasticity robust
     standard error in parentheses.
Table A1: Local Labor Market Outcomes for the U.S. and Canada for Prime-Age Population (24 to 59), 1990 to
2011


                                          United States                                    Canada
                              1990        2000       2007        2011       1990       2000       2007       2011
                               (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)

                Panel A: Working Age Population (thousands)
                Mean          2617        2880       2974        2988        844      1018        1095       1167
                Std Dev      (3051)      (3310)     (3376)      (3379)      (783)     (937)      (1011)     (1075)

                Panel B: Employment-Population Ratio (%)
                Mean          78.6        76.3       77.1        75.3       77.1       78.9       80.0       79.5
                Std Dev       (3.4)       (4.0)      (2.7)       (3.2)      (3.8)      (3.2)      (2.6)      (2.6)

                Panel C: Weekly Wage (USD 2010)
                Mean           936       1070        1055        972        814        858         901        989
                Std Dev       (123)      (154)       (156)      (148)       (65)       (87)       (115)      (133)

                Panel D: Unemployment Rate (%)
                Mean           4.54       3.77        4.88       8.13       8.61       5.67       5.01        5.96
                Std Dev       (1.02)     (1.05)      (0.94)     (1.71)     (1.86)     (1.64)     (1.20)      (1.22)

                Panel E: University/Population Ratio (%) (Katz-Murphy measure explained in notes)
                Mean          31.3        32.1       33.9        35.7       25.3       30.7       34.5       37.5
                Std Dev       (5.2)       (5.7)      (5.9)       (6.2)      (3.8)      (4.6)      (5.1)      (5.3)

                Panel F: Foreign-Population Ratio (%)
                Mean           12.8       18.1        21.1       22.2       24.5       26.9       28.3        29.5
                Std Dev       (10.8)     (13.3)      (13.7)     (13.6)     (14.6)     (16.9)     (17.6)      (17.5)

                Panel G: Union Coverage (%)
                Mean          19.2        15.1       13.6        13.1       32.0       27.8       27.2       26.6
                Std Dev       (8.4)       (6.9)      (6.8)       (6.4)      (6.5)      (6.7)      (6.5)      (7.0)

                Panel H: Unemployment Insurance (USD per capita)
                Mean           254        190         224        724        1376       622         601        720
                Std Dev       (125)       (85)       (102)      (260)       (246)     (220)       (215)      (220)
Notes: Sample consists of 264 metro areas in the United States and 82 in Canada observed in 1990, 2000, 2007, and 2011. All variables
(excluding unemployment insurance) are measured for the 24-59 working age population. Weekly wages and unemployment insurance
are in 2010 U.S. dollars, and weekly wages and manufacturing share are compiled using year t − 1 data. The unemployment insurance
is annual dollars per person, and unemployment insurance is not available for all metros in all time periods. Canadian metro areas are
those with population greater than 15,000 in 1990; U.S. metro areas have population greater than 50,000 in 1999. Averages and standard
deviations are weighted by start of period population. Data definitions are in section 3.




                                                                 47
Table A2: Probit Models Predicting a U.S. Indicator – U.S. and Canada


                                      Dependent variable:
                                           U.S. Dummy
                                          (1)          (2)
            Foreign-Born/Pop         −6.023∗∗∗     −5.727∗∗∗
                                      (0.789)       (0.837)

            University/Pop            9.909∗∗∗      11.295∗∗∗
                                      (2.409)        (2.714)

            Manufacturing                            0.030∗
            Share                                    (0.018)

            Oil Share                                 0.325
                                                     (0.244)

            Minimum Wage                              0.302
                                                     (0.273)

            Constant                  −0.802        −3.600∗∗
                                      (0.644)        (1.827)

            Observations               309            309
            Log Likelihood           −67.213        −65.604
            Akaike Inf. Crit.        140.427        143.209

       Notes: Probit estimates where the LHS variable is a U.S. Dummy.




                                     48
                          Table A3: Pridicted Probabilities for Select Metros


                                Bottom 10                          Top 10
                             Metro           Prob           Metro              Prob
                              (1)             (2)            (3)                (4)

                        Panel A: Using population demographics
                        Toronto              0.19      Chicoutimi              0.90
                        Abbotsford           0.34      Ottawa                  0.90
                        Vancouver            0.35      Saskatoon               0.90
                        Chilliwack           0.39      Sherbrooke              0.91
                        Hamilton             0.40      Charlottetown           0.94
                        Windsor              0.42      St. John’s              0.94
                        St Catharines        0.43      Halifax                 0.95
                        Oshawa               0.45      Rimouski                0.95
                        Kitchener            0.47      Quebec                  0.95
                        Brantford            0.49      Fredericton             0.97

                        Panel B: Using population, industry, and institutions
                        Chilliwack           0.23      Granby                  0.84
                        Toronto              0.24      Drummondville           0.86
                        Abbotsford           0.26      Ottawa                  0.86
                        Vancouver            0.30      Halifax                 0.88
                        Nanaimo              0.41      Trois-Rivieres          0.89
                        Kelowna              0.44      Rimouski                0.90
                        Wood Buffalo         0.46      Chicoutimi              0.90
                        Kamloops             0.46      Sherbrooke              0.90
                        Prince George        0.47      Fredericton             0.91
                        St Catharines        0.48      Quebec                  0.92
Notes: Predicted probabilities of a U.S. Dummy from probit specifications. See table A2 for model specifications.




                                                       49
     Table A4: 2SLS Common City Size Estimates of Changes in Local Labor Market Outcomes Due to Changes in Employment (Two Bartik Instrument Estimates):
     1990 to 2011


                                                                                                  Dependent variable: Difference in
                                        Wage           Log           Log             Log              Log           Wage           Log           Log          Log           Log         Log
                                       Location       Popu-        Emp/Pop          Unemp           Unemp.           Skill       Foreign/       Univ/       Univ/HS        90/10       Housing
                                        Index         lation        Ratio            Rate          Insurance        Index          Pop           Pop         Wage          Wage         Cost
                                          (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)            (7)           (8)           (9)         (10)         (11)
                                             ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗               ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗
          ∆ Log Employment ×           0.447         0.634          0.366         −2.799          −2.277          −0.198          −0.574       −0.006        −0.061         0.008      1.501∗∗∗
          United States                 (0.085)       (0.058)        (0.058)       (0.486)         (0.613)         (0.037)        (0.672)      (0.022)       (0.054)       (0.126)      (0.347)




50
          ∆ Log Employment ×           0.679∗∗∗      0.756∗∗∗       0.244∗∗       −2.601∗∗∗        −1.932∗∗       −0.294∗∗∗      1.535∗∗∗      0.177∗∗∗       0.254         0.128       0.140
          Canada                        (0.123)       (0.106)       (0.106)        (0.708)          (0.767)        (0.055)        (0.367)       (0.036)      (0.252)       (0.191)     (0.388)

          Observations                    927           927           927             927             883            927            927          927           927           927         927
          US = CA p-value                0.121         0.316         0.316           0.818           0.726          0.145          0.006        0.000         0.223         0.600       0.009

           Notes: See the notes for table 1. Sample consists of 255 metro areas in the United States and 54 in Canada observed in 1990, 2000, 2007, and 2011. Not all dependent variables
          are available for all metro areas. The CBP/ASM Bartik instrument is calculated using County (US) Businesss Patterns or Canadian (CA) Business Patterns along with the ASM
          data, respectively. The Bartik instruments are calculated using the start of sample as the base year. Within each panel, controls include decadal and census division/region fixed
          effects. Cities are chosen so that 1990 24-59 city population size has a common support. The p-value in the bottom row with the null hypothesis of equality on the coefficients
          (∆ Log Employment) across the United States and Canada. See the notes to table A1 for data sources and definitions. Regressions are weighted by start of period population
          24-59. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered at the state/province level and are in parentheses. *, **, *** indicates statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent
          levels, respectively.
       Table A5: 2SLS Estimates – Local Labor Market Effects of Sectoral Shifts Predicted at the National Level (Bartik), 1980 to 1990


                                                                                 Dependent variable: Difference in
                                   Wage           Log          Log            Log         Wage         Log           Log           Log            Log         Log
                                  Location       Popu-       Emp/Pop         Unemp         Skill     Foreign/       Univ/        Univ/HS         90/10       Housing
                                   Index         lation       Ratio           Rate        Index        Pop           Pop          Wage           Wage         Cost
                                     (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)          (6)           (7)           (8)            (9)         (10)
                                           ∗∗         ∗∗∗                            ∗                        ∗∗            ∗                            ∗
     ∆ Log Employment ×            0.775        0.996           0.004        1.242       −0.014       1.381        0.128          −0.012        −0.341       1.611∗∗
     United States                 (0.351)       (0.077)       (0.077)       (0.694)     (0.058)      (0.681)      (0.065)        (0.089)       (0.195)      (0.755)

     ∆ Log Employment ×             0.143       0.955∗∗∗        0.045        −0.355      −0.011      2.617∗∗∗      0.162∗∗∗     −0.221∗∗∗       −0.431        −0.215




51
     Canada                        (0.153)       (0.135)       (0.135)       (0.665)     (0.050)      (0.532)       (0.049)      (0.060)        (0.315)       (0.201)

     Observations                    346          346            346           346         346          346          346            346           346           346
     US First-Stage F               22.36        22.36          22.36         22.36       22.36        22.36        22.36          22.36         22.36         22.36
     CA First-Stage F               46.38        46.38          46.38         46.38       46.38        46.38        46.38          46.38         46.38         46.38
     US = CA p-value                0.100        0.795          0.795         0.098       0.978        0.154        0.678          0.053         0.808         0.020

      Notes: See the notes for table 1. Sample consists of 264 metro areas in the United States and 82 in Canada observed in 1980. Controls include census
     division/region fixed effects. The p-value in the bottom row is associated with the null hypothesis of equality on the coefficients (∆ Log Employment) across
     the United States and Canada. See the notes to table A1 for data sources and definitions. Regressions are weighted by start of period population 24-59.
     Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered at the state/province level and are in parentheses. *, **, *** indicates statistical significance at the 10, 5,
     and 1 percent levels, respectively.
                                  Table A6: 2SLS Bartik Estimates – Difference between US and Canada in the 1980s


                                                                                Dependent variable: Difference in
                                   (1)           (2)          (3)             (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)           (9)          (10)
                                 Wage           Log          Log            Log           Wage         Log           Log          Log           Log          Log
                                Location       Popu-       Emp/Pop         Unemp           Skill     Foreign/       Univ/       Univ/HS        90/10        Housing
                                 Index         lation       Ratio           Rate          Index        Pop           Pop         Wage          Wage          Cost

     Panel A: Original Estimates
     ∆ Log Employment           −0.632∗       −0.040         0.040         −1.596∗        0.002        1.236        0.034       −0.209∗        −0.090      −1.826∗∗
     CA - US                    (0.383)       (0.155)       (0.155)        (0.961)       (0.076)      (0.864)      (0.082)      (0.108)        (0.370)      (0.781)

     Observations                  346          346           346            346           346          346          346           346           346           346

     Panel B: Common City Sizes (Prime Age from 24 thousand to 2 million)
     ∆ Log Employment            −0.242        0.049        −0.049         −1.066         0.039       1.423∗∗       0.046      −0.291∗∗∗        0.108      −1.032∗∗∗
     CA - US                     (0.200)      (0.147)       (0.147)        (0.898)       (0.073)      (0.581)      (0.051)      (0.078)        (0.276)      (0.302)




52
     Observations                  309          309           309            309           309          309          309           309           309           309

     Panel C: Common City Sizes, Reweighted using demographic characteristics
     ∆ Log Employment          −0.457∗∗∗      −0.159         0.159        −2.843∗∗        0.100       1.143∗∗       0.019      −0.384∗∗∗       −0.242      −1.159∗∗∗
     CA - US                    (0.166)       (0.182)       (0.182)        (1.108)       (0.074)      (0.441)      (0.061)      (0.086)        (0.435)      (0.314)

     Observations                  309          309           309            309           309          309          309           309           309           309

     Panel D: Common City Sizes, Reweighted using demographics, industries, and institutions
     ∆ Log Employment          −0.463∗∗       −0.145         0.145        −2.829∗∗∗       0.112       1.351∗∗       0.028      −0.367∗∗∗       −0.169      −1.250∗∗∗
     CA - US                    (0.183)       (0.172)       (0.172)        (1.075)       (0.075)      (0.538)      (0.065)      (0.066)        (0.427)      (0.299)

     Observations                  309          309           309            309           309          309          309           309           309           309

      Notes: See the notes for table 1. The difference between Canada and the U.S. 2SLS Bartik estimates. Panel A corresponds to full sample data in the 1980s.
     Panel B uses common city size support. See table A2 for the reweighting model specifications. Regressions are weighted by start of period population 24-59.
     Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered at the state/province level and are in parentheses. *, **, *** indicates statistical significance at the 10, 5,
     and 1 percent levels, respectively.
      Table A7: Using only CBP Bartiks: 2SLS Estimates – Local Labor Market Effects of Sectoral Shifts Predicted at the National Level (Bartik), 1990 to 2011


                                                                                              Dependent variable: Difference in
                                    Wage            Log           Log             Log             Log             Wage           Log           Log           Log            Log        Log
                                   Location        Popu-        Emp/Pop          Unemp          Unemp.             Skill       Foreign/       Univ/        Univ/HS         90/10      Housing
                                    Index          lation        Ratio            Rate         Insurance          Index          Pop           Pop          Wage           Wage        Cost
                                       (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)            (7)           (8)            (9)          (10)         (11)
     ∆ Log Employment ×             0.518∗∗∗      0.580∗∗∗       0.420∗∗∗       −3.211∗∗∗       −3.643∗∗       −0.260∗∗∗        −0.481        −0.006         0.113         0.302      1.696∗∗∗
     United States                  (0.113)       (0.090)        (0.090)         (0.747)         (1.551)        (0.054)         (0.752)       (0.034)       (0.094)       (0.228)     (0.329)




53
     ∆ Log Employment ×             0.453∗∗∗      0.834∗∗∗       0.166∗         −2.399∗∗∗        −1.404        −0.219∗∗∗       1.722∗∗∗      0.192∗∗∗       0.351∗∗       0.416∗       −0.120
     Canada                         (0.069)       (0.091)        (0.091)         (0.738)         (1.832)        (0.053)        (0.409)       (0.044)        (0.138)       (0.253)      (0.394)

     Observations                    1,038          1,038         1,038           1,038            966            1,038          1,038         1,038         1,038         1,038        1,038
     US = CA p-value                 0.623          0.047         0.047           0.439           0.351           0.585          0.010         0.000         0.155         0.737        0.000

      Notes: See the notes for table 1. Sample consists of 264 metro areas in the United States and 82 in Canada observed in 1990, 2000, 2007, and 2011. Not all dependent variables are available
     for all metro areas. The CBP/ASM Bartik instrument is calculated using County (US) Businesss Patterns or Canadian (CA) Business Patterns along with the ASM data, respectively. The
     Bartik instruments are calculated using the start of sample as the base year. Within each panel, controls include decadal and census division/region fixed effects. The p-value in the bottom
     row is associated with the null hypothesis of equality on the coefficients (∆ Log Employment) across the United States and Canada.
     Table A8: Using only Census Bartiks: 2SLS Estimates – Local Labor Market Effects of Sectoral Shifts Predicted at the National Level (Bartik), 1990 to 2011


                                                                                              Dependent variable: Difference in
                                    Wage            Log           Log             Log             Log             Wage           Log           Log           Log            Log        Log
                                   Location        Popu-        Emp/Pop          Unemp          Unemp.             Skill       Foreign/       Univ/        Univ/HS         90/10      Housing
                                    Index          lation        Ratio            Rate         Insurance          Index          Pop           Pop          Wage           Wage        Cost
                                       (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)            (7)           (8)            (9)          (10)         (11)
     ∆ Log Employment ×             0.616∗∗∗      0.589∗∗∗       0.411∗∗∗       −3.709∗∗∗       −4.594∗∗       −0.245∗∗∗        −1.519        0.066∗         0.237         0.688       1.405∗∗
     United States                  (0.194)       (0.131)        (0.131)         (1.131)         (1.981)        (0.066)         (1.194)       (0.036)       (0.209)       (0.535)      (0.630)




54
     ∆ Log Employment ×             0.659∗∗∗      0.799∗∗∗       0.201∗∗        −2.004∗∗∗        −1.781        −0.235∗∗∗       1.386∗∗∗      0.152∗∗∗        0.022        −0.065        0.293
     Canada                         (0.058)       (0.089)        (0.089)         (0.483)         (1.131)        (0.027)        (0.162)       (0.024)        (0.214)       (0.105)      (0.275)

     Observations                    1,038          1,038         1,038           1,038            966            1,038          1,038         1,038         1,038         1,038        1,038
     US = CA p-value                 0.832          0.184         0.184           0.166           0.218           0.889          0.016         0.048         0.474         0.168        0.106

      Notes: See the notes for table 1. Sample consists of 264 metro areas in the United States and 82 in Canada observed in 1990, 2000, 2007, and 2011. Not all dependent variables are available
     for all metro areas. The CBP/ASM Bartik instrument is calculated using County (US) Businesss Patterns or Canadian (CA) Business Patterns along with the ASM data, respectively. The
     Bartik instruments are calculated using the start of sample as the base year. Within each panel, controls include decadal and census division/region fixed effects. The p-value in the bottom
     row is associated with the null hypothesis of equality on the coefficients (∆ Log Employment) across the United States and Canada.
     Table A9: Common City Size 2SLS Estimates – the Impact of Import Competition on Local Labor Markets in the U.S. and Canada, 1990 to 2007


                                                                               Dependent variable: Decadal Change in
                                                                       Log            Log           Log            Manufac         Log
                                                                      Manuf          Popu-        Emp/Pop          Location       Unemp
                                                                      Emp            lation        Ratio            Wage           Rate
                                                                        (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)

                               Panel A: United States
                               ∆ imports from China                 −0.033∗∗∗        0.009        −0.008∗∗∗         −0.001        0.030∗
                               to US per worker                      (0.009)        (0.007)        (0.003)          (0.003)       (0.016)

                               Start of Period                        0.001         −0.002∗        −0.0002        −0.001∗∗∗       0.004∗
                               Manufac Share                         (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.0003)       (0.0004)        (0.003)

                               Observations                            510             510            510             510            510




55
                               Panel B: Canada
                               ∆ imports from China                  −0.012         0.015∗∗       −0.006∗∗          −0.005         0.002
                               to Canada per worker                  (0.017)        (0.006)        (0.003)          (0.005)       (0.036)

                               Start of Period                       −0.002         −0.0001        0.001∗∗∗        0.002∗∗∗       −0.002
                               Manufac Share                         (0.004)        (0.001)        (0.0003)        (0.001)        (0.005)

                               Observations                            108             108            108             108            108

                               ∆ IPW US = Canada pval                 0.241          0.494           0.546           0.543         0.441

                                Notes: See the notes for tables 1 and 5. Sample consists of 255 metro areas in the United States and 54
                               in Canada observed in 1990, 2000, and 2007. Not all dependent variables are available for all metro areas.
                               Controls include census division/region and decadal fixed effects. Metros are chosen so that 1990 24-59
                               metro population size has a common support. See the notes to table A1 for data sources and definitions.
                               Regressions are weighted by start of period population 24-59. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors
                               clustered at the state/province level and are in parentheses. *, **, *** indicates statistical significance at
                               the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.
B     Data Appendix

B.1     University variable

We follow Katz and Murphy (1992), who create university (bachelor’s only) and high school

(12 years in the U.S. and 11 to 13 in Canada) equivalents. The measure adds workers with

less than a high school diploma to high school, and those with more than a bachelor’s to

university. Those in-between are divided with 2/3 to high school and 1/3 to university. Aux-

iliary regressions based on cross-sectional wage structures suggest that this is roughly correct,

although the “some-college” group may in fact be closer to high school for Canadians. There

are some additional challenges in classifying education. While the U.S. has a standardized

four years of high school and university, Canada has a system that varies more by province.

In Québec, secondary school ends at grade 11 and then students can continue on with Collège

d’Enseignement Général et Professionnel (CEGEP). In Ontario, until 1987, they had grade

13. Subsequently for students not planning on attending university, they ended high school

at grade 12, while students planning to go on to university took an additional year (Ontario

Academic Credit). After 2003, grade 12 is the last grade of high school for all students after

the OAC was phased out. We group education into five groups based on the highest level

of education achieved: less than high school, high school, a post-secondary degree below a

bachelor’s degree, a bachelor’s degree, and a graduate degree prior to defining our university

equivalent.

B.2     Housing Costs

We calculate housing costs from Census data on gross monthly rents or by imputing rents

from owned units, similar to Albouy et al. (2013). We control for housing characteristics —

namely the number of rooms, and age of structure — to construct a housing index based

only on location.

B.3     Other Data

B.3.1    UN Comtrade Database

Our trade data comes from the UN Comtrade database. From this dataset, we retain exports

from China to the U.S., Canada, and other developed countries at the 6-digit Harmonized

System product level. We aggregate the U.S. trade data to SIC 1987 3-digit level in 2007



                                               56
U.S. dollars. The Canadian trade data are aggregated to the NAICS 1997 4-digit level in

2007 U.S. dollars to align with the industry classification of our Canadian CBP/ASM data.

B.3.2     Transfer Data

The Canadian Unemployment Insurance (UI)48 data come from the T1 Family File (T1FF).49

This contains city-level total UI as well as the number of tax filers collecting UI, so we are

able to create measures of UI per person. Similarly, we obtain unemployment insurance data

from the Bureau of Economic Analysis at the county level. We then convert these data to

the metro-area level of aggregation.

B.3.3     Union Data

For Canada, we calculate the city-level unionization rates from the Masterfile Labour Force

Survey (LFS). Unfortunately, questions about unionization were only added in 1997; there-

fore for 1991, we extrapolate backwards.50 We use two-year averages when calculating the

city average union rates (including the previous year) to ensure that we have accurate mea-

sures for the smaller cities. For the U.S., we obtain unionization rates from http://www.unionstats.com/,

which are calculated from the Current Population Survey (CPS).51

B.3.4     World KLEMS Data

We use World KLEMS data for Canada and the U.S. to provide an aggregate perspective on

labor dynamics in both countries during our study period.52 The KLEMS initiative uses a

harmonized growth accounting framework, which ensures that our Canada–U.S. comparisons

use variables that are measured using a common methodology.
  48
      In 1996, Unemployment Insurance was renamed Employment Insurance in Canada. Given that Unem-
ployment Insurance (UI) is the term used in the U.S., we use it throughout the paper to avoid confusion.
   49
      For 2011, we downloaded the data directly from CANSIM, while for the preceding years, we purchased
tables from Statistics Canada.
   50
      We extrapolate from 1997–1998 to 1991 using provincial unionization rates, which we obtained from
the 1990 Labour Market Activity Survey with our 1997–1998 LFS cities rates and 1997–1998 LFS provincial
rates.
   51
      The LFS and CPS do not identify union rates for all of the cities we require. For Canada, we have union
rates for 71 of the 82 cities in 1990, 2001 and 2011 and 60 in 2007. For the U.S., of the 264 cities, we have
the union rates for 174 cities in 1990, 182 in 2011, and 194 in 2007 and 2011. We impute the union rates for
the remaining cities.
   52
      The Canada and U.S. data were downloaded from the World KLEMS website. Documentation for the
Canada and U.S. KLEMS datasets are provided in Gu (2012) and Ho et al. (2012), respectively.




                                                     57
B.4     SIC-E 1980 to NAICS 1997 Crosswalk

We structure our crosswalk using Statistics Canada’s concordance table between SIC-E 1980

and NAICS 1997.53 This concordance table provides a one-to-many mapping between SIC-E

1980 4-digit and NAICS 1997 6-digit codes. Unfortunately, there are no weights for the

one-to-many mappings, so the Statistics Canada concordance table cannot be directly used

to crosswalk the data.

    We create the crosswalk weights using micro data from CDER’s T2-Longitudinal Employ-

ment Analysis Program (T2-LEAP). A limitation of the T2-LEAP data is that the NAICS

classification is limited to 4 digits. Accordingly, we collapse the original Statistics Canada’s

concordance table to a SIC-E 1980 3-digit to NAICS 1997 4-digit concordance table. We

leverage the fact that in the crossover year of 1997, T2-LEAP has both SIC-E 1980 and

NAICS 1997 industrial classification for many enterprises in the data. Using these data, we

calculate our weights as the share of SIC-E classified T2-LEAP employment in each NAICS

cell for all one-to-many mappings in the SIC-E 1980 3-digit to NAICS 1997 4-digit concor-

dance table. One-to-one mappings in the concordance table are assigned a crosswalk weight

of 1.




  53
     Statistics   Canada’s       industrial    concordance          tables   are   available   at:
https://www.statcan.gc.ca/eng/concepts/concordances-classifications.


                                                   58
