                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE INCOME ELASTICITY FOR NUTRITION:
          EVIDENCE FROM UNCONDITIONAL CASH TRANSFERS IN KENYA

                                        Ingvild Almås
                                     Johannes Haushofer
                                      Jeremy P. Shapiro

                                     Working Paper 25711
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25711


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                           March 2019, Revised April 2019




We are grateful to Hanfeng Chen, Leah Kiwara, and James Reisinger for excellent research
assistance, and to Orazio Attanasio, Abhijit Banerjee, Marianne Bertrand, Sandra Black, Richard
Blundell, Konrad Burchardi, Thomas Crossley, Jesse Cunha, Jon de Quidt, Thomas Dohmen,
Esther Duflo, Seema Jayachandran, Dennis Kristensen and Bertil Tungodden for useful
comments. This research was supported by NIH Grant R01AG039297 to Johannes Haushofer and
the Norwegian and Swedish Research Councils. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Ingvild Almås, Johannes Haushofer, and Jeremy P. Shapiro. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Income Elasticity for Nutrition: Evidence from Unconditional Cash Transfers in Kenya
Ingvild Almås, Johannes Haushofer, and Jeremy P. Shapiro
NBER Working Paper No. 25711
March 2019, Revised April 2019
JEL No. C93,D12,D13,D14,O12

                                          ABSTRACT

We use a randomized controlled trial to study the effect of large income changes, through
unconditional cash transfers, on the food share of expenditures and consumption of calories
among poor households in rural Kenya. Our preferred estimate of the food elasticity following
USD 709 transfers is 0.78 for expenditure, 0.60 for calories, and 1.29 for protein. Experimental
elasticities are lower than cross-sectional estimates. These estimates are unaffected by spillovers
or price changes at the village level: results are similar with vs. without an almost ideal demand
system, and with a control group in treatment vs. control villages.


Ingvild Almås                                            Jeremy P. Shapiro
Institute for International Economic Studies             Busara Center for Behavioral Economics
Stockholm University                                     Daykio Plaza
SE-106 91 Stockholm                                      Nairobi, Kenya
Sweden                                                   jeremypshapiro@gmail.com
Ingvild.Almas@nhh.no

Johannes Haushofer
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
427 Peretsman-Scully Hall
Princeton, NJ 08540
and Busara Center for Behavioral Economics
Nairobi, Kenya
and also NBER
haushofer@princeton.edu




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/docs/analysisplan/625
1    Introduction

The response of households in developing countries to income changes in terms of
food share of expenditures and calorie consumption is of significant interest to both
policymakers and economists. It is a crucial element in modeling the consumption
and savings choices of households, and a central ingredient in designing tax and
transfers policy, labor market policy, and insurance markets (Deaton 1992; Hall and
Mishkin 1982; Jappelli and Pistaferri 2010). In developing countries, it can inform
the design of consumption support policies and redistribution programs (Fenn et al.
2015; Luseno et al. 2014; Robertson et al. 2013; Fernald and Hidrobo 2011; Schady
and Paxson 2007; Aguero, Carter, and Woolard 2006; Cunha 2014; Blattman, Fiala,
and Martinez 2013; Aker 2015; Schofield 2014). A main reason for the importance of
such responses is that they provide information about the source of possible poverty
traps: If households show a strong response to income changes in terms of calorie
consumption, a nutrition-based poverty trap is plausible (Banerjee and Duflo 2011;
Schofield 2014). The potential for nutrition-based poverty traps has received signif-
icant attention in the literature (Dasgupta and Ray 1986), and there is debate as to
whether they exist (Deaton and Drèze 2009; Behrman and Deolalikar 1987).

The present study revisits the question of the income elasticity of nutrition in the
context of the unconditional cash transfer program of the NGO GiveDirectly, Inc.
(GD), first studied by Haushofer and Shapiro (2016). Between 2011 and 2013, GD
sent unconditional cash transfers of at least USD 404, corresponding to at least
twice monthly average household consumption, to randomly chosen poor households
in Kenya through the mobile money system M-Pesa.1 The transfers were explicitly
described to households as fully unconditional, and as short-term windfalls, rather
than as a promise of recurring payments for the long term. Within the treatment
group, transfer recipient within the household (wife vs. husband), transfer timing
(monthly installments over nine months vs. one-time lump sum transfer) and transfer
magnitude (USD 404 vs. USD 1520) were randomized. We surveyed randomly
selected treatment and control households both before the program and between 1
and 15 months after it ended. The present study builds on this dataset, but extends
    1
      All USD values are calculated at purchasing power parity, using the World Bank PPP con-
version factor for private consumption for KES/USD in 2012, 62.44. The price level ratio of PPP
conversion factor (GDP) to KES market exchange rate for 2012 was 0.5. These figures were retroac-
tively changed by the World Bank after 2013; we use those that were current at the time the study
was conducted.


                                               2
it in two ways to obtain nutrition estimates for the purposes of this study: a price
survey, and a weight survey to map food weights into nutrients. In combination with
the existing dataset, this confers several advantages to our study, which allow us to
establish the following results.

First, we identify elasticities by instrumenting total expenditure or consumption with
the randomly assigned receipt of the unconditional cash transfer. This feature of our
setting allows us to make causal statements with greater confidence than was possible
in previous studies, which often relied on cross-sectional estimation of Engel curves
and elasticities (Subramanian and Deaton 1996). We find income elasticities that
are higher than reported in some previous studies using cross-sectional approaches.
For example, in a review of 66 studies containing 1,444 food expenditure elasticity
estimates, Colen et al. (2018) report an average expenditure elasticity of 0.61. In con-
trast, our preferred estimate is 0.78. This estimate makes a nutrition-based poverty
trap marginally less implausible than the low previous estimates. However, income
would still have to display a surprisingly high elasticity with respect to food expen-
diture (or calories) to generate a trap. Some nutrients display higher elasticities;
e.g. we estimate an elasticity of 1.30 for protein. Thus, if productivity is strongly
dependent on protein, a trap may still be possible. .Importantly, we also show
that cross-sectional elasticity estimates are unlikely to be reliable: when compar-
ing our experimental estimates to cross-sectional estimates obtained using the same
data, we find substantial differences, with the cross-sectional elasticities consistently
larger than the experimental ones. For example, the non-experimental elasticity for
overall food expenditure is 0.91, i.e. larger than the experimental elasticity of 0.78.

Second, when income changes lead to substitution towards more expensive calories,
the income elasticity of expenditure will overestimate the elasticity of calories. To
account for this fact, we combine our expenditure data with price data and nutri-
tion tables to obtain estimates of nutrient intake, including calories, protein, fats,
carbohydrates, fiber, and iron. This data was obtained through two survey efforts:
first, we collected detailed information on local prices of the goods covered by our
consumption survey at the market level at the time of the endline, i.e. in 2012. This
survey has the additional advantage that it is not collected at the household level,
thus ruling out substitution towards more expensive varieties as a possible source
of differences in prices between treatment and control groups. Second, a team of
surveyors bought and weighed five items from each food category in local stores.


                                           3
These weights enable us to use nutrition tables to compute how many nutrients
(calories, fats, etc.) households consumed from a given food category. This data
then allows us to estimate not only expenditure, but also nutrition elasticities. We
find that households substitute towards more expensive calories, evident in the fact
that the nutrition elasticities are consistently lower than the expenditure elasticities:
our preferred expenditure elasticity estimate is 0.78, while the calorie elasticity esti-
mate is 0.60. Nevertheless, this elasticity estimate is substantially higher than what
is reported in the literature; the review by Colen et al. (2018) finds a mean calorie
elasticity of 0.42 averaging over 120 estimates.

Third, estimation of the effect of income changes on expenditure patterns is po-
tentially complicated by general equilibrium effects: if the program is substantial
enough to generate significant variation in expenditure, it may also be large enough
to move local prices. To deal with this possibility, we use the price data described
above to estimate a linearized version of the almost ideal demand system (AIDS;
Deaton and Muellbauer 1980), effectively enabling us to estimate elasticities while
accounting for changes in prices. We find little effect on the results, suggesting that
price effects are an unlikely confound in estimates of consumption elasticities, even
with substantial interventions such as this one.

Fourth, when estimating nutrition elasticities using exogenous income changes such
as in cash transfer programs, spillovers to non-recipient households are a potential
concern. Our setting offers two advantages in this regard. First, our preferred
specification uses randomization of villages, rather than households, into treatment
and control, allowing us to obtain across-village estimates that are free from within-
village spillover effects. Second, because we also surveyed control households in
treatment villages, we additionally estimate how important such spillovers at the
village level are. We find little evidence that randomization at the household level
leads to substantially different estimates from randomization at the village level; our
preferred within-village elasticity is 0.79, very close to our preferred across-village
elasticity of 0.78. This finding therefore implies that spillover effects are small and
elasticities can sensibly be measured within villages.

Finally, our study varies three design features of unconditional cash transfers: fre-
quency (monthly vs. lump-sum), recipient gender (male vs. female), and magnitude
(USD 404 vs. USD 1520). In the context of the present study, the randomization
of transfer magnitude is especially salient because it allows us to estimate whether


                                           4
Engel curves are linear. We find little evidence of non-linearity; our preferred spec-
ification suggests a higher elasticity for small than for large transfers, suggesting
some concavity, but the difference between these results is not statistically signifi-
cant. This result further corroborates the view that a calorie-based poverty trap is
unlikely, at least over the range of transfers studied here. We also find little evidence
of differences in elasticities across male and female recipient households, suggesting
that households are unitary and/or men and women have similar preferences over
food consumption.

Our paper contributes to a large literature that aims to estimate the food expenditure
and nutrition elasticity from observational data. Previous approaches have used
cross-sectional estimates (Subramanian and Deaton 1996; Jappelli and Pistaferri
2010; Skoufias 2003), time-series data (Dynarski et al. 1997; Krueger and Perri 2010;
Krueger and Perri 2006; Browning and Crossley 2001; Hall and Mishkin 1982), or
natural or policy shocks to study household responses (Johnson, Parker, and Souleles
2006; Souleles 2002; Shapiro and Slemrod 1995). However, estimating the income
elasticity of calorie consumption from observational data alone presents significant
challenges. In the cross-section, households that have different resources may have
different tastes, different opportunities, and face different prices, which complicates
the interpretation of estimates of elasticities. Cross-sectional estimates may also be
biased by reverse causality, e.g. if calorie intake affects productivity, or simultaneous
causality, e.g. if health affects both calorie intake and income. In time series, changes
in income are typically accompanied with changes in the economic environment faced
by the household (e.g. changes in wages or labor productivity). Finally, because
policymakers in developing countries have often been wary of unconditional income
transfers, most income redistribution to the poor is either in kind or attached to
conditionalities, and therefore few (natural) experiments exist.

We are not aware of previous studies that use randomized unconditional cash trans-
fers to estimate income elasticities of food expenditure and calories while controlling
for prices. However, a few recent studies come close. Angelucci and Attanasio (2013)
and Attanasio, Battistin, and Mesnard (2012) study the effect of conditional cash
transfers (CCT) programs in Mexico (PROGRESA/Oportunidades) and Ecuador
(Bono de Desarollo Humano, BDH) on the food share of expenditures, finding an
increase in the former study and a small decrease in the latter. These studies differ
from ours in that the transfers are conditional, are made only to women, and price


                                           5
data are not available or incomplete, and nutrient elasticities and spillovers can-
not be studied. Attanasio and Lechene (2010) and Hoddinott and Skoufias (2004)
use a similar approach for PROGRESA, but have access to price data. Attanasio
and Lechene (2010) do not estimate elasticities explicitly; Hoddinott and Skoufias
(2004) obtain calorie elasticities between 0.3–0.5. Again conditionality and targeting
of women makes these studies different from ours. Armand et al. (2016) compare
conditional cash transfers to men vs. women in Macedonia, finding that targeting
transfers to women increases the expenditure share on food by 4–5 percentage points.
In this study, the absence of a pure control group makes it difficult to obtain direct
experimental estimates of elasticities. Schady and Rosero (2008) estimate the effect
of monthly unconditional cash transfers to women in Ecuador on the food share,
finding an increase of 3–4 percentage points. However, a large number of control
group households in their experiment received treatment, and there were large base-
line differences between treatment and control groups. In addition, transfers again
are made only to women, price data are not available, and nutrient elasticities and
spillovers are not studied. Gangopadhyay, Lensink, and Yadav (2012) show positive
reduced-form impacts of a UCT program in India on calorie consumption, but do
not estimate elasticities. Thus, estimates of the income elasticity of food expenditure
and calories based on unconditional cash transfers are scarce, especially with price
controls.

Finally, the estimates provided in this paper can potentially be combined with es-
timates of the income elasticity of calorie consumption to assess whether a poverty
trap is possible. Most prominently, Schofield (2014) finds effects of providing extra
calories over a period of 5 weeks on the productivity of rickshaw drivers in India
that correspond to an elasticity of productivity with respect to calorie consumption
of around 0.31. This elasticity would still be too low to generate a trap, even in
combination with our highest estimates, but differences in setting and timeframe
make the two sets of results difficult to compare.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives an overview
of the intervention, study design, and datasets. Section 3 lays out the econometric
framework. Section 4 presents results, and Section 5 concludes.




                                          6
2    Intervention, study design, and data

The intervention, experimental design, and econometric approach used in this study
have previously been described elsewhere (Haushofer and Shapiro 2016), and are
briefly summarized here. We refer the reader to the companion paper for details.

GiveDirectly, Inc. (GD; www.givedirectly.org) is an international NGO founded in
2009 whose mission is to make unconditional cash transfers to poor households in
developing countries. At the time of the study, eligibility was determined by living
in a house with a thatched (rather than metal) roof. Recipients were informed that
they would receive a transfer of KES 25,200 (USD 404 PPP), and that this transfer
was unconditional and one-time. Recipients were provided with a Safaricom SIM
card and had to register it for the mobile money service M-Pesa in the name of the
designated transfer recipient. They could keep the M-Pesa account even after the
study, and money could be stored there indefinitely. Anecdotally, most recipients
withdrew the money very soon after receipt, and in earlier work we found that M-
Pesa balances at endline were below USD 5 PPP in all groups.

An overview of the design and timeline is shown in Figure 1. The study was con-
ducted in Rarieda district, Kenya. Consumption levels are relatively low in our
setting. As reported in previous work, average monthly food expenditure in the
control group at endline was USD 104 PPP, which translates to USD 0.68 PPP per
person per day in the average household of five (Haushofer and Shapiro 2016). In
line with these low levels of consumption, 23 percent of respondents report having
gone to bed hungry at least once in the preceding week.

Among the 120 villages with the highest proportion of thatched roofs in Rarieda,
60 were randomly chosen to be treatment villages. Within these villages, half of
all eligible households were randomly chosen to be treatment households, while the
other half were control households. A household was eligible if it had a thatched roof.
This process resulted in 503 treatment households and 505 spillover households in
treatment villages at baseline. Villages had an average of 100 households, of which an
average of 19 percent were surveyed, and an average of 9 percent received transfers.
The transfers amounted to an average of 10 percent of aggregate baseline village
wealth (excluding land).

Among treatment households, we further randomized whether the transfer went to
the husband or the wife (in dual-headed households). In addition, 137 households

                                          7
in the treatment group were randomly chosen to receive “large” transfers of KES
95,200 (USD 1,525 PPP, USD 1,000 nominal) per household, while the remaining
366 treatment households received “small” transfers of KES 25,200 (USD 404 PPP,
USD 300 nominal) per household. Finally, we randomly assigned the transfer to be
delivered either as a lump-sum amount or as a series of nine monthly installments.
We only consider the 173 monthly recipient and 193 lump-sum recipient households
that did not receive large transfers, because large transfers were not unambiguously
monthly or lump-sum. The total amount of each type of transfer was KES 25,200
(USD 404 PPP).

We conducted a baseline survey with all treatment and spillover households before
they received the first transfer, and an endline after the end of transfers. House-
holds received the first transfer an average of 9.3 months before endline, the last
transfer an average of 4.4 months before endline, and the mean transfer an average
of 6.9 months before endline.2 The order in which villages were surveyed at base-
line was randomized, and at endline it followed the same order. In a small number
of households, the endline survey was administered before the final transfer was re-
ceived. These households are nevertheless included in the analysis to be conservative
(intent-to-treat).

Control villages were surveyed only at endline; in these villages, we sampled 432 “pure
control” households from among eligible households. Because these pure control
households were selected into the sample just before the endline, the thatched-roof
criterion was applied to them about one year later than to households in treatment
villages. This fact potentially introduces bias into the comparison of households in
treatment and control villages; however, as shown in Haushofer and Shapiro (2016),
this bias was negligible, amounting to 5 households, or 1.1 percent of the sample.
We therefore do not control for it further here; this produces results very similar
to a number of bounding approaches, as shown in our original paper. The lack
of baseline data in the pure control group also implies that we cannot use a first
differences approach for this group.




   2
     The mean transfer date is defined as the date at which half of the total transfer amount to a
given household has been sent.


                                                8
2.1    Data and Variables

In each surveyed household, we collected two survey modules: a household module,
which collected information about assets, consumption, income, food security, health,
and education; and an individual module, which collected information about psycho-
logical wellbeing, intra-household bargaining and domestic violence, and economic
preferences. The two surveys were administered on different (usually consecutive)
days. This paper is based on the household survey, which was administered to any
household member who could give information about the outcomes in question for
the entire household. This was usually one of the primary members.

The household survey contained a detailed consumption expenditure module, which
is the main focus of the present paper. It asked for household expenditure in the
preceding week on each of 99 foods (e.g. rice, tomatoes, butter), which were ag-
gregated up to 18 food categories (e.g. cereals, vegetables, oils); 46 non-food items
with smaller and more frequent expenditures, such as airtime, travel expenses, and
firewood, with a weekly recall period, aggregated up to 10 categories; and 26 non-
food items with larger and less frequent expenditures, such as weddings, funerals,
and home repair, with a 12 month recall period, aggregated up to 11 categories. We
use these expenditures to compute monthly totals at purchasing power parity.3

To convert food expenditure into calories and other nutrients, we first need to com-
pute the quantities of each consumed item based on expenditure. To do this, we
require price data. In the original study, we conducted a separate price survey at
the village level, in which we elicited prices for 38 common food and non-food items
from 397 individuals, spread over all study villages. This survey allowed us to com-
pute quantities for most consumption categories. However, it did not collect some
prices for items in smaller categories: “non-alcoholic drinks”, “fats”, and “sweets and
spices”. To complete the price data for these consumption categories, we conducted
a new price survey in 2016, in which we collected 2012 prices for 31 food items from
these categories. Prices for these items were collected from five different markets in
the city of Rongo in western Kenya. Together, our price data therefore allows us to
compute monthly quantities consumed of each item in our consumption survey.

An additional problem, however, was that some prices in the price survey were in
   3
     The full survey is available at http://www.princeton.edu/haushofer. Weekly data are divided
by 7 and multiplied by 30.5 to convert to monthly. Yearly data are divided by 365 and multiplied
by 30.5.


                                               9
“local” units which are easy for respondents to understand, but which do not corre-
spond to those used in standard food composition tables. For example, some prices
are given “per bunch”. Overall, this was the case for five consumption categories. To
convert these units into known weight units, e.g. price per gram, we also obtained
estimates of the weight corresponding to the “local” units, by buying five units of
the items in question, and obtaining their average weight in grams.

Finally, to allow us to compute nutritional content for each consumption category,
we used the detailed nutritional composition tables from the West Africa Food Com-
position Table 2012, published by Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations4 . Together with knowledge about the quantities consumed from the combi-
nation of the household and price surveys, these weights enable us to compute how
many nutrients (calories, fats, etc.) households consumed in a given food category.
Thus, we first convert the food expenditure data collected at endline into food quan-
tities using the price and weight data, and then convert the weights into calories,
protein, fat, carbohydrates, and fiber using nutrition tables. The resulting variables
record monthly intake of these nutrients for each household. See Table A.1 for a
more detailed descriptions of the variables.


2.2      Integrity of experiment

Earlier results have shown that our study had good baseline balance on most out-
comes of interest, and therefore we do not repeat this discussion here (Haushofer
and Shapiro 2016). Due primarily to registration issues with M-Pesa, 18 treatment
households had not received transfers at the time of the endline, and thus only 485 of
the 503 treatment households were in fact treated. We deal with this issue by using
an intent-to-treat approach. We had low levels of attrition; overall, 940 of 1,008
baseline households (93.3 percent) were surveyed at endline. As shown previously,
our results are unlikely to be affected by this attrition (Haushofer and Shapiro 2016).
Both for the original study and for this follow-on analysis, we wrote a pre-analysis
plan (PAP). The PAP pertinent to this paper is published and time-stamped at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/docs/analysisplan/625.




   4
       The database is available at http://www.fao.org/3/a-i2698b.pdf


                                                10
3     Econometric framework

3.1    Main estimation: An almost ideal demand specification using
       across-village variation in treatment

The random variation of the cash transfer across households allows us to identify
causal effects of income changes on food shares and nutrient consumption using
an instrumental variable approach. Moreover, because we have prices measured
at endline, we are able to take account of potential general equilibrium effects on
prices. The standard approach for estimating such an elasticity taking account of
prices is the almost ideal demand system (Deaton and Muellbauer 1980).5 It is
attractive because it has a structure that is consistent with economic theory in that
it is consistent with utility maximization under a budget constraint, that allows for
flexible utility functions that are non-homothetic, and that allows for prices to play
a role and hence it can account for general equilibrium effects of our intervention.
Often there is not sufficient relative price variation to identify all coefficients in the
full system, and Deaton and Muellbauer (1980) point out this in their original article.
They suggest that in such cases the a linearized version of this system can be used.
In particular, they suggest that the Stone price index can be used instead of the
translog price index of the full system (see Stone (1953)). The Stone price index is a
weighted geometric average of log prices, where the weights are given by the budget
share for each good. It is this linearized version of the system that we use in this
paper.6

     5
       Note that for many goods, the quadratic version of this system, the QUAIDS due to Banks,
Blundell, and Lewbel (1997) , has been shown to fit data better. However, for food, the AIDS
system has proven to be a good application and is the most used. Actually Banks, Blundell, and
Lewbel (1997) did not reject the log-linear specification for food although they did for the other
goods that they considered.
     6
       Note that in the pre-analysis plan we suggested that we would show results for the QUAIDS
system in addition to the AIDS system. We pre-specified that we would use lnUCT and squared
lnUCT as instruments for this system. However, it turned out during analysis that we do not have
a strong enough first stage. Using the Sanderson-Windmeijer multivariate F test, we found lnUCT
and its square to be weak instruments for log total expenditure and its square in our specifications.
Following Sanderson and Windmeijer (2016), we used the Stock and Yogo (2005) weak instrument
critical values for the conditional F-statistics. We defined weak instruments as those that lead to
a rejection rate of 10 percent when the true rejection rate is 5 percent and use the corresponding
critical value of 7.03. For all of our specifications we cannot reject the null hypothesis of weak
identification. (see Table A.2 for the F-statistics and corresponding p-values). For this reason we
report results only for the linearized AIDS. See Table A.3 for other discrepancies between pre-
analysis plan and current specifications.


                                                 11
The linearized AIDS is given by the following equation:


                  ωhv = α + β ln z ∗hv + γ(ln pfv − ln pnv ) + ξ 0 Xhv + εhv               (1)

where ωhv is the outcome of interest for household h in village v. zhv denotes
                                             ∗ = ln zhv , where ln a∗ (p ) is
the monthly non-durable expenditure, and ln zhv    a∗ (pv )             v

the Stone price index: ln a∗ (pv ) = wf lnpfv + wn lnpnv . pv is a village price, where
superscripts f and n refer to food and non-food prices, respectively. wx is the
average budget share for good x ∈ {f, n} in the sample. Xhv is a vector of baseline
demographic control variables7 , and εhv is an idiosyncratic error term.

For our main estimation, we use only endline data and apply ln U CThv as an in-
                 ∗ . ln U CT
strument for ln zhv         hv is log of the randomly assigned cash transfer amount
received by household h in village v. To deal with possible zeroes in the expenditure
data, we use the inverse hyperbolic sine transform wherever we mention logs (Bur-
bidge, Magee, and Robb 1988; MacKinnon and Magee 1990; Pence 2006). We use
treated households from treated villages and households from pure control villages.
That is, we do not in the main estimation include the households that we refer to as
“spillover households”, i.e., the household in treatment villages that did not receive
the treatment. These households are included in a next step discussed in Section
3.2. Standard errors are clustered at the village level.

To compare the results of this “experimental” analysis to a cross-sectional analysis
that resembles many of the previous studies on the income elasticity of consumption,
we next repeat the same estimation without instrumenting total expenditure with
the randomly assigned cash transfers. To avoid using any experimentally induced
variation in expenditure in this analysis, we restrict the sample to households from
control villages. Thus, this analysis is based on the cross-section only, and hence
comparable in methodology to the majority of previous studies on the topic.

In both cases, we then compute the elasticity as follows:

                                                β
                                       ehv =       + 1,                                    (2)
                                               ωhv
   7
     For estimations that include treated and spillover households, we control for the baseline
number of children and number of adults. For estimation that include treated and pure control
households, we use one variable for total number of household members because the number of
adults was not registered for pure control households at census.


                                               12
We present an experimental and a non-experimental version of this elasticity for all
empirical specifications we consider. Since the budget share varies across households,
there is a question of whose budget share we should use to report the elasticity. We
report the elasticity evaluated at the mean and median household budget shares,
respectively, and in addition we report the mean and the median elasticities using
household-specific shares to find the full distribution of elasticities.


3.2   Within-village analysis in levels

In our second estimation, we restrict the sample to treatment villages and study
households that received the treatment (treatment households) and within-village
control households (“spillover” households). We use the following specification:


                        ωhv = α + β ln zhv + δv + ξ 0 Xhv + εhv                     (3)

Again, we estimate based on endline data only, and we use ln U CThv as an instrument
for ln zhv . The motivation for this analysis is twofold. First, in this within-village
analysis, we can include village-level fixed effects, which not only increases preci-
sion, but also allows us to not worry about controlling for village-level prices or
other village-level controls. The benefit of this approach is that our point estimates
and precision will neither be affected by potential measurement error in prices or
other control variables, nor will we need to impose the structural assumptions of
the demand system. Second, previous work suggests that the spillover effects in this
study were small, making the within-village control households a reasonable com-
parison group (Haushofer and Shapiro 2016). Standard errors are not clustered in
this analysis because the randomization occurs at the household level.

In the “non-experimental” version of this specification, the sample is simply restricted
to spillover households.


3.3   Within-village analysis in first differences

Third, to investigate the precision of our findings, we estimate the elasticities using
a first difference approach. This specification has the potential to be more highly
powered with a stronger first stage as the unconditional cash transfer may be more


                                           13
correlated with the change in expenditure from baseline to endline than any level of
expenditure. As we only have data for control villages at endline, the first difference
results are based on within-village estimations, i.e. the sample consists of treatment
and spillover households. Because randomization is within villages, again village-
level dummies pick up all variance at the village level, including prices and other
village-level differences. Our demand system therefore collapses to:


                          ∆ωhv = α + β∆ ln z hv + δv + εhv                         (4)

In the “experimental” version of this analysis, ∆ ln zhv is again instrumented with the
cash transfer. In the “non-experimental” version, we do not instrument, and restrict
the sample to the spillover households.


3.4   Across-village analysis without price controls

Fourth, as we are interested in whether general equilibrium effects through prices
are important, we also estimate the elasticities using the across-villages compari-
son, including treatment households and pure control households (i.e. no spillover
households), and no price controls:


                          ωhv = α + β ln zhv + ξ 0 Xhv + εhv .                     (5)


3.5   Differences across treatment arms

The RCT had three cross-randomizations which allow us to study whether results
differ when transfer are made to the wife vs. the husband, as a lump-sum vs. in
monthly installments, and when transfers are large (USD 1520) vs. small (USD 404).
The impact of recipient gender on elasticities is important to inform the discussion
around whether aid should be targeted at women when its goal is to improve nutrition
for children and families in general. The impact of transfer timing and frequency is
important to determine the existence of savings and credit constraints. Finally, the
impact of transfer magnitude is informative about the curvature of the effects, and
therefore speaks to whether there may be a poverty trap.
We estimate the difference between these treatment arms for each of the four spec-
ifications described in the previous sections. For the across-village specifications,

                                          14
we restrict the samples to pure control households and one treatment group, e.g.
female recipient households, for each estimation. For example, when estimating
the elasticities for female recipients, we restrict the sample to pure control house-
holds and treated households with female recipients (leaving out treated households
with male recipients and the households that are not two-headed). Analogously,
for within-village specifications, we restrict the samples to spillover households and
one treatment group for each estimation, etc. In Appendix A we also report a first
difference version of this specification. The p-values comparing elasticities across
pairs of treatment arms (e.g. female vs. male recipient households) are computed as
described in Appendix B.


3.6   Nutrients

To study the elasticities for nutrients, we use a similar set of specifications, with the
same sample restrictions, as for the budget share estimations described above:


                 ωhv = α + γ(ln pcv − ln pnv ) + β ln z ∗hv + ξ 0 Xhv + εhv ,        (6)



                        ωhv = α + β1 ln zhv + δv + ξ 0 Xhv + εhv ,                   (7)



                              ∆ωhv = α + β∆ ln zhv + εhv ,                           (8)



                           ωhv = α + β ln zhv + ξ 0 Xhv + εhv ,                      (9)

where ωhv is the budget share for the nutrient of interest for household h in village v,
and pv is a village price, where superscripts c and n refer to the nutrient of interest
and all consumption categories other than c, respectively. The price of a particular
nutrient is defined as a weighted average of all food prices. The weight for each
food category is given by the ratio of the intake of nutrient from one food to the
total intake across all food categories. All other variables are as described above,
and we also instrument as described above. Again as above, we further test whether
there are differences across elasticities for the experimental vs. non-experimental
specifications, within vs. across villages, and across treatment arms.

                                             15
To test the differences between the experimental and non-experimental version of
each of the specifications and between treatment arms, we employ a strategy using
nested models described in Appendix B.


3.7    Summary

Together, these specifications allow us to answer the following questions:

    1. What is the range of the estimated elasticities for our preferred estimations (1
       and 2)?

    2. Do the experiment reveal different elasticities than the cross-sectional based
       findings?

    3. Are spillover households affected by the treatment, i.e., are there spillovers?

    4. Does it matter whether we estimate the elasticities from levels at endline or
       by taking first differences?

    5. Are general equilibrium effects through prices important?

    6. Are calorie and protein elasticities lower than expenditure elasticities?

    7. Do elasticities differ across treatment arms?



4     Results

We begin by examining non-parametric plots of total expenditure and nutrients,
shown in Figures 2 and 3. The categories we consider in the four panels of Figure
2 are total food expenditure; expenditure on meat, fish, dairy, and egg; expenditure
on fruit, vegetables, and cereals; and other food. In Figure 3, the five panels show
expenditure on total calories, protein, fat, carbohydrates, and fibre, respectively. In
each figure, the lines are based on locally weighted scatterplot smoothing (LOWESS)
with a bandwidth of 0.8, and show the relationship between the log of total expendi-
ture on the horizontal axis, and category shares of total expenditure on the vertical
axis. The blue line uses data from the treatment group, the red line from the pure
control group. The lines are thus non-parametric cross-sectional Engel curves; their


                                           16
slope gives an indication of the cross-sectional elasticities. The dots indicate the
mean values for the treated and pure control groups: the red dots represent the pure
control group average, the blue dots the treatment group average, and the other dots
correspond to the different treatment arms. A line through the dots corresponding
to the control and treatment groups thus gives an indication of the experimental
elasticities.

The plots suggest that the estimated elasticity for food from the experiment is smaller
than that of the cross-section: both in Figure 2 and Figure 3, lines drawn through the
dots corresponding to the treatment and control group means give steeper downward-
sloping Engel curves than either of the cross-sectional Engel curves.

The estimated elasticities are presented in Table 1 and Table 2. As the elasticity
is a function not only of the estimated coefficients, but also the budget share for
food or nutrients as expressed in equation 2, the elasticities can be evaluated at,
e.g., the mean or median budget share, or they can be calculated for each household
and then represented by a descriptive statistic from that distribution. In the tables
we present elasticities evaluated at the mean and the median, respectively, and we
also give mean and median elasticities from the distribution of estimated household-
specific elasticities. Table 1, columns (1)–(3), show results from estimating the
AIDS in levels and across villages, using equation 1; column (1) shows the results of
the experimental estimation, and column (2) of the cross-sectional estimation, with
column (3) reporting the p-value of the difference between the two. Columns (4)–(6)
report the analogous results for the within-village analysis using levels, as specified
by equation 3. In Table 2, the first three columns report results for the within-village
first differences approach given by equation 4, and the last three columns report the
across-village specification without price controls given by equation 5. All results
are very similar when estimated at the mean and median; we focus the following
discussion on the mean, but the interpretation of the results for the median is the
same.

Our preferred experimental estimates are those in column (1) of Table 1. We find an
income elasticity of food expenditure of 0.78. This elasticity is below unity, but larger
than some of the early estimates of this elasticity described above. The elasticity for
meat, fish, dairy and egg is estimated to be 1.48, suggesting that this consumption
category contains luxury goods. The elasticity for fruit, vegetables, and cereals is
0.75 and thus somewhat lower, suggesting that this category may contain staples


                                           17
with a low elasticity. These results are very similar across the different specifications
presented in Tables 1 and 2.

The expenditure elasticities are likely to be an upper bound for the elasticities for
calories, and a lower bound for more expensive nutrients such as protein.8 The lower
panels of Tables 1 and 2 show elasticities for nutrients. As expected, the calorie
elasticity is lower than that for expenditure, with a preferred estimate of 0.60. Also
expected, the elasticity for protein is higher, at 1.29, but lower than that for meat,
fish, dairy and egg reported above (1.48). In contrast, the elasticity for carbohydrates
is lower, at 0.45, again likely owing to the fact that staples contain carbohydrates.
Thus, recipients appear to substitute towards more expensive nutrients with fewer
calories and carbohydrates, and more protein. The shares of fat and fiber appear
not to change dramatically. These results are again comparable across the different
specifications, with the exception of a somewhat higher calorie elasticity in the first
differences specification.

How do these experimentally obtained elasticities compare to what we would have
estimated from the cross-section? Columns (2) and (5) in Tables 1 and 2 show the
non-experimental estimates, and columns (3) and (6) show the p-values from the
comparison to the experimentally calculated elasticities. Our main finding is that
the experimentally estimated elasticities are often different from those obtained in
the cross-section. In most cases, the cross-sectional estimates are higher than the
experimental estimates, suggesting that the cross-sectional estimates may overesti-
mate the extent to which a nutrition-based poverty trap may exist. In fact, the
cross-sectional expenditure elasticity for food in our preferred specification is 0.91
for expenditures and 0.85 for calories. Since both estimates are rather close to
unity, relying on the cross-sectional analysis might thus lead us to conclude that a
nutrition-based poverty trap is at least possible. The lower experimental elasticities,
in contrast, make it somewhat less likely.

We next compare the four different estimation strategies to each other: levels across
villages; levels within villages; first differences within villages; and levels across vil-
lages without controls for prices. Table 3 reports the p-values of the comparison of
the estimates shown in Tables 1 and 2 to each other, with the specific comparison
specified in the column headings.

   8
     Note, however, that most people in our sample do not have access to refrigeration, and many
foods are therefore perishable; expenditure is thus usually fairly close in time to consumption.


                                              18
Our core specification is the estimation in levels across villages with price controls,
as specified in equations 1 and 6. The reason for this choice is that this specifica-
tion is unaffected by village-level spillovers, and controls for possible price effects of
transfers. The comparison of this analysis to the within-village estimation allows us
to asses the importance of within-village spillovers. We find very similar elasticities
in the two specifications, with all of the individual p-values well higher than con-
ventional levels of statistical significance. Numerically, the largest differences are in
the elasticities for fat, which is higher in the within-village specification, and fiber,
which is higher in the across-village specification. Overall, however, we conclude that
spillovers at the village level are not important in the estimation of our elasticities.

The second comparison of interest is between the within-village levels and within-
village first differences specifications; this comparison allows us to assess the impor-
tance of baseline data. As shown in column (2) of Table 3, we find no statistically
significant differences between the two approaches. Numerically, a few differences
emerge: the elasticities for “other foods” and fat are somewhat higher when esti-
mated in first differences, and that for protein is higher when estimated in levels.
However, no consistent pattern emerges, and together with the fact that we cannot
reject equality for any comparison, we conclude that the first differences approach
has little effect on the elasticity estimates.

Finally, we compare the linearized AIDS estimated across villages with the across-
village analysis that omits the price controls. This comparison allows us to test
whether there might be price effects that distort the estimation of elasticities when
prices are not taken into account. Again we find very little evidence of differences:
as shown in column (3) of Table 3, the associated p-values are all above conventional
levels of statistical significance. Numerically, all estimates are quite close to each
other, with the exception of the elasticity for fruit, vegetable, and cereal expenditure,
which is somewhat higher when price controls are included. This result suggests that
prices may have decreased slightly for this group of items, such that an elasticity
estimate that does not take this decrease into account will result in a lower elasticity.
On the whole, however, we again conclude that price changes do not strongly affect
our estimates, either statistically or economically.

Finally, we turn to the comparison of the various treatment arms in the treatment
group: making transfers to women vs. men; monthly vs. lump-sum transfers; and
large vs. small transfers. Results are shown in Table 4, using the across-village


                                            19
AIDS specification.9 For each pair of treatment arms, the first two columns show
the separate elasticity estimates for the two treatment arms relative to the pure
control group, and the third column shows the p-value for the difference between
the two. Comparing elasticities for male and female recipients shown in columns
(1)–(3), we find no significant differences; in fact, for overall food expenditure, the
elasticities are almost identical, at 0.720 and 0.715 for female and male recipients,
respectively.10 The calorie elasticities are also similar, at 0.46 and 0.54, respectively.
None of the other expenditure categories or nutrients show significant differences,
even though some differences are numerically moderate (e.g.“other foods”, protein,
and carbohydrates). Overall, we conclude that there is little evidence of differences
in elasticities between female and male recipients, although a more highly-powered
study might be able to detect such differences.

Second, when comparing monthly vs. lump-sum transfers in columns (4)–(6), we also
find no statistically significant differences. Monthly transfers have slightly higher
food expenditure and calorie elasticities (1.10 and 0.83, respectively) than lump-
sum transfers (0.83 and 0.65), and this qualitative difference is observed in most
expenditure and nutrient categories.11 However, the standard errors are too large
to make these differences statistically significant. The qualitative finding, however,
is consistent with monthly transfers being used for consumption and consumption
smoothing, while lump-sum transfers are used to make larger investments, e.g. in
durables or livestock.

Third, we compare large and small transfers in columns (7)–(9). Again we find
no statistically significant differences in this comparison; however, qualitatively, the
large transfers generate lower elasticity estimates than the small transfers, consistent
with some concavity.




   9
      See Tables A.4–A.6 for results using the other three specifications.
  10
      Note that the average of these two need not amount to our preferred elasticity of 0.78 as we
leave out households that are not two-headed.
   11
      Note that these elasticities need not average to our preferred elasticity of 0.78 as we here
leave out the large transfers. These transfers were delivered as add-on monthly installments to
small lump-sum or monthly transfers, and thus cannot be unambiguously considered lump-sum or
monthly.


                                               20
5    Concluding remarks

In this paper we use data from a randomized controlled trial delivering unconditional
cash transfers to poor households in Kenya to identify the income elasticity for
food expenditure and nutrients. In contrast to much of the previous evidence, we
can use the random variation in total expenditure induced by the cash transfers to
obtain causal estimates for the elasticities. We find that the expenditure and calorie
elasticities, at 0.78 and 0.60, respectively, are closer to unity than many previous
studies have indicated, but even so they are still substantially below unity. We note,
however, that the calorie elasticity for protein is larger than unity. Our findings
are relevant to the debate around nutrition-based poverty traps: for such a trap to
exist, the food and calorie elasticities cannot be small. The fact that our preferred
estimates are below unity suggests that such traps are unlikely unless protein is the
most important factor for efficient production. In further support of this conclusion,
our causal estimates for food expenditure and calories are smaller than our cross-
sectional estimates, suggesting that the cross-sectional estimates in other studies
may also be overestimated. In this case, the (unobserved) causal elasticities in these
other settings may also be smaller. Thus, across settings, the true expenditure and
calorie elasticities may be too small for nutrition-based poverty traps to be plausible.

There are two important caveats to this conclusion. First, when we consider specific
food categories (such as meat, fish, dairy, and egg) and nutrients (such as protein),
we find some elasticities that are larger than unity. Thus, nutrition-based poverty
traps might be possible if work capacity is a function of e.g. protein intake. Second,
a nutrition-based poverty trap can occur even with a small calorie elasticity if the
elasticity of work capacity with respect to food is substantial. We are unable to study
this relationship in the present paper. However, Heather Schofield’s recent work
provides a window on this question. She finds that providing an extra 700 calories per
day to individuals who consume around 2,200 calories per day (a roughly 32 percent
increase) leads to an increase in productivity of about 10 percent, suggesting an
elasticity of income with respect to calories of 0.31 (Schofield 2014). This estimate
is too low to generate a poverty trap in combination with any of our estimates.
It is, of course, possible that differences in context (India vs. Kenya), occupation
(rickshaw drivers vs. subsistence farmers), or other factors make Schofield’s estimates
incomparable to ours. Future studies might attempt to study the two elasticities in
the same setting to obtain conclusive evidence for the empirical plausibility of a

                                          21
nutrition-based poverty trap.




                                22
References
Aguero, Jorge, Michael Carter, and Ingrid Woolard. 2006. “The impact of uncon-
   ditional cash transfers on nutrition: The South African Child Support Grant.”
   Working paper series, no. 06/08.
Aker, Jenny C. 2015. “Comparing Cash and Voucher Transfers in a Humanitarian
   Context: Evidence from the Democratic Republic of Congo.” The World Bank
   Economic Review, November, lhv055.
Angelucci, Manuela, and Orazio Attanasio. 2013. “The demand for food of poor
   urban mexican households: Understanding policy impacts using structural mod-
   els.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5 (1): 146–205.
Armand, Alex, Orazio Attanasio, Pedro Carneiro, and Valerie Lechene. 2016. “The
   Effect of Gender-Targeted Conditional Cash Transfers on Household Expendi-
   tures: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment.” IZA Discussion Papers, no.
   10133.
Attanasio, Orazio, Erich Battistin, and Alice Mesnard. 2012. “Food and Cash
   Transfers: Evidence from Colombia.” The Economic Journal 122 (559): 92–124
   (mar).
Attanasio, Orazio, and Valérie Lechene. 2010. “Conditional cash transfers, women
   and the demand for food.” Technical Report, IFS working papers.
Banerjee, Abhijit V, and Esther Duflo. 2011. Poor economics: A radical rethinking
   of the way to fight global poverty. Public Affairs.
Banks, James, Richard Blundell, and Arthur Lewbel. 1997. “Quadratic Engel curves
   and consumer demand.” Review of Economics and statistics 79 (4): 527–539.
Behrman, Jere R, and Anil B Deolalikar. 1987. “Will developing country nutrition
   improve with income? A case study for rural South India.” Journal of political
   Economy 95 (3): 492–507.
Blattman, Christopher, Nathan Fiala, and Sebastian Martinez. 2013. “Generating
   Skilled Self-Employment in Developing Countries: Experimental Evidence from
   Uganda*.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, December, qjt057.
Browning, Martin, and Thomas F. Crossley. 2001. “The life-cycle model of con-
   sumption and saving.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 15 (3): 3–22.



                                        23
Burbidge, John B., Lonnie Magee, and A. Leslie Robb. 1988. “Alternative trans-
   formations to handle extreme values of the dependent variable.” Journal of the
   American Statistical Association 83 (401): 123–127.
Colen, L, PC Melo, Y Abdul-Salam, D Roberts, S Mary, and S Gomez Y Paloma.
   2018. “Income elasticities for food, calories and nutrients across Africa: A meta-
   analysis.” Food Policy 77:116–132.
Cunha, Jesse M. 2014. “Testing Paternalism: Cash versus In-Kind Transfers.”
   American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 6 (2): 195–230 (April).
Dasgupta, Partha, and Debraj Ray. 1986. “Inequality as a determinant of malnu-
   trition and unemployment: Theory.” Economic Journal 96 (384): 1011–1034.
Deaton, Angus. 1992. Understanding consumption. Oxford University Press.
Deaton, Angus, and Jean Drèze. 2009. “Food and nutrition in India: facts and
   interpretations.” Economic and political weekly, pp. 42–65.
Deaton, Angus, and John Muellbauer. 1980. “An almost ideal demand system.”
   The American economic review 70 (3): 312–326.
Dynarski, Susan, Jonathan Gruber, Robert Moffitt, and Gary Burtless. 1997. “Can
   families smooth variable earnings.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no.
   1:229–303.
Fenn, Bridget, Garba Noura, Victoria Sibson, Carmel Dolan, and Jeremy Shoham.
   2015. “The role of unconditional cash transfers during a nutritional emergency
   in Maradi region, Niger: a pre-post intervention observational study.” Public
   Health Nutrition 18 (2): 343–351.
Fernald, Lia CH, and Melissa Hidrobo. 2011. “Effect of Ecuador’s cash transfer pro-
   gram Bono de Desarrollo Humano on child development in infants and toddlers:
   A randomized effectiveness trial.” Social Science & Medicine 72 (9): 1437–1446.
Gangopadhyay, Shubhashis, Robert Lensink, and Bhupesh Yadav. 2012, October.
   “Cash or Food Security through the Public Distribution System? Evidence
   from a Randomized Controlled Trial in Delhi, India.” SSRN Scholarly Paper ID
   2186408, Social Science Research Network, Rochester, NY.
Hall, Robert E., and Frederic S. Mishkin. 1982. “The sensitivity of consumption
   to transitory income: Estimates from panel data on households.” Econometrica
   50 (2): 461–481.


                                        24
Haushofer, Johannes, and Jeremy Shapiro. 2016. “The short-term impact of uncon-
   ditional cash transfers to the poor: experimental evidence from Kenya.” The
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (4): 1973–2042.
Hoddinott, John, and Emmanuel Skoufias. 2004. “The Impact of PROGRESA
   on Food Consumption.” Economic Development and Cultural Change 53 (1):
   37–61.
Jappelli, Tullio, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2010. “The consumption response to income
   changes.” Annual Review of Economics 2 (1): 479–506.
Johnson, David S., Jonathan A. Parker, and Nicholas S. Souleles. 2006. “Household
   Expenditure and the Income Tax Rebates of 2001.” American Economic Review
   96 (5): 1589–1610 (December).
Krueger, Dirk, and Fabrizio Perri. 2006. “Does income inequality lead to consump-
   tion inequality? Evidence and theory.” The Review of Economic Studies 73 (1):
   163–193.
      . 2010. “How do households respond to income shocks.”
Luseno, Winnie K, Kavita Singh, Sudhanshu Handa, and Chirayath Suchindran.
   2014. “A multilevel analysis of the effect of Malawi’s Social Cash Transfer Pilot
   Scheme on school-age children’s health.” Health Policy and Planning 29 (4):
   421–432.
MacKinnon, James G., and Lonnie Magee. 1990. “Transforming the dependent
   variable in regression models.” International Economic Review 31(2):315–39.
Pence, Karen M. 2006. “The role of wealth transformations: An application to
   estimating the effect of tax incentives on saving.” Contributions to Economic
   Analysis and Policy 5 (1): 1–26.
Robertson, Laura, Phyllis Mushati, Jeffrey W. Eaton, Lovemore Dumba, Gideon
   Mavise, Jeremiah Makoni, Christina Schumacher, Tom Crea, Roeland Monasch,
   Lorraine Sherr, Geoffrey P. Garnett, Constance Nyamukapa, and Gregson. 2013.
   “Effects of unconditional and conditional cash transfers on child health and
   development in Zimbabwe: a cluster-randomised trial.” The Lancet 381 (9874):
   1283 – 1292.
Sanderson, Eleanor, and Frank Windmeijer. 2016. “A weak instrument F-test in
   linear IV models with multiple endogenous variables.” Journal of Econometrics
   190 (2): 212–221.

                                       25
Schady, Norbert, and Christina H Paxson. 2007. “Does money matter? The effects
   of cash transfers on child health and development in rural Ecuador.” World
   Bank Policy Research Working Paper, no. 4226.
Schady, Norbert, and José Rosero. 2008. “Are cash transfers made to women spent
   like other sources of income?” Economics Letters 101 (3): 246–248 (December).
Schofield, Heather. 2014. “The economic costs of low caloric intake: Evidence from
   India.” University of Pennsylvania Working Paper.
Shapiro, Matthew D., and Joel Slemrod. 1995. “Consumer Response to the Tim-
   ing of Income: Evidence from a Change in Tax Withholding.” The American
   Economic Review 85 (1): 274–283.
Skoufias, Emmanuel. 2003. “Is the Calorie–Income Elasticity Sensitive to Price
   Changes? Evidence from Indonesia.” World Development 31 (7): 1291–1307
   (July).
Souleles, Nicholas S. 2002. “Consumer response to the Reagan tax cuts.” Journal
   of Public Economics 85 (1): 99–120 (July).
Stock, James H., and Motohiro Yogo. 2005. Pages 80–108 in Testing for Weak
   Instruments in Linear IV Regression, edited by Donald W. K. Andrews and
   James H.Editors Stock. Cambridge University Press.
Stone, Richard. 1953. The measurement of consumer’s expenditure and behaviour
   in the United Kingdom, 1920-1938. Cambridge University Press.
Subramanian, Shankar, and Angus Deaton. 1996. “The demand for food and
   calories.” Journal of Political Economy, pp. 133–162.




                                       26
                                         Figure 1: Timeline of study



                                   302 villages in Rarieda

                                   120 villages with highest
                                   proportion of thatched roofs
                                   chosen for study, April 2011


   60 villages randomly chosen
           to receive transfers

   Research census: 1123 HH
        March-November 2011

   Baseline: 1097 HH
         April-November 2011

   GiveDirectly census: 1034 HH
         April-November 2011

   Final treatment sample:
           1008 baseline HH

   Treatment rollout                                                      Pure control census: 1141 HH
         June 2011-January 2013                                           (464 targeted) April-June 2012


                                       Endline: 1372 HH


   Treatment: 503/471 HH               Spillover: 505/469 HH              Pure control: 0/432 HH

           Male recipient: 185/174 HH
           Female recipient: 208/195 HH

           Monthly transfer: 173/159 HH
           Lump-sum transfer: 193/184 HH

           Large transfer: 137/128 HH
           Small transfer: 366/343 HH



 Notes: Timeline and treatment arms. Numbers with slashes designate baseline/endline number of households in
each treatment arm. Male vs. female recipient was randomized only for households with co-habitating couples.
Large transfers were administered by making additional transfers to households that had previously been assigned to
treatment. The lump-sum vs. monthly comparison is restricted to small transfer recipient households.
                                              Figure 2: LOWESS estimates for expenditure shares
                                                               Treatment group      Female recipient   Large transfer   Lump-sum transfer

                                                               Pure control group   Male recipient     Small transfer   Monthly transfer


                                                  Food total                                                                               Meat, fish, dairy & egg
                             0.675



                             0.650                                                                     0.16


                             0.625
                                                                                                       0.14


                             0.600
                                                                                                       0.12
Share of total expenditure




                             0.575

                                                                                                       0.10
                                    100                                                     200            100                                                       200


                                          Fruit, vegetables & cereals                                                                           Other foods
                             0.36

                                                                                                       0.18
                             0.34



                             0.32                                                                      0.16



                             0.30
                                                                                                       0.14


                             0.28

                                                                                                       0.12
                                100                                                         200            100                                                       200


                                                                                 Total expenditure (USD)
 Notes: Locally weighted smoothed scatterplots between category shares of total expenditure and log of total expen-
diture, for bandwidth equal to 0.8. Bandwidth refers to the share of total observations used for calculating smoothed
values for each household (except for the end points). The shaded areas show the two-standard error bands for the
nonparametric regressions. The standard errors are obtained by bootstrapping, with 100 replication for each of the
regression curves. The blue dot shows the average total expenditure and category share for the treatment group, and
the red dot for the control group. Other dots correspond to other treatment groups, as described by the legend. The
vertical lines show the sample quartiles.
                                            Figure 3: LOWESS estimates for calorie and nutrient shares
                                                              Treatment group      Female recipient   Large transfer   Lump-sum transfer

                                                              Pure control group   Male recipient     Small transfer   Monthly transfer


                                                    Calorie                                                                                   Protein
                                                                                                      0.038

                                  0.31
                                                                                                      0.036

                                  0.29                                                                0.034

                                  0.27                                                                0.032


                                  0.25                                                                0.030
                                     100                                                   200            100                                             200
     Share of total expenditure




                                                      Fat                                                                                  Carbohydrate
                                                                                                      0.20
                                  0.065
                                                                                                      0.19

                                  0.060                                                               0.18

                                                                                                      0.17
                                  0.055
                                                                                                      0.16

                                  0.050                                                               0.15
                                      100                                                  200           100                                              200


                                                     Fiber
                                  0.016


                                  0.015


                                  0.014


                                  0.013


                                  0.012
                                      100                                                  200


                                                                             Total expenditure (USD)
 Notes: Locally weighted smoothed scatterplots between calorie and nutrients’ shares of total expenditure and log of
total expenditure, for bandwidth equal to 0.8. Bandwidth refers to the share of total observations used for calculating
smoothed values for each household (except for the end points). The shaded areas show the two-standard error bands
for the nonparametric regressions. The standard errors are obtained by bootstrapping, with 100 replication for each
of the regression curves. The blue dot shows the average total expenditure and category share for the treatment
group, and the red dot for the control group. Other dots correspond to other treatment groups, as described by the
legend. The vertical lines show the sample quartiles.
               Table 1: Income elasticities of food expenditure and nutrient availability I
                                                      Across village
                                                                                                      Within village
                                                         In levels
                                                                                                        In levels
                                                     Linearized AIDS
                                           (1)            (2)            (3)        (4)            (5)            (6)
                                       Experimental Non-experimental Difference Experimental Non-experimental Difference
                                        (N = 903)      (N = 432)      p-value    (N = 940)      (N = 469)      p-value
Food expenditure

Food total
 At mean                               0.780   (0.126)   0.913   (0.029)   0.287    0.793   (0.071)     0.976   (0.024)   0.015
 At median                             0.782   (0.125)   0.914   (0.029)   0.287    0.794   (0.071)     0.976   (0.024)   0.015
 Mean                                  0.767   (0.134)   0.907   (0.031)   0.288    0.779   (0.076)     0.974   (0.026)   0.015
 Median                                0.782   (0.125)   0.914   (0.029)   0.287    0.794   (0.071)     0.976   (0.024)   0.015

Meat, fish, dairy & egg
At mean                                1.478   (0.287)   1.244   (0.082)   0.429    1.490   (0.190)     1.291   (0.055)   0.314
At median                              1.511   (0.306)   1.272   (0.092)   0.454    1.530   (0.206)     1.327   (0.062)   0.345
Mean                                   1.711   (0.426)   1.367   (0.124)   0.437    1.732   (0.284)     1.441   (0.083)   0.326
Median                                 1.500   (0.300)   1.255   (0.086)   0.430    1.515   (0.200)     1.310   (0.059)   0.325

Fruit, vegetables & cereals
 At mean                               0.751   (0.214)   0.877   (0.049)   0.539    0.607   (0.124)     0.936   (0.039)   0.011
 At median                             0.745   (0.220)   0.876   (0.050)   0.533    0.595   (0.128)     0.935   (0.040)   0.011
 Mean                                  0.698   (0.261)   0.850   (0.060)   0.541    0.518   (0.152)     0.921   (0.049)   0.012
 Median                                0.745   (0.220)   0.876   (0.050)   0.533    0.595   (0.128)     0.936   (0.040)   0.011

Other foods
 At mean                               0.239   (0.244)   0.699   (0.057)   0.044    0.535   (0.136)     0.786   (0.050)   0.085
 At median                             0.180   (0.263)   0.682   (0.060)   0.042    0.500   (0.147)     0.771   (0.054)   0.082
 Mean                                  0.007   (0.318)   0.588   (0.078)   0.051    0.397   (0.177)     0.710   (0.068)   0.099
 Median                                0.180   (0.263)   0.682   (0.060)   0.042    0.501   (0.146)     0.771   (0.054)   0.083


Calorie and nutrient availability

Calorie
 At mean                               0.600   (0.167)   0.854   (0.035)   0.113    0.682   (0.087)     0.941   (0.031)   0.005
 At median                             0.597   (0.168)   0.853   (0.035)   0.114    0.681   (0.087)     0.941   (0.031)   0.005
 Mean                                  0.569   (0.180)   0.842   (0.038)   0.114    0.652   (0.095)     0.934   (0.034)   0.005
 Median                                0.597   (0.168)   0.853   (0.035)   0.114    0.681   (0.087)     0.941   (0.031)   0.005

Protein
 At mean                               1.291   (0.201)   1.085   (0.041)   0.324    1.183   (0.112)     1.132   (0.034)   0.667
 At median                             1.303   (0.210)   1.089   (0.043)   0.325    1.188   (0.116)     1.135   (0.034)   0.656
 Mean                                  1.351   (0.243)   1.103   (0.050)   0.322    1.222   (0.137)     1.161   (0.041)   0.670
 Median                                1.303   (0.210)   1.089   (0.043)   0.325    1.188   (0.116)     1.135   (0.034)   0.656

Fat
 At mean                               0.545   (0.292)   0.790   (0.085)   0.403    0.794   (0.150)     1.010   (0.053)   0.174
 At median                             0.496   (0.323)   0.761   (0.096)   0.414    0.779   (0.161)     1.011   (0.057)   0.175
 Mean                                  0.376   (0.400)   0.723   (0.112)   0.386    0.691   (0.225)     1.016   (0.084)   0.176
 Median                                0.496   (0.323)   0.761   (0.096)   0.414    0.779   (0.161)     1.011   (0.057)   0.175

Carbohydrate
 At mean                               0.453   (0.204)   0.835   (0.050)   0.041    0.553   (0.110)     0.886   (0.040)   0.004
 At median                             0.434   (0.211)   0.832   (0.050)   0.040    0.536   (0.114)     0.883   (0.041)   0.004
 Mean                                  0.071   (0.346)   0.608   (0.118)   0.085    0.460   (0.133)     0.852   (0.052)   0.006
 Median                                0.434   (0.211)   0.832   (0.050)   0.040    0.536   (0.114)     0.883   (0.041)   0.004

Fiber
 At mean                               0.706   (0.241)   0.836   (0.050)   0.574    0.599   (0.131)     0.901   (0.043)   0.028
 At median                             0.697   (0.248)   0.832   (0.051)   0.571    0.581   (0.137)     0.898   (0.044)   0.028
 Mean                                  0.637   (0.297)   0.795   (0.062)   0.581    0.511   (0.159)     0.879   (0.052)   0.028
 Median                                0.698   (0.248)   0.832   (0.051)   0.571    0.581   (0.137)     0.898   (0.044)   0.027


 Notes: Estimates of income elasticities for food expenditure (top panel) and calorie and nutrient availability (bottom panel).
Columns (1)–(3) show estimates using the linearized AIDS across villages, estimated in levels; columns (4)–(6) show reults
from the within-village specification estimated in levels. Columns (1) and (4) present experimentally estimated elasticities, and
columns (2) and (5) cross-sectional estimates. Columns (3) and (6) report p-values of the difference between the experimental
and non-experimental estimates. Each elasticity is evaluated both at the mean and median household budget shares, and we
report the mean and the median elasticities using household-specific shares. Standard errors are shown in parentheses.
               Table 2: Income elasticity of food expenditures and nutrients availability II
                                                                                                      Across village
                                                      Within village
                                                                                                        In levels
                                                    In first-differences
                                                                                                     No price control
                                          (1)            (2)            (3)        (4)            (5)            (6)
                                      Experimental Non-experimental Difference Experimental Non-experimental Difference
                                       (N = 940)      (N = 469)      p-value    (N = 903)      (N = 432)      p-value
Food expenditure

Food total
 At mean                              0.769   (0.093)   1.069   (0.029)    0.002   0.746   (0.142)      0.914   (0.030)   0.229
 At median                            0.776   (0.090)   1.067   (0.028)    0.002   0.748   (0.141)      0.914   (0.030)   0.229
 Mean                                 0.751   (0.100)   1.075   (0.031)    0.002   0.730   (0.151)      0.908   (0.032)   0.230
 Median                               0.777   (0.090)   1.067   (0.028)    0.002   0.748   (0.141)      0.914   (0.030)   0.229

Meat, fish, dairy & egg
At mean                               1.380   (0.268)   1.207   (0.079)    0.534   1.526   (0.323)      1.244   (0.077)   0.402
At median                             1.429   (0.303)   1.246   (0.094)    0.563   1.562   (0.345)      1.273   (0.086)   0.422
Mean                                  1.543   (0.383)   1.296   (0.113)    0.536   1.781   (0.479)      1.367   (0.116)   0.408
Median                                1.380   (0.268)   1.212   (0.080)    0.547   1.549   (0.337)      1.255   (0.081)   0.402

Fruit, vegetables & cereals
 At mean                              0.568   (0.170)   1.108   (0.049)    0.002   0.613   (0.254)      0.890   (0.052)   0.242
 At median                            0.543   (0.180)   1.114   (0.051)    0.002   0.602   (0.261)      0.889   (0.052)   0.239
 Mean                                 0.377   (0.246)   1.164   (0.074)    0.002   0.529   (0.309)      0.866   (0.063)   0.243
 Median                               0.546   (0.179)   1.113   (0.051)    0.002   0.603   (0.260)      0.889   (0.052)   0.239

Other foods
 At mean                              0.755   (0.143)   0.920   (0.039)    0.268   0.295   (0.250)      0.678   (0.054)   0.107
 At median                            0.737   (0.154)   0.913   (0.043)    0.271   0.241   (0.270)      0.659   (0.057)   0.102
 Mean                                 0.670   (0.193)   0.892   (0.053)    0.269   0.081   (0.327)      0.558   (0.074)   0.123
 Median                               0.739   (0.153)   0.914   (0.042)    0.269   0.241   (0.270)      0.659   (0.057)   0.102


Calorie and nutrient availability

Calorie
 At mean                              0.763   (0.106)   1.072   (0.032)    0.005   0.563   (0.175)      0.848   (0.036)   0.084
 At median                            0.765   (0.106)   1.072   (0.031)    0.005   0.559   (0.176)      0.847   (0.037)   0.084
 Mean                                 0.731   (0.121)   1.082   (0.036)    0.005   0.528   (0.188)      0.835   (0.039)   0.085
 Median                               0.766   (0.105)   1.071   (0.031)    0.005   0.559   (0.176)      0.847   (0.037)   0.084

Protein
 At mean                              1.037   (0.145)   1.180   (0.046)    0.345   1.299   (0.215)      1.079   (0.040)   0.323
 At median                            1.037   (0.144)   1.181   (0.046)    0.340   1.311   (0.224)      1.083   (0.042)   0.324
 Mean                                 1.053   (0.208)   1.277   (0.070)    0.308   1.361   (0.260)      1.095   (0.048)   0.322
 Median                               1.037   (0.144)   1.180   (0.046)    0.342   1.311   (0.224)      1.083   (0.042)   0.324

Fat
 At mean                              1.112   (0.186)   0.898   (0.057)    0.271   0.580   (0.282)      0.780   (0.082)   0.478
 At median                            1.122   (0.204)   0.889   (0.061)    0.274   0.535   (0.312)      0.751   (0.093)   0.491
 Mean                                 1.165   (0.274)   0.854   (0.081)    0.278   0.424   (0.387)      0.711   (0.108)   0.458
 Median                               1.122   (0.203)   0.890   (0.061)    0.274   0.535   (0.312)      0.751   (0.093)   0.491

Carbohydrate
 At mean                              0.573   (0.157)   1.115   (0.040)    0.001    0.408 (0.210)       0.829   (0.052)   0.027
 At median                            0.569   (0.158)   1.115   (0.040)    0.001    0.387 (0.218)       0.826   (0.053)   0.026
 Mean                                 0.267   (0.269)   1.201   (0.071)    0.001   -0.005 (0.357)       0.595   (0.124)   0.057
 Median                               0.571   (0.157)   1.112   (0.040)    0.001    0.387 (0.218)       0.826   (0.053)   0.026

Fiber
 At mean                               0.610 (0.188)    1.076   (0.055)    0.017   0.614   (0.267)      0.836   (0.051)   0.377
 At median                             0.570 (0.208)    1.087   (0.063)    0.017   0.602   (0.275)      0.832   (0.053)   0.375
 Mean                                 -0.216 (0.587)    1.355   (0.258)    0.014   0.524   (0.329)      0.794   (0.064)   0.382
 Median                                0.572 (0.207)    1.086   (0.062)    0.017   0.603   (0.275)      0.832   (0.053)   0.375


 Notes: Estimates of income elasticities for food expenditure (top panel) and calorie and nutrient availability (bottom panel).
Columns (1)–(3) show estimates using the first-differences specification within villages; columns (4)–(6) show reults from the
across-village specification estimated in levels, omitting price controls. Columns (1) and (4) present experimentally estimated
elasticities, and columns (2) and (5) cross-sectional estimates. Columns (3) and (6) report p-values of the difference between
the experimental and non-experimental estimates. Each elasticity is evaluated both at the mean and median household budget
shares, and we report the mean and the median elasticities using household-specific shares. Standard errors are shown in
parentheses.
                                         Table 3: Comparison between models
                                      Across village linearized AIDS     Within village levels        Across village linearized AIDS
                                                    vs.                           vs.                               vs.
                                              Within village         Within village first-differences Across village no price control
                                                    (1)                             (2)                             (3)
                                            Difference p-value              Difference p-value              Difference p-value
Food expenditure

Food total
 At mean                                          0.922                           0.840                           0.826
 At median                                        0.923                           0.874                           0.826
 Mean                                             0.925                           0.823                           0.826
 Median                                           0.923                           0.877                           0.826

Meat, fish, dairy & egg
At mean                                           0.971                           0.739                           0.908
At median                                         0.958                           0.784                           0.908
Mean                                              0.966                           0.693                           0.908
Median                                            0.965                           0.687                           0.908

Fruit, vegetables & cereals
 At mean                                          0.486                           0.855                           0.595
 At median                                        0.482                           0.817                           0.595
 Mean                                             0.477                           0.627                           0.595
 Median                                           0.480                           0.824                           0.595

Other foods
 At mean                                          0.250                           0.266                           0.859
 At median                                        0.250                           0.264                           0.859
 Mean                                             0.246                           0.297                           0.859
 Median                                           0.249                           0.259                           0.859


Calorie and nutrient availability

Calorie
 At mean                                          0.604                           0.555                           0.846
 At median                                        0.599                           0.538                           0.846
 Mean                                             0.629                           0.608                           0.846
 Median                                           0.599                           0.534                           0.846

Protein
 At mean                                          0.612                           0.427                           0.977
 At median                                        0.605                           0.413                           0.977
 Mean                                             0.618                           0.497                           0.977
 Median                                           0.605                           0.412                           0.977

Fat
 At mean                                          0.394                           0.184                           0.920
 At median                                        0.377                           0.186                           0.920
 Mean                                             0.442                           0.182                           0.920
 Median                                           0.377                           0.186                           0.920

Carbohydrate
 At mean                                          0.624                           0.916                           0.857
 At median                                        0.629                           0.864                           0.857
 Mean                                             0.224                           0.520                           0.857
 Median                                           0.629                           0.856                           0.857

Fiber
 At mean                                          0.640                           0.963                           0.744
 At median                                        0.624                           0.964                           0.744
 Mean                                             0.654                           0.231                           0.744
 Median                                           0.623                           0.970                           0.744


 Notes: Each column shows the p-values of the difference between elasticities generated by the models listed in the column headers.
Column (1) shows the difference between the across-village vs. within-village linearized AIDS, both estimated in levels. Column
(2) shows the difference between the within-village levels and the within-village first differences specification. Column (3) shows
the difference between the across-village specification in levels, estimated with vs. without price controls. Separate p-values are
reported for the comparisons at the mean and median household budget shares, and of the mean and the median elasticities using
household-specific shares.
                  Table 4: Comparison of treatment arms: linearized AIDS across villages
                                        Female vs. male recipient    Monthly vs. lump-sum transfer      Large vs. small transfer
                                               (N = 703)                      (N = 775)                       (N = 903)
                                         (1)       (2)      (3)      (4)       (5)      (6)      (7)       (8)      (9)
                                       Female     Male Difference Monthly Lump-sum Difference Large       Small Difference
                                      recipient recipient p-value transfers transfers p-value transfers transfers p-value
Food expenditure
Food total
 At mean                                0.720     0.715     0.981      1.097     0.834       0.330     0.700     0.912     0.214
                                       (0.204)   (0.194)              (0.288)   (0.192)               (0.105)   (0.199)
 At median                              0.718     0.718     0.999      1.098     0.837       0.338     0.704     0.912     0.216
                                       (0.205)   (0.192)              (0.292)   (0.188)               (0.104)   (0.197)
Meat, fish, dairy & egg
At mean                                 1.614     1.442     0.699      1.995     1.441       0.596     1.338     1.651     0.543
                                       (0.511)   (0.386)              (0.954)   (0.533)               (0.247)   (0.513)
 At median                              1.674     1.471     0.677      2.071     1.462       0.586     1.375     1.690     0.566
                                       (0.561)   (0.412)              (1.027)   (0.557)               (0.274)   (0.544)
Fruit, vegetables & cereals
 At mean                                0.642     0.496     0.676      1.154     0.969       0.707     0.587     1.016     0.195
                                       (0.346)   (0.338)              (0.541)   (0.337)               (0.191)   (0.361)
 At median                              0.627     0.473     0.673      1.157     0.967       0.706     0.569     1.016     0.198
                                       (0.361)   (0.353)              (0.553)   (0.364)               (0.200)   (0.380)
Other foods
 At mean                                -0.010    0.509     0.268      0.223     0.048       0.767     0.255     0.073     0.641
                                       (0.466)   (0.262)              (0.570)   (0.464)               (0.192)   (0.461)
 At median                              -0.085    0.458     0.282      0.164     -0.067      0.720     0.186     0.005     0.664
                                       (0.501)   (0.289)              (0.614)   (0.520)               (0.210)   (0.495)

Calorie and nutrient availability
Calorie
 At mean                                0.461     0.542     0.797      0.827     0.651       0.567     0.519     0.695     0.395
                                       (0.298)   (0.267)              (0.342)   (0.264)               (0.137)   (0.264)
 At median                              0.446     0.538     0.772      0.830     0.648       0.553     0.513     0.696     0.374
                                       (0.307)   (0.269)              (0.337)   (0.266)               (0.139)   (0.264)
Protein
 At mean                                1.399     1.046     0.268      1.943     1.466       0.603     1.062     1.652     0.183
                                       (0.336)   (0.302)              (0.872)   (0.468)               (0.173)   (0.451)
 At median                              1.429     1.046     0.252      2.001     1.486       0.596     1.067     1.686     0.184
                                       (0.361)   (0.304)              (0.926)   (0.488)               (0.186)   (0.475)
Fat
 At mean                                0.642     0.670     0.951      0.316     0.368       0.954     0.577     0.390     0.728
                                       (0.489)   (0.377)              (0.983)   (0.580)               (0.224)   (0.607)
 At median                              0.607     0.658     0.918      0.282     0.297       0.987     0.514     0.353     0.776
                                       (0.537)   (0.392)              (1.032)   (0.645)               (0.256)   (0.644)
Carbohydrate
 At mean                                0.151     0.384     0.591      0.706     0.522       0.680     0.353     0.550     0.473
                                       (0.426)   (0.324)              (0.472)   (0.335)               (0.183)   (0.335)
 At median                              0.121     0.357     0.598      0.703     0.504       0.661     0.345     0.535     0.501
                                       (0.442)   (0.338)              (0.477)   (0.348)               (0.185)   (0.345)
Fiber
 At mean                                0.600     0.420     0.652      1.204     0.942       0.672     0.459     1.041     0.141
                                       (0.394)   (0.412)              (0.646)   (0.419)               (0.227)   (0.422)
 At median                              0.589     0.398     0.643      1.206     0.938       0.672     0.449     1.042     0.147
                                       (0.405)   (0.428)              (0.654)   (0.445)               (0.231)   (0.436)

 Notes: Experimental estimates of income elasticities for food expenditure (top panel) and calorie and nutrient availability (bottom
panel). Columns (1)–(3) show separate elasticity estimates for female and male recipient households, and the p-values of the
difference between them; columns (4)–(6) show analogous estimates for monthly vs. lump-sum transfers, and columns (7)–(9) for
large vs. small transfers. Estimates in columns (1)–(9) are obtained using the linearized AIDS across villages, estimated in levels.
Each elasticity is evaluated both at the mean and median household budget shares. Standard errors are shown in parentheses.
Appendix

A     Additional tables

                                                                       Table A.1: Variable Descriptions
Outcome variables

 Food total (share)                    The share of household expenditure on meat, fish, dairy and egg, fruits, vegetables, pulses, roots and tubers, cereals, fats,
                                       spices, sugars, non-alcoholic drinks, and sweets.

 Meat, fish, dairy & egg (share)       The share of household expenditure on meat, fish, dairy and egg.

 Fruit, vegetables & cereals (share)   The share of household expenditure on fruits, vegetables, pulses, roots and tubers, and cereals.

 Other food (share)                    The share of household expenditure on fats, spices, sugars, non-alcoholic drinks, and sweets.

 Nutrient variables                    Each of the nutrient variables is the total nutrient available based on household’s monthly expenditures on meat, fish,
                                       dairy and egg, fruits, vegetables, pulses, roots and tubers, cereals, fats, spices, sugars, non-alcoholic drinks and sweets.

Other variables

 Total expenditure                     The total monthly spending on food and other non-food expenditures. Non-food expenditures include temptation goods,
                                       medical care, education expenditures, social expenditures and other non-durable expenditures.

 Temptation expenditure                The total monthly spending on alcohol, tobacco and lottery.

 Medical expenditure                   The total monthly spending on medical care for all household members including consultation fees, medicines, hospital
                                       costs, lab test costs, ambulance costs, and related transport.

 Education expenditure                 The total monthly spending for household members on school/college fees, uniforms, books, and other supplies.

 Social expenditure                    The total monthly spending by all members of the household on ceremonies, weddings, funerals, dowries / bride prices,
                                       charitable donations, village elder fees, and recreation or entertainment.

 Other non-durable expenditure         The total monthly spending on airtime, travel, clothing, personal items, household items, firewood, electricity and water.
         Table A.2: Sanderson-Windmeijer multivariate test for weak instruments
                                    Across village                                                Across village
                                                        Within village      Within village
                                       In levels                                                    In levels
                                                          In levels       In first-differences
                                   Linearized AIDS                                               No price control
 Log total expenditure
  F-statistic                            1.008              1.445                4.677                1.001
  Prob > F                               0.317              0.230                0.031                0.319

 Log total expenditure squared
  F-statistic                            1.004              1.438                2.988                0.992
  Prob > F                               0.318              0.231                0.084                0.321
 Notes: The table shows the F-statistics and p-values of the Sanderson-Windmeijer multivariate test for weak
instruments. We test the joint significance of included instruments, lnUCT and its square, in the first stage for
each of our four specifications. The table shows the conditional first-stage F-statistic and corresponding p-value
for each of the endogenous variables, log total expenditure and its square.
                                             Table A.3: Pre-analysis plan discrepancies

Pre-analysis Plan                                Modification                                     Reason

Specifications

 Expenditure elasticities with naïve approach;   Omitted quadratic term.                          LnUCT and its square are weak instruments
QUAIDS; nutrient elasticities with naïve                                                          when we include quadratic term.
approach and price controls

 Expenditure elasticities with linearized        Omitted first-difference version.                Space constraints; results similar.
QUAIDS; nutrient elasticities with price
controls

 Nutrient elasticities with naïve approach and   Changed from log-log to budget share form.       Equivalent estimation; consistency with
price controls                                                                                    expenditure elasticities.


Estimation samples

Experimental estimation sample                   Added specifications across villages in          No potential for confounds any possible
                                                 addition to the pre-specified within-village     within-village spillover effects.
                                                 specifications.

Non-experimental estimation sample               Added specifications using pure control          No potential for confounds any possible
                                                 sample in addition to the pre-specified          within-village spillover effects.
                                                 spillover sample
                                                 In within-village specifications, changed from   No time confound in comparing to
                                                 using baseline spillover household data to       experimental estimation.
                                                 using endline data
                       Table A.4: Comparison of treatment arms: within village in levels
                                        Female vs. male recipient    Monthly vs. lump-sum transfer       Large vs. small transfer
                                               (N = 742)                      (N = 812)                        (N = 940)
                                          (1)       (2)      (3)      (4)       (5)      (6)      (7)       (8)      (9)
                                        Female     Male Difference Monthly Lump-sum Difference Large       Small Difference
                                       recipient recipient p-value transfers transfers p-value transfers transfers p-value
Food expenditure
Food total
 At mean                                 0.778     0.754     0.856     0.998      0.807       0.338     0.711     0.880     0.203
                                        (0.099)   (0.085)             (0.151)    (0.131)               (0.078)   (0.107)
 At median                               0.777     0.758     0.884     0.998      0.811       0.347     0.715     0.881     0.205
                                        (0.099)   (0.084)             (0.153)    (0.128)               (0.077)   (0.107)
Meat, fish, dairy & egg
At mean                                  1.460     1.312     0.627     1.756      1.472       0.607     1.376     1.610     0.491
                                        (0.227)   (0.201)             (0.458)    (0.306)               (0.179)   (0.288)
 At median                               1.504     1.333     0.603     1.814      1.494       0.587     1.417     1.647     0.529
                                        (0.249)   (0.214)             (0.493)    (0.320)               (0.199)   (0.306)
Fruit, vegetables & cereals
 At mean                                 0.621     0.466     0.505     0.771      0.622       0.674     0.495     0.670     0.462
                                        (0.161)   (0.167)             (0.281)    (0.218)               (0.136)   (0.195)
 At median                               0.605     0.442     0.501     0.767      0.591       0.636     0.473     0.652     0.471
                                        (0.168)   (0.175)             (0.287)    (0.236)               (0.142)   (0.205)
Other foods
 At mean                                 0.414     0.760     0.145     0.742      0.551       0.639     0.436     0.618     0.488
                                        (0.181)   (0.154)             (0.318)    (0.256)               (0.137)   (0.223)
 At median                               0.371     0.735     0.158     0.723      0.497       0.613     0.384     0.590     0.467
                                        (0.194)   (0.170)             (0.342)    (0.286)               (0.150)   (0.240)

Calorie and nutrient availability
Calorie
 At mean                                 0.629     0.672     0.787     0.864      0.725       0.551     0.576     0.778     0.212
                                        (0.122)   (0.098)             (0.174)    (0.156)               (0.095)   (0.131)
 At median                               0.619     0.670     0.752     0.866      0.723       0.538     0.570     0.779     0.200
                                        (0.126)   (0.099)             (0.172)    (0.157)               (0.096)   (0.131)
Protein
 At mean                                 1.168     0.948     0.258     1.434      1.215       0.548     1.080     1.318     0.264
                                        (0.147)   (0.127)             (0.306)    (0.197)               (0.107)   (0.185)
 At median                               1.181     0.948     0.252     1.460      1.224       0.539     1.085     1.334     0.270
                                        (0.158)   (0.127)             (0.325)    (0.205)               (0.114)   (0.194)
Fat
 At mean                                 0.796     0.885     0.727     0.759      0.872       0.800     0.743     0.843     0.724
                                        (0.196)   (0.165)             (0.363)    (0.261)               (0.150)   (0.239)
 At median                               0.776     0.881     0.703     0.747      0.858       0.817     0.705     0.833     0.676
                                        (0.215)   (0.171)             (0.381)    (0.291)               (0.173)   (0.254)
Carbohydrate
 At mean                                 0.466     0.563     0.621     0.788      0.580       0.471     0.417     0.653     0.255
                                        (0.152)   (0.124)             (0.212)    (0.196)               (0.124)   (0.167)
 At median                               0.447     0.544     0.632     0.786      0.564       0.453     0.409     0.642     0.274
                                        (0.157)   (0.129)             (0.214)    (0.203)               (0.125)   (0.172)
Fiber
 At mean                                 0.560     0.406     0.535     0.823      0.655       0.654     0.425     0.711     0.253
                                        (0.176)   (0.174)             (0.298)    (0.227)               (0.146)   (0.203)
 At median                               0.547     0.383     0.521     0.821      0.633       0.628     0.414     0.701     0.267
                                        (0.181)   (0.181)             (0.302)    (0.241)               (0.149)   (0.211)

 Notes: Experimental estimates of income elasticities for food expenditure (top panel) and calorie and nutrient availability (bottom
panel). Columns (1)–(3) show separate elasticity estimates for female and male recipient households, and the p-values of the
difference between them; columns (4)–(6) show analogous estimates for monthly vs. lump-sum transfers, and columns (7)–(9) for
large vs. small transfers. Estimates in columns (1)–(9) are obtained using the within-village specification estimated in levels. Each
elasticity is evaluated both at the mean and median household budget shares. Standard errors are shown in parentheses.
                Table A.5: Comparison of treatment arms: within village in first differences
                                        Female vs. male recipient    Monthly vs. lump-sum transfer      Large vs. small transfer
                                               (N = 742)                      (N = 812)                       (N = 940)
                                         (1)       (2)      (3)      (4)       (5)      (6)      (7)       (8)      (9)
                                       Female     Male Difference Monthly Lump-sum Difference Large       Small Difference
                                      recipient recipient p-value transfers transfers p-value transfers transfers p-value
Food expenditure
Food total
 At mean                                0.747     0.584     0.439      0.784     0.867       0.745     0.746     0.824     0.630
                                       (0.104)   (0.184)              (0.218)   (0.135)               (0.089)   (0.134)
 At median                              0.755     0.598     0.442      0.790     0.871       0.745     0.754     0.829     0.629
                                       (0.101)   (0.178)              (0.211)   (0.131)               (0.086)   (0.129)
Meat, fish, dairy & egg
At mean                                 1.353     1.240     0.831      1.628     1.064       0.456     1.523     1.265     0.590
                                       (0.317)   (0.426)              (0.642)   (0.400)               (0.278)   (0.388)
 At median                              1.397     1.256     0.807      1.675     1.070       0.460     1.545     1.290     0.621
                                       (0.356)   (0.454)              (0.690)   (0.438)               (0.290)   (0.425)
Fruit, vegetables & cereals
 At mean                                0.524     0.265     0.520      0.438     0.889       0.370     0.498     0.697     0.499
                                       (0.198)   (0.351)              (0.441)   (0.243)               (0.166)   (0.243)
 At median                              0.498     0.208     0.502      0.406     0.883       0.370     0.457     0.684     0.463
                                       (0.209)   (0.378)              (0.465)   (0.257)               (0.180)   (0.253)
Other foods
 At mean                                0.790     0.725     0.830      0.906     0.704       0.643     0.749     0.776     0.918
                                       (0.157)   (0.257)              (0.353)   (0.252)               (0.128)   (0.231)
 At median                              0.782     0.700     0.801      0.899     0.685       0.644     0.728     0.761     0.906
                                       (0.163)   (0.281)              (0.377)   (0.269)               (0.139)   (0.247)

Calorie and nutrient availability
Calorie
 At mean                                0.740     0.571     0.479      0.931     0.892       0.888     0.682     0.900     0.237
                                       (0.119)   (0.208)              (0.228)   (0.160)               (0.107)   (0.151)
 At median                              0.743     0.575     0.479      0.931     0.894       0.892     0.685     0.901     0.240
                                       (0.118)   (0.206)              (0.227)   (0.157)               (0.105)   (0.150)
Protein
 At mean                                0.958     0.752     0.485      1.303     1.140       0.684     0.943     1.195     0.313
                                       (0.166)   (0.244)              (0.333)   (0.222)               (0.133)   (0.211)
 At median                              0.959     0.761     0.489      1.297     1.142       0.696     0.945     1.194     0.312
                                       (0.162)   (0.235)              (0.326)   (0.225)               (0.128)   (0.210)
Fat
 At mean                                1.028     0.996     0.928      1.508     1.249       0.658     0.923     1.326     0.243
                                       (0.207)   (0.283)              (0.503)   (0.304)               (0.167)   (0.303)
 At median                              1.031     0.995     0.925      1.559     1.275       0.661     0.917     1.361     0.243
                                       (0.235)   (0.302)              (0.554)   (0.336)               (0.180)   (0.335)
Carbohydrate
 At mean                                0.629     0.427     0.527      0.700     0.730       0.941     0.497     0.719     0.395
                                       (0.161)   (0.277)              (0.343)   (0.217)               (0.151)   (0.212)
 At median                              0.628     0.408     0.505      0.692     0.732       0.923     0.469     0.719     0.348
                                       (0.162)   (0.286)              (0.352)   (0.215)               (0.159)   (0.212)
Fiber
 At mean                                0.551     0.297     0.541      0.836     1.003       0.724     0.391     0.919     0.099
                                       (0.212)   (0.358)              (0.390)   (0.268)               (0.197)   (0.252)
 At median                              0.510     0.237     0.546      0.819     1.003       0.721     0.362     0.913     0.106
                                       (0.231)   (0.388)              (0.430)   (0.284)               (0.206)   (0.272)

 Notes: Experimental estimates of income elasticities for food expenditure (top panel) and calorie and nutrient availability (bottom
panel). Columns (1)–(3) show separate elasticity estimates for female and male recipient households, and the p-values of the
difference between them; columns (4)–(6) show analogous estimates for monthly vs. lump-sum transfers, and columns (7)–(9)
for large vs. small transfers. Estimates in columns (1)–(9) are obtained using the within-village specification estimated in first-
differences. Each elasticity is evaluated both at the mean and median household budget shares. Standard errors are shown in
parentheses.
                Table A.6: Comparison of treatment arms: across villages, no price controls
                                        Female vs. male recipient    Monthly vs. lump-sum transfer       Large vs. small transfer
                                               (N = 703)                      (N = 775)                        (N = 903)
                                          (1)       (2)      (3)      (4)       (5)      (6)      (7)       (8)      (9)
                                        Female     Male Difference Monthly Lump-sum Difference Large       Small Difference
                                       recipient recipient p-value transfers transfers p-value transfers transfers p-value
Food expenditure
Food total
 At mean                                 0.656     0.657     0.995     1.077      0.758       0.379     0.648     0.880     0.283
                                        (0.262)   (0.231)             (0.363)    (0.273)               (0.125)   (0.247)
 At median                               0.654     0.662     0.976     1.078      0.763       0.387     0.652     0.880     0.286
                                        (0.264)   (0.228)             (0.367)    (0.267)               (0.124)   (0.246)
Meat, fish, dairy & egg
At mean                                  1.696     1.475     0.659     2.227      1.610       0.665     1.322     1.836     0.438
                                        (0.587)   (0.418)             (1.258)    (0.756)               (0.269)   (0.672)
 At median                               1.764     1.507     0.639     2.322      1.639       0.654     1.358     1.887     0.453
                                        (0.644)   (0.447)             (1.355)    (0.791)               (0.298)   (0.713)
Fruit, vegetables & cereals
 At mean                                 0.498     0.257     0.619     0.924      0.683       0.708     0.465     0.786     0.450
                                        (0.437)   (0.452)             (0.683)    (0.510)               (0.217)   (0.480)
 At median                               0.477     0.223     0.616     0.923      0.657       0.691     0.441     0.775     0.456
                                        (0.456)   (0.473)             (0.697)    (0.552)               (0.226)   (0.505)
Other foods
 At mean                                 -0.072    0.624     0.225     0.286      0.085       0.782     0.291     0.147     0.755
                                        (0.556)   (0.276)             (0.671)    (0.609)               (0.203)   (0.528)
 At median                               -0.152    0.585     0.234     0.231      -0.025      0.747     0.226     0.084     0.775
                                        (0.598)   (0.305)             (0.722)    (0.683)               (0.222)   (0.566)

Calorie and nutrient availability
Calorie
 At mean                                 0.359     0.518     0.659     0.739      0.538       0.595     0.468     0.626     0.520
                                        (0.358)   (0.258)             (0.378)    (0.346)               (0.154)   (0.300)
 At median                               0.341     0.515     0.638     0.743      0.535       0.581     0.461     0.627     0.498
                                        (0.368)   (0.259)             (0.373)    (0.348)               (0.156)   (0.300)
Protein
 At mean                                 1.422     1.040     0.243     2.012      1.525       0.634     1.047     1.719     0.202
                                        (0.358)   (0.299)             (0.988)    (0.559)               (0.181)   (0.538)
 At median                               1.454     1.041     0.230     2.075      1.548       0.627     1.051     1.756     0.202
                                        (0.385)   (0.300)             (1.049)    (0.582)               (0.194)   (0.566)
Fat
 At mean                                 0.653     0.715     0.895     0.368      0.463       0.918     0.606     0.449     0.770
                                        (0.495)   (0.361)             (0.989)    (0.590)               (0.218)   (0.601)
 At median                               0.619     0.704     0.867     0.336      0.403       0.946     0.548     0.415     0.815
                                        (0.543)   (0.375)             (1.039)    (0.656)               (0.250)   (0.638)
Carbohydrate
 At mean                                 0.026     0.363     0.485     0.579      0.345       0.655     0.298     0.442     0.641
                                        (0.479)   (0.299)             (0.498)    (0.429)               (0.193)   (0.371)
 At median                               -0.008    0.336     0.491     0.574      0.320       0.634     0.289     0.424     0.672
                                        (0.496)   (0.311)             (0.503)    (0.445)               (0.195)   (0.383)
Fiber
 At mean                                 0.488     0.282     0.661     1.078      0.757       0.656     0.383     0.899     0.250
                                        (0.444)   (0.457)             (0.737)    (0.534)               (0.247)   (0.497)
 At median                               0.473     0.254     0.652     1.079      0.742       0.648     0.372     0.895     0.259
                                        (0.457)   (0.476)             (0.746)    (0.567)               (0.251)   (0.515)

 Notes: Experimental estimates of income elasticities for food expenditure (top panel) and calorie and nutrient availability (bottom
panel). Columns (1)–(3) show separate elasticity estimates for female and male recipient households, and the p-values of the
difference between them; columns (4)–(6) show analogous estimates for monthly vs. lump-sum transfers, and columns (7)–(9) for
large vs. small transfers. Estimates in columns (1)–(9) are obtained using the across-village specification estimated in levels. Each
elasticity is evaluated both at the mean and median household budget shares. Standard errors are shown in parentheses.
B    Testing differences across specifications using nested
     models

To test the differences between the experimental and non-experimental version of
equation 1, we use the following setup, within which both versions are nested:

                                    ∗               ∗
          ωhv = α0 + α1 s1 + β1 ln(zhv )s1 + β2 ln(zhv )s2 + γ1 (ln pfv − ln pnv )s1
                                                                                       (10)
                + γ2 (ln pfv − ln pnv )s2 + ξ10 Xhv s1 + ξ20 Xhv s2 + εhv

Here, s1 and s2 are indicator variables denoting the sample to which each observa-
tion belongs. Equation 10 is estimated on a sample that combines the two sample
restrictions. One of the two interactions terms between log expenditure and sample
indicator is instrumented. As an illustration, let s1 be an indicator variable for the
sample in the experimental version (treatment and pure control households) and
s2 be an indicator variable for the sample in the non-experimental version (pure
                                                   ∗ )s is then instrumented with
control households only). The interaction term ln(zhv  1
ln(uhv )s1 . β1 is then equivalent to β in equation 1 estimated experimentally, and β2
is equivalent to β in equation 1 estimated non-experimentally. A test of equivalence
          β1              β2
between   ωhv   + 1 and   ωhv   + 1 produces the difference p-values we report. We proceed
analogously for testing differences between experimental and non-experimental ver-
sions of the remaining specifications, and between treatment arms such as male vs.
female recipient households.




                                                 40
