                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  LABOR MARKET POWER

                                        David W. Berger
                                       Kyle F. Herkenhoff
                                        Simon Mongey

                                      Working Paper 25719
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25719


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           March 2019, Revised October 2019




We thank Costas Arkolakis, Chris Edmond, Oleg Itskohki, Matt Notowidigdo, Richard Rogerson,
Jim Schmitz, and Chris Tonetti, for helpful comments. We thank seminar participants at the SED
2018, SITE, Briq (Bonn), FRB Minneapolis, Princeton, Stanford, UC Berkeley, Rochester, BFI
Firms and Workers Workshop, Paris School of Economics, Toulouse School of Economics,
EIEF, Barcelona GSE Summer Forum. This research was supported by the National Science
Foundation (Award No. SES-1824422). Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau. All results
have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed. The views expressed
in this study are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the position of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, or National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by David W. Berger, Kyle F. Herkenhoff, and Simon Mongey. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Labor Market Power
David W. Berger, Kyle F. Herkenhoff, and Simon Mongey
NBER Working Paper No. 25719
March 2019, Revised October 2019
JEL No. E2,J2,J42

                                        ABSTRACT

We develop a tractable quantitative, general equilibrium, oligopsony model of the labor market
that we use to measure the macroeconomic implications of labor market power. Strategic
interaction complicates inference of parameters that are key to this exercise. To address this
challenge, we contribute estimates of market share dependent wage and employment responses to
state corporate tax changes in U.S. Census data, which we combine with the structure of the
model. We validate against the distribution of local labor market concentration and quasi-
experimental evidence on productivity-wage pass-through. Relative to a counterfactual
competitive economy, and accounting for transition dynamics, we measure welfare losses from
labor market power to be roughly 5 percent of lifetime consumption. Minimum wage and merger
experiments caution that concentration and welfare may not negatively comove.

David W. Berger                               Simon Mongey
Department of Economics                       Kenneth C. Griffin Department of Economics
Duke University                               University of Chicago
419 Chapel Drive                              1126 E. 59th Street
Social Science building 231                   Chicago, IL 60637
Durham, NC 27708                              and NBER
and NBER                                      mongey@uchicago.edu
david.berger@duke.edu

Kyle F. Herkenhoff
University of Minnesota
Department of Economics
4-101 Hanson Hall
1925 Fourth Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
kyle.herkenhoff@gmail.com
    A recent empirical literature has documented important deviations from textbook perfectly competi-
tive labor markets, leading to a growing concern that “labor market power” may generate large welfare
losses.1 One intuitive source of market power is that there may be few firms in a local labor market and
these firms understand that their hiring and wage setting decisions affect the local labor market’s overall
wage and employment levels. Firms that have a significant impact on local labor market conditions and
internalize this fact, maximize profits by hiring fewer workers in order to pay lower wages.
    In this paper, we contribute a tractable, quantitative, general equilibrium model of oligopsony in the
labor market that delivers a structurally consistent formulation of this notion of labor market power. The
model then guides how we measure labor market power. Strategic interaction complicates inference of
parameters that are key to this exercise. To address this challenge, our identification strategy integrates
new reduced form estimates of market share dependent wage and employment responses to state corpo-
rate tax changes—obtained by extending Giroud and Rauh (2019) in U.S. Census data—into a structural
estimation of the model. We then use the model to measure the welfare and macroeconomic implications
of labor market power.
    We have three main results. First, the model implies substantial welfare losses from labor market
power, both across steady states and along the transition path to a competitive economy, which range
from 3 to 8 percent of lifetime consumption. Second, despite these large losses, we find that labor market
power has not contributed to the declining labor share. Despite the backdrop of an overall increase in
national concentration, we find that the model-consistent measure of local labor market concentration
has actually declined over the last 35 years, indicating that most local labor markets are actually more
competitive than they were in the 1970s. Third, we draw lessons from two counterfactuals that are
important to discussions of labor market power: a minimum wage and mergers. Our key finding is
that both counterfactuals yield a non-monotonic relationship between concentration and welfare. We
conclude that an observed increase in concentration in a market cannot be used to make statements
about welfare without understanding driving forces.
    Our model accommodates two natural features of the data. Local labor markets are concentrated. We
therefore depart from standard models of atomistic monopsony (Burdett and Mortensen, 1998; Manning,
2003; Card, Cardoso, Heining, and Kline, 2018; Lamadon, Mogstad, and Setzler, 2019) by incorporating
strategic interaction between a finite set of employers in each labor market (Atkeson and Burstein, 2008).
The macroeconomy consists of many local labor markets. We therefore provide a general equilibrium
structure that aggregates these markets.
    Our benchmark oligopsony model features two sources of market power. The first is classical monop-
sony: firms face upward sloping labor supply curves, which they internalize. Optimal wages are a mark-
down relative to competitive wages, i.e. the marginal revenue product of labor. Second, and the focus
of this paper, is oligopsony: firms are non-atomistic and compete strategically for workers. Equilibrium
markdowns are wider at the firms with the most labor market power. Therefore, understanding the
welfare consequences of labor market power requires understanding how these markdowns vary across
   1 For example:  Azar, Marinescu, and Steinbaum (2017), Benmelech, Bergman, and Kim (2018), Card, Cardoso, Heining, and
Kline (2018), and Lamadon, Mogstad, and Setzler (2019).


                                                           1
                                              Figure 1: Estimation strategy

firms. In our model the markdown is an exact function of the structural labor supply elasticity that a firm
faces in equilibrium which—via a closed form—depends on the firm’s observable labor market share
and parameters that determine substitutability of labor across- (θ) and within- (η) markets.
    We estimate these key parameters using U.S. Census Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) micro
data (see Figure 1). Given a quasi-experiment that yields an identified shock to labor demand, a re-
searcher can estimate reduced form labor supply elasticities off of relative employment and wage responses.
The literature so far has assumed a special case of our model: firms do not behave strategically, ratio-
nalized by infinitely many firms in each labor market.2 We show that in abstracting from competitor
best responses this assumption implies that empirically estimated reduced form elasticities are equal to
structural elasticities, so one can move directly from empirical analysis to welfare analysis. However, in
the more general case of finitely many firms, there is no closed form mapping between (observed) re-
duced form elasticities and (unobserved) structural elasticities.3 A model is needed to account for the
equilibrium best responses that determine the mapping between underlying structural parameters and
the reduced form elasticities we observe.
    Our approach is therefore indirect inference. Our quasi-experiment is an extension of Giroud and
Rauh (2019). We exploit corporate tax rate changes to estimate reduced form elasticities, extending cur-
rent methodology to characterize how they relate to a firm’s share of the local labor market. We then
simulate this quasi-experiment in our model and find the structural parameters that minimize the dis-
tance between the profile of reduced form elasticities by market share in model and data. We also match
concentration in the data, allowing for the possibility that the assumption of unconcentrated markets
is valid. The estimated model is then used to compute structural elasticities, markdowns, and conduct


    2 Papersin the literature that study strategic behavior have been theoretical, which we discuss below.
    3 Thefinitely many firms case is indeed more general. That is, a ‘competitive’ monopsony model is indeed a special case of
our model. Taking the number of firms in all markets in our model toward infinity smoothly yields the ‘competitive’ economy
in which there is no strategic interaction. We let the data tell us where we are on this spectrum between one and infinitely many
firms per market.


                                                               2
welfare counterfactuals.4
    This departure from the literature contributes three additional results. First, in the data, we iden-
tify systematically different responses of firms to labor demand shocks: at firms with smaller market
shares, we estimate larger reduced form labor supply elasticities. Second, in our particular experiment
reduced form elasticities at small firms are around 2, yet welfare-relevant structural elasticities are around
5. Interpreting the data through the model is necessary for quantifying the high labor supply elastici-
ties faced by small firms. Third, we explore bias in more common empirical settings that exploit purely
idiosyncratic variation. Here results are different; when we account for competitors’ best responses, the
structural elasticities faced by firms are always less than implied by empirically estimated reduced form
elasticities, often by a large amount. Since reduced form estimates overstate structural elasticities, a re-
searcher using the former for welfare analysis would infer flatter labor supply curves that understate the
degree of labor market power.
    We validate the estimated model against two sets of non-targeted moments that enter the discus-
sion of labor market power: (1) the weighted and unweighted distribution of concentration across mar-
kets, and (2) wage-pass through. First, in both model and data, the payroll weighted average of market
wage-bill Herfindahls (HHI) is significantly lower than the unweighted average. The ratio, which we do
not target, is approximately 3.2 in the data and 2.4 in the model: concentrated markets are small mar-
kets.5 Second, we carefully replicate the quasi-experiment that identifies reduced-form estimates of pass-
through in Kline, Petkova, Williams, and Zidar (2019). Pass-through from value added per worker to
wages is 79.5 percent, which is larger but conceptually comparable to the 47.0 percent estimate of Kline,
Petkova, Williams, and Zidar (2019). In classical monopsony models that ignore strategic complemen-
tarities, this measure of pass-through would be 100 percent.6 That the model reproduces non-degenerate
pass-through rates from value added per worker to wages is evidence that strategic interactions play an
important role in wage setting.
    With our model calibrated to aggregates and local labor markets, we define the welfare loss due to
labor market power as the consumption subsidy required to make households indifferent between the
oligopsonistic economy and a competitive equilibrium. Comparing steady states at an aggregate Frisch
elasticity of labor supply of 0.5, we measure a welfare loss of 5.4 percent.7 Losses are slightly lower
(4.1 percent) when accounting for macroeconomic transition dynamics between these two labor market
structures. Competitive equilibrium wages, output and labor supply are significantly greater.
    The competitive equilibrium also features higher concentration. Roughly half of the output gains in
    4 This   procedure has a direct counterpart in the estimation of linearized macroeconomic state-space systems: AXt =
BE[Xt+1 ] + CXt−1 + Dε t . The structural model implies a reduced form VAR representation: Xt+1 = HXt + Fet+1 The researcher
then estimates the reduced form on the data to obtain reduced form shocks {et }tT=0 . The researcher then simulates structural
shocks {ε t }tT=0 in the model and jointly estimates structural parameters { A, B, C, D } and structural shocks {ε t }tT=0 such that the
model implied reduced form shocks match those obtained from the data.
    5 In the data, markets with only one firm—and so an HHI of one—account for 15 percent of market but only 0.4 percent

of employment, so are uninformative of labor market conditions faced by most workers. Our theory consistent measure of
concentration that reflects this. In the model, employment in these regions is small as monopsonists pay low wages and hire
few workers. Figure 7 provides the distribution of weighted and unweighted market concentration in both model and data.
    6 See papers described in Manning (2003) and Card, Cardoso, Heining, and Kline (2018).
    7 Under an aggregate Frisch of 0.2 (0.8), welfare losses are 3 (8).



                                                                   3
competitive equilibrium are driven by a reallocation of workers from smaller, less productive firms to
larger, more productive firms. In the oligopsonistic economy, large firms have more labor market power,
so are inefficiently small. A by-product of this efficient reallocation is a sharp increase in concentration,
along with significant increases in welfare, consumption, and output.
    Despite large welfare losses from labor market power, we find that declining labor market concen-
tration between 1976 and 2014 increased labor’s share of income. First, letting our model guide mea-
surement, we show that the distribution of market-level wage-bill Herfindahls is a sufficient statistic
for labor’s share of income.8 Second, the model implies that when aggregating these micro measures,
market-level payroll shares should be used as weights. We construct this model relevant concentration
measure directly from the Census LBD and find it to have declined from 0.20 to 0.14 between 1976 and
2014.9 Combined with our estimates of model parameters (θ, η ), and exploiting a closed form link be-
tween our sufficient statistic and the labor share, this decline in concentration would have implied a
counterfactual 3.13 percentage point increase in labor’s share of income. Changing labor market concen-
tration is not behind the declining labor share.
    Given large welfare losses from labor market power in the U.S., we study two applications—a na-
tional minimum wage and mergers. The former is often proposed as an antidote to labor market power;
the latter a potential culprit for changes in labor market power.
    First, minimum wages have been studied extensively in applied labor economics (e.g. Card and
Krueger, 1994) and historically motivated the development of monopsonistic models (Boal and Ransom,
1997; Manning, 2003). We provide a new theoretical characterization of how minimum wages affect
firm-level and worker-level behavior in an environment with decreasing returns to scale and strategic
complementarities. Workers reallocate away from unproductive fims as the minimum wage increases.
Efficacy of the minimum wage trades off reallocating workers away from small, unproductive firms,
against the additional market power this delivers to larger firms. These opposing forces lead welfare to
be hump-shaped in the minimum wage, despite monotonically increasing concentration.
    In the second application of our model, we consider mergers. On the one hand, merging the two
largest firms in each market decreases welfare and increases concentration. On the other hand, merging
the two smallest firms in each market increases welfare, but still increases concentration. Merged firms
have more market power, so lower wages and employment. If the merging firms are productive (unpro-
ductive) this increases (decreases) misallocation, decreasing (increasing) output. Our estimates imply
that mergers between productive firms could generate maximum welfare losses of up to 2 percent. We
further explore merger empirics, welfare and optimal policy in Berger, Herkenhoff, and Mongey (2019).
These applications, and our competitive equilibrium counterfactual caution strongly against making in-
ferences about changes in welfare from changes in concentration.
    We next review the literature and then proceed as follows. Section 1 provides new statistics char-
acterizing the evolution of U.S. labor market concentration. Sections 2 and 3 lay out the model and

   8 The  market-level wage-bill Herfindahl is the sum of the squared payroll shares of all firms within the labor market
   9 The  effective number of firms in a typical labor market was equivalent to 5.0 equally sized firms per market in 1976, and
7.1 equally sized firms per market in 2014.


                                                              4
characterize the equilibrium. In Section 4 we provide empirical estimates of the relationship between
reduced form labor supply elasticities and market share, then combine this relationship and our new
concentration statistics to parameterize the model. Section 5 validates the model against cross-sectional
concentration statistics and pass-through estimates. Section 6 presents our two measurement exercises:
welfare and the labor share. Section 7 applies the model to study minimum wage and merger policy.

Literature.      Our work is related to a growing literature that explores the implications of market power.
In the product market, Gutiérrez and Philippon (2016); Autor, Dorn, Katz, Patterson, and Van Reenen
(2017) all document an increase in national sales concentration and a fall in the labor share across many
industries, while De Loecker and Eeckhout (2017) document an increase in product market power more
directly by measuring firm markups. Consistent with our findings, concurrent work by Rossi-Hansberg,
Sarte, and Trachter (2018) document declining regional employment concentration, despite rising na-
tional concentration. In the labor market, several concurrent studies have documented cross-sectional
and time-series patterns of U.S. Herfindahls in employment (Benmelech, Bergman, and Kim, 2018; Rinz,
2018; Hershbein and Macaluso, 2018) and vacancies (Azar, Marinescu, Steinbaum, and Taska, 2019; Azar,
Marinescu, and Steinbaum, 2017). Brooks, Kaboski, Li, and Qian (2019) combine theory and Chinese
and Indian data to study monopsony by a firm or collusive group of firms and find adverse effects of
monopsony power on labor’s share of income. Our contributions to this literature are (i) a new, model
consistent, measure of U.S. labor market concentration, which we use to (ii) quantitatively measure the
welfare losses associated with labor market power. In general the exercises in our paper issue a warning
against qualitatively mapping changes in concentration into a change in welfare.
    Our work is also related to a large literature which has measured reduced form labor supply elas-
ticities of individual firms (Staiger, Spetz, and Phibbs, 2010; Card, Cardoso, Heining, and Kline, 2018;
Suárez Serrato and Zidar, 2016; Dube, Jacobs, Naidu, and Suri, 2019). We provide new estimates of
measured labor supply elasticities by building on the approach of Giroud and Rauh (2019), who find
significant effects of state corporate taxes on firm-state employment.10 Our contributions to this empiri-
cal literature are (i) estimates of the share-dependency of measured elasticities which highlight that large
firms have more market power (ii) to demonstrate that if markets have firms that interact strategically,
there can be a large disconnect between measured labor supply elasticities and the structural elasticities
that are relevant for welfare. This is a substantive point: the empirical literature cited above typically
measures labor supply elasticities that are small. If structural elasticities were equal to these reduced
form elasticities, then labor market power would be extremely high.11 We describe empirical designs
under which (i) reduced form estimates of labor supply elasticities may be biased downwards relative
to structural elasticities, and even then, (ii) that structural elasticities vary systematically with the firm’s
labor market share, reconciling the range and level of empirical estimates.
   10 Conceptually,  our approach is related to papers that estimate exchange rate pass-through (Amiti, Itskhoki, and Konings,
2014, 2016). The main difference is this literature This literature focuses exclusively on prices whereas we look at both price
and quantity responses.
    11 Consider Manning (2011) discussing the widely cited natural experiments of Staiger, Spetz, and Phibbs (2010) and others:

“Looking at these studies, one clearly comes away with the impression not that it is hard to find evidence of monopsony power but that the
estimates are so enormous to be an embarrassment even for those who believe this is the right approach to labour markets.”


                                                                    5
    Finally, our work is related to the large literature that models monopsony in labor markets. We de-
part from benchmark models of monopsony described in (Burdett and Mortensen, 1998; Manning, 2003;
Card, Cardoso, Heining, and Kline, 2018; Lamadon, Mogstad, and Setzler, 2019) by explicitly modeling
a finite set of employers that compete strategically for workers. We demonstrate that this addition is
crucial for identification: strategic interaction and finiteness of firms jointly imply that reduced form em-
pirical estimates of labor supply elasticities from any shock cannot be used to infer the (structural) labor
supply elasticities firm face—and hence identify preference parameters—except in the limiting case of
monopsonistic competition between infinitesimally sized firms. Additionally, our assumptions allow us
to (i) interpret granular measures of concentration, such as Herfindahl indexes, and (ii) accommodate a
Walrasian equilibrium as a meaningful counterfactual, in which strategic behavior is shut down.
    Our main quantitative contribution is to build a general equilibrium model of oligopsony and mea-
sure the welfare costs of current levels of U.S. labor market power.12 Our framework extends the general
tools developed in Atkeson and Burstein (2008) to the labor market, adding multiple non-trivial fea-
tures: capital, corporate taxes, decreasing returns to scale, set the model in general equilibrium, and
study transition dynamics between steady states. Recent related work by Jarosch, Nimcsik, and Sorkin
(2019) considers non-atomistic firms, but adapts a random search model to construct a search-theoretic
measure of labor market power. We view our papers as complementary.
    Our model features firm-specific upward sloping labor supply curves. This is supported by numer-
ous recent studies using (quasi-)experimental approaches.13 Belot, Kircher, and Muller (2017) randomly
assign higher wages to observationally equivalent vacancies on an actual job-board and find that higher
wage vacancies attract more applicants. Dube, Jacobs, Naidu, and Suri (2019) and Banfi and Villena-
Roldan (2018) also find job-specific upward sloping labor supply curves in well-identified contexts.14
    Finally, our quantitative model features strategic complementarity between oligopsonists. Strategic
complementarity in labor markets is not new to the theoretical literature. The earliest models used to
motivate monopsony power were Robinson (1933) and the spatial economies of Hotelling (1990) and
Salop (1979).15 Our contribution, relative to these stylized single-market models, is a quantitative gen-
eral equilibrium framework. We incorporate firm heterogeneity, decreasing returns to scale, and general
equilibrium across multiple markets, making it rich enough to be estimated on U.S. Census data. More-
over, by modeling a finite set of employers, our model may be used in the future to understand the wage
and welfare effects of mergers, firm exit, and other shocks to local labor market competition.




   12 Our   work is therefore related to a literature measuring the welfare consequences of misallocation. There the focus has
been on the product market (Baqaee and Farhi, 2017; Edmond, Midrigan, and Xu, 2018), and measures misallocation via het-
erogeneous markups. Our paper measures misallocation from heterogeneous mark-downs.
    13 See Ashenfelter, Farber, and Ransom (2010) for a summary of prior papers.
    14 We are unaware of experimental evidence regarding the market-share dependence of the elasticity of labor supply.
    15 Boal and Ransom (1997) and Bhaskar, Manning, and To (2002) provide excellent summaries of strategic complementarity

in spatial models of the labor market.


                                                              6
1     Labor market concentration: 1976 and 2014
We provide new statistics summarizing labor market concentration in 1976 and 2014 using the Census
Longitudinal Business Database (LBD).16 The LBD provides high quality measures of employment, lo-
cation, and industry with nearly universal coverage of the non-farm business sector. Data are carefully
linked over time at the establishment and firm level.
Market.       In order to compute concentration we must define a market. In our model, a market will have
two features: (i) a worker drawn at random from the economy will have a greater attachment to one
market than others on the basis of idiosyncratic preferences, but will be able to move across markets
nonetheless, and (ii) firms within a market compete strategically.
     With these assumptions in mind and given what we can observe in the LBD, we define a local labor
market as a 3-digit NAICS (NAICS3) industry within a Commuting Zone (CZ).17 Examples of adjacent
3-digit NAICS codes are subsectors 323-325: ‘Printing and Related Support Activities’, ‘Petroleum and Coal
Products Manufacturing’ and ‘Chemical Manufacturing’ which we regard as suitably different. Examples
of commuting zones include the collection of counties surrounding downtown Minneapolis and those
surrounding Duluth.18
Industries.       A key step in our analysis is to restrict our attention to tradeable goods industries. Our aim
is to cleanly study labor market power without the potential confounds of product market power. Our
assumption is that the spot market for tradeable goods is outside the local labor market, which we make
explicit in our model. We keep the industries specialized in tradeable goods as identified by Delgado,
Bryden, and Zyontz (2014).19 Appendix D verifies that the trends we report for these sectors are also
true for the economy as a whole.
Firm. Finally, we define a firm in a local labor market as the collection of establishments operated by
that firm. We aggregate employment and annual payroll of all establishments owned by the same firm
within the same NAICS3-CZ market.20 For each resulting firm-market-year observation, we observe
employment, payroll, and herein define the wage as payroll per worker. Appendix C provides more
details on the sample restriction and data definitions.


    16 1976 and 2014 are the first and last years of data availability in the LBD ‘snapshot’ for, which our project had access.
                                                                                                                              At this
point in the review process for this paper, we have only disclosed these two years, but in future revisions are able to release and
plot the full time series between these points. For additional information regarding the data sources in this paper see Appendix
C.
   17 Using BLS Occupational Employment Statistics microdata, Handwerker and Dey (2018) show that when it comes to con-

centration there is little practical difference in defining a market at the occupation-city level rather than the industry-city level
as these two measures are highly correlated. In particular the across-city correlation of Herfindahl-Hirschman Indices at the
CBSA-occupation and CBSA-industry level is 0.97.
   18 Many more examples are provided in Tables C1 and C2 in Appendix C.
   19 See their Table 2, in which they rank 2-digit NAICS sectors by the fraction of employment in tradeable sub-industries.

The 2 digit industries we use have more than 70 percent of their employment in tradeable sub-industries. These include 11
(Agriculture), 21 (Mining), 31-33 (Manufacturing), 42 (Wholesale trade) and 55 (Management). When identifying industries
throughout the paper, we use the time consistent 2007 NAICS codes provided by Fort and Klimek (2016).
   20 Firms are identified by the LBD variable firmid.



                                                                   7
                  A. Firm-market-level averages                                                          1976       2014
                  Total firm pay ($1,000’s)                                                          470.90      1839.00
                  Total firm employment                                                               37.09         27.96
                  Pay per employee                                                                 $ 12,696      $ 65,773
                  Firm-market level observations                                                   660,000       810,000


                  B. Market-level averages                                                               1976       2014
                  Wage-bill HH I (Unweighted)                                                          0.45          0.45
                  Employment HH I (Unweighted)                                                         0.43          0.42
                  Wage-bill HH I (Weighted by market’s share of total payroll)                         0.20          0.14
                  Employment HH I (Weighted by market’s share of total payroll)                        0.17          0.11
                  Wage-bill HH I (Weighted by market’s share of total employment)                      0.19          0.14
                  Employment HH I (Weighted by market’s share of total employment)                     0.18          0.12
                  Firms per market                                                                     42.6          51.6
                  Percent of markets with 1 firm                                                     14.6%         14.7%
                  National employment share of markets with one firm                                 0.63%         0.36%
                  Market level observations                                                          15,000       16,000


                  C. Across market correlations with wage-bill HH I                                      1976       2014
                  Number of firms                                                                        -0.22      -0.21
                  Market employment                                                                      -0.20      -0.21
                  Employment Herfindahl                                                                   0.98       0.98
                  Standard deviation of relative wages                                                   -0.49      -0.51
                  Market level observations                                                          15,000       16,000

         Table 1: Summary Statistics, U.S. Census Longitudinal Employer Database 1976 and 2014
Notes: Tradeable NAICS2 codes (11,21,31,32,33,42,55). Market defined to be NAICS3 within Commuting Zone. Observations
rounded to nearest thousand and numbers rounded to 4 significant digits according to Census disclosure rules. Firm-market-
level refers to a ‘firmid by Commuting Zone by 3-digit NAICs by Year’ observation. Market-level refers to a ‘Commuting Zone
by 3-digit NAICs by Year’ aggregation of observations.


Summary statistics.        Table 1A describes characteristics of the firm-market observations. Average nom-
inal payroll was $470,900 in 1976 and $1,839,000 in 2014. Average firm-market employment was 37
workers in 1976 and 28 workers in 2014. Average wage was $12,696 in 1976 and $65,773 in 2014.21
Concentration.       In Appendix D, we show that non-tradeable industries also display the same patterns
we now describe for tradeable industries. First, we consider two measures: Herfindahl indexes for
payroll and employment. Let i denote a firm and j denote a market. Let wij and nij denote the firm’s
wage and employment in market j, respectively. Equation (1) defines the wage-bill Herfindahl: the sum
of the squared wage-bill shares. Our model will reveal this to be the welfare relevant measure of market
concentration.                                                   2                       wij nij
                                  HH Ijwn :=   ∑          sijwn            ,   sijwn =
                                                                                         ∑i∈ j wij nij
                                                                                                                            (1)
                                               i∈ j




   21 Realwage growth in these industries was relatively low at 0.6 percent per annum. By our statistics, nominal wage growth
was 4.42 percent p.a., while the CPI increased at a rate of 3.82 percent p.a. over the same period.


                                                                       8
Equation (2) defines the employment Herfindahl.
                                                             2                        nij
                                        HH Ijn :=    ∑       sijn       ,    sijn =
                                                                                      ∑i∈ j nij
                                                                                                                                   (2)
                                                     i∈ j

This measure does not capture the positive empirical covariance between wages and employment and
so tends to be less than the wage-bill Herfindahl.
    Different weighting schemes of across-market averages imply different levels and trends. The un-
weighted average Herfindahls for wages and employment are between two and three times larger than
their counterparts weighted by either employment or payroll. Little employment or payroll is located
in highly concentrated markets: in both periods, 14 percent of markets have only one employer and so
HH Is equal to one. This is a distinct statistical property of labor market concentration that our model
will reproduce. In terms of the time-series, unweighted average payroll and employment Herfindahls
are approximately unchanged between 1976 and 2014. When weighted by market payroll, the payroll
(employment) wage-bill Herfindahl declines from 0.20 to 0.14 (0.17 to 0.11). Aggregation in our model
will imply that welfare relevant concentration measures should be the payroll weighted measures, which
declined. In Appendix D, we show that these patterns are consistent in non-tradeable industries.
    Table 1C confirms that the number of firms and total market employment are negatively correlated
with concentration. This is important for understanding why weighted and unweighted Herfindahls are
so different and will be used as an over-identifying test of the estimated model. Moreover, employment
and wage-bill Herfindahls are highly correlated. We also document that more concentrated markets have
less dispersed wages: the correlation between concentration and within market dispersion of relative
wages is strongly negative.22
    When estimating our model we will target a single concentration measure. We then use many of
these other moments as over-identifying tests of the quantitative relevance of our theory.
Summary. Figure 2 summarizes changes in concentration. To interpret the payroll weighted Herfind-
ahls in Panel A, Panel B plots the inverse of the wage-bill and employment Herfindahls. The Inverse
Herfindahl Index (I H I) can be interpreted as the effective number of firms competing in a market.23 The
payroll weighted wage-bill Herfindahl implies that the effective number of firms in tradeable U.S. labor
markets increased from 5.01 in 1976 to 7.09 in 2014: concentration fell. By comparison, in the raw data,
we observe a 20 percent increase in the average number of firms per market.24
    To map these measures of labor market concentration to welfare, we require a model. Our theoretical
framework is specifically designed to accommodate these commonly used statistics. In fact, within our
framework wage-bill Herfindahls and knowledge of key structural parameters are sufficient to compute
   22 A   firm’s relative wage is defined by wijrel := wij /(∑i∈ j wij /M j ), where M j is the number of firms in market j. We then
compute the standard deviation of this term within each market j.
    23 If three firms operate in a market and have equal shares, then the Herfindahl is 1/3 =
                                                                                                    ∑i∈ j (1/3)2 . So a market with M j
firms of different sizes and a Herfindahl of 1/x has the same level of concentration as a market with x firms of equal size.
    24 Rinz (2018) describes employment concentration in a number of non-tradeable sectors using a NAICS4×Commuting zone

definition of a labor market. Tradeable and non-tradeable sectors do not have systematically different levels of concentration (his
Figure 11). Rinz (2018) does not aggregate establishments within firms when computing employment shares. When averaged
at the 2-digit level, he finds similar trends in tradeable and non-tradeable sectors.


                                                                    9
                              Figure 2: Labor Market Concentration, 1976 and 2014
Notes: Panel A plots employment and payroll Herfindhals in the Census LBD in 1976 and 2014 for tradeable firms (see notes
to Table 1). Panel B plots the inverse of these Herfindhals along with firms per CZ×NAICS3 market. See text for details.


the share of aggregate income paid to workers. From the point of view of measurement, we can also
quantify how other measures of concentration that are not welfare relevant may bias inferences regarding
welfare.


2     Model
2.1   Environment

Agents. The economy consists of a representative household and a continuum of firms. Firms are
heterogeneous in two dimensions. First, firms inhabit a continuum of local labor markets j ∈ [0, 1],
within which there exists an exogenously given finite number of firms indexed i ∈ {1, 2, ...M j }. Second,
firms’ productivity zijt ∈ (0, ∞) are drawn from a location invariant distribution F (z). The only ex-ante
difference between markets is the number of firms M j ∈ {1, . . . , ∞}. Time subscripts are necessary in that
we study welfare counterfactuals on transition paths between steady-states, but at the firm and market
level productivity and number of firms are constant.
Goods and technology.          The continuum of firms produce goods that are perfect substitutes, and so
trade in a perfectly competitive national market at a price Pt that we normalize to one. Firms operate
a value-added production function that uses inputs of capital k ijt and labor nijt .25 Let Z be a common
component of productivity across firms. A firm produces yijt units of net-output (value-added) according


   25 Since aggregating firm-level value-added yields aggregate output (GDP), we abuse terminology and refer to the output of

this production function interchangeably in terms of goods and value-added. We carefully distinguish the two when comparing
our results to empirical studies.


                                                             10
to the production function:
                                                 1− γ γ α
                                                         
                                  yijt = Zzijt k ijt nijt                      ,       γ ∈ (0, 1)        ,   α > 0.

The degree of returns to scale α is unrestricted and later estimated. These goods may be used for con-
sumption or investment. Investment augments the capital stock Kt which is owned by the representative
household, rented to firms in a competitive market at price Rt and depreciates at rate δ. To model imper-
fect labor market competition with decreasing returns to scale production, we extend tools developed in
the trade literature (Atkeson and Burstein, 2008).

2.2    Household

Preferences and problem. The household chooses the measure of workers to supply to each firm, nijt ,
investment in next period capital Kt+1 , and consumption of each good cijt to maximize their net present
value of utility. Given an initial capital stock K0 , the household solves
                                                               1+ ϕ1
                                                                    
                                             ∞
                                                           1 N
                  W0 =       max            ∑   βt u Ct − 1 t 1  , β ∈ (0, 1)                                       ,   ϕ>0   (3)
                        {nijt ,cijt ,Kt+1 } t=0           ϕϕ 1 + ϕ

where the aggregate disutility of labor supply is given by,
                                                "ˆ                          # θ +θ 1
                                                        1        θ +1
                                        Nt :=               N jt djθ
                                                                                                     ,   θ>0
                                                    0
                                                    η +1                          η +1
                                                                                           η +η 1
                                       N jt := n1jt + · · · + n Mj jt
                                                       η                             η
                                                                                                     ,   η>θ

and maximization is subject to the household’s budget constraint:
                h                     i   ˆ 1h                                    i
           C t + K t +1 − (1 − δ ) K t =       w1jt n1jt + · · · + w Mj jt n Mj jt dj + Rt Kt + Πt ,                            (4)
                                                             0
                                                            ˆ    1   h                         i
                                           Ct =                          c1jt + · · · + c Mj jt dj.                             (5)
                                                             0

Firm profits, Πt , are rebated lump sum to the household. The function u is twice continuously dif-
ferentiable with u0 > 0, u00 < 0 and satisfies the Inada conditions. The consumption index captures
perfect substitutability of consumption goods, such that our assumption of a single market price Pt = 1
is valid.26
Notation.       Indexes, in bold font, are book-keeping devices and not directly observable in the raw data
but can be constructed from observables. For example, the disutility of labor supply Nt does not corre-
   26 Observe  that since we are solving the model with decreasing returns to scale in production, we are arbitrarily able to
                                                                                  ´     (σ−1)/σ
introduce monopolistic competition in the national market for goods. Let Ct = [ ∑i∈ j cijt      dj]σ/(σ−1) , then given household’s
optimal demand schedules, a firm would optimize a decreasing returns to scale revenue function as opposed to the decreasing
returns to scale production function used here. Firms would charge identical, constant markups, and profits from product market
power would be rebated to the household. To keep our analysis clean, we ignore this case.


                                                                            11
spond to any aggregates reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. However, given parameters, Nt can
be constructed from the universe of firm-level employment {nijt }. We denote aggregate labor computed
by adding bodies as unbolded: Nt = ∑ij nijt .
Elasticities.   The elasticities of substitution at the firm and market levels, η > 0 and θ > 0, jointly affect
the labor market power of firms. Both across and within markets, the lower the degree of substitutability,
the greater the market power of firms. Below we discuss a micro-foundation of the representative agent
problem—presented in full in Appendix B—that exactly maps these parameters into the relative net costs
to individuals of relocating between firms within the same market versus across markets.
   Across-market substitutability θ stands in for mobility costs across markets, which are often esti-
mated to be significant (Kennan and Walker, 2011). As such costs increase (θ → 0), the household min-
imizes labor disutility Nt by choosing an equal division of workers across markets: N jt = N j0 t , ∀ j, j0 ∈
[0, 1]. This limit imparts the largest degree of local labor market power for firms as market employment
is completely inelastic market by market and unresponsive to across-market wage differences. As sub-
stitutability approaches infinity, the representative household optimally sends all workers to the market
with the highest wage, eroding market power of firms in other markets.
     Within-market substitutability η stands in for within-market, across-firm mobility costs such as the
job search process (Burdett and Mortensen, 1998), some degree of non-generality of accumulated human
capital (Becker, 1962), or heterogeneity in worker-firm specific amenities or commuting costs. As such
costs increase (η → 0), the household minimizes within-market disutility N jt by choosing an equal
division of workers across firms: nijt = ni0 jt , ∀i, i0 ∈ {1, 2, ...M j } . This generates the largest degree of
monopsony power for firms. Regardless of its wage, firm ij will employ the same number of workers,
allowing it to pay less while maintaining its workforce. As substitutability increases, the representative
household reallocates workers toward firms with higher wages. In the limit as η increases, the local labor
market tends to perfect competition and within each market wages and marginal revenue products are
equalized.
Labor supply.     Given the distribution of wages {wijt }, the necessary conditions for household optimal-
ity consist of first order conditions for labor at each firm {nijt }. Combining these yields the following
system of firm specific, upward sloping, labor supply curves:
                                            !η        !θ
                                       wijt      W jt     ϕ
                              nijt = ϕ                   Wt ,            for all              ij              (6)
                                       W jt      Wt
The supply curve includes more book-keeping terms: the market wage index W jt and aggregate wage index
Wt are defined as the numbers that satisfy
                                                                             ˆ       1
                            W jt N jt :=   ∑ wijt nijt   ,        Wt Nt :=
                                                                                 0
                                                                                         W jt N jt dj.
                                           i∈ j

Together with (6) these definitions imply the following indexes:
                                 "       # 1+1 η              "ˆ                                # 1+1 θ
                                                                             1
                                    ∑
                                            1+ η
                           W jt =          wijt          ,        Wt =           W1jt+θ dj                .
                                    i∈ j                                 0


                                                             12
Since we focus on Cournot competition, we work with the inverse labor supply function:
                                                     ! η1      ! 1θ
                                           − ϕ1 nijt      N jt        1
                                  wijt = ϕ                          Ntϕ                                                    (7)
                                                N jt      Nt
The remaining optimality conditions include the household Euler equation for consumption. We derive
this and the labor supply system in detail in Appendix E.
Micro-foundation. What is our representative household representative of? In Appendix B we micro-
found our preference specification. In the model presented, labor supply curves to firms are determined
by a representative agent with nested-CES preferences. We show that the exact same supply system
described by equations (6) and (2.2) can be obtained in an environment with heterogeneous workers
making independent decisions.
    The environment is as follows. Each worker decides which firm to work for and how many units of
labor to supply. In making this decision, each worker minimizes the total disutility of attaining some
random level of income. Total disutility is the sum of the logarithm of hours supplied and a worker
specific disutility of supplying labor to each firm, ξ ij . The worker specific disutility of supplying labor to
each firm is iid across individuals and time, and drawn from a correlated Gumbel distribution in which
θ governs the overall variance of ξ ij , and η governs the within-market conditional correlation of ξ ij .
    Similar, non-nested, formulations of individual decisions have been used to model the total supply
of labor to a firm in competitive markets by Card, Cardoso, Heining, and Kline (2018) and Borovick-
ova and Shimer (2017). Our contribution is to adapt existing results in the discrete choice literature to
demonstrate a supply-system equivalence with our ‘nested-CES’ representative household specification,
and to set the problem in oligopsonistic markets.27,28
    We also establish that, under constant returns to scale, the same supply system obtains in the steady-
state of a dynamic discrete-choice setting in which workers are paid constant individual-firm specific
wages. Workers separate from their firm with probability δ and when separating draw a new firm.
Firms then compete in a dynamic oligopsony for these workers.
    Beyond unifying alternative approaches, this micro-foundation delivers an intuitive interpretation
of our key parameters θ and η.29 In the discrete choice setting, increasing θ decreases workers’ overall
variance of net disutility ξ ij . If θ is high, a worker has a high likelihood that their lowest draws of non-
wage utility ξ ij are close together, increasing overall competition on wages between firms. Increasing
η increases the covariance of ξ ij within markets. If η > θ, then the smallest realizations of a worker’s

   27 We  adapt arguments from the product market case due to Verboven (1996). In that paper the author establishes the
equivalence of nested-logit and nested-CES, extending the results of Anderson, De Palma, and Thisse (1987) who established
an equivalence between single sector CES and single sector logit.
   28 We are primarily interested in discussing θ and η and within- and across- market preferences conditional on employment.

To get to the overall representative household formulation requires (i) adding an additional nest to the logit that induces a
decision between work and not-work, where the dispersion in idiosyncratic tastes over these choices maps into ϕ, (ii) complete
markets such that the evolution of the aggregate capital stock and aggregate consumption due to the savings decisions of agents
can be represented by the consumption and savings decisions of a representative household.
   29 This framework also clarifies the economics of the wage indexes W ( W ). These relate the ex-ante expected utility of one
                                                                          t    jt
unit of labor supply in the economy (sector j)


                                                              13
disutilities are more likely to be bunched within a particular j, so facing similar non-pecuniary utility the
worker closely compares wages within j. If η ≈ θ, then the smallest realizations of a worker’s disutilities
are more likely to be spread across markets, so the worker compares wages across j’s. In the former
case, a productive firm in market j is shielded from competing with the continuum of firms outside of
its market. This directly maps the model into the proposed sources of monopsony power of Robinson
(1933).30
      An important feature of the model is that workers are not confined to particular markets. The micro-
foundation makes clear that workers are able to move across markets. The limitation that markets im-
pose is on the boundary of the strategic behavior of firms. Within markets firms are strategic, but with
respect to firms in the continuum of other markets, firms are price takers. We now describe the behavior
of the firm.


2.3     Firms

Firms draw idiosyncratic productivities zijt from a distribution F (z). Within a market, we assume that M j
firms engage in Cournot or Bertrand competition. Firms take the aggregate wage Wt and labor supply
Nt as given. In order to maximize profits, firms choose how much capital to rent, k ijt , and either the
number of workers to hire nijt (i.e. Cournot) or wages wijt to post (i.e. Bertrand). Our baseline assumes
Cournot and Appendix E explores Bertrand.
      The firm maximizes profits:
                                                              1− γ γ α
                                                                      
                          πijt = max Zzijt                  k ijt nijt     − Rt k ijt − wijt nijt       ,       subject to (7).
                                   nijt ,k ijt

Given capital demand, we can rewrite firm profits using three auxiliary parameters:
                                                                                                    (1− γ ) α
                                                                                  (1 − γ ) α                        1
                                                                                              
                     γα                                                                            1−(1−γ)α                                    1
                                                                                                                 1−(1−γ)α
           α :=                      ,      zijt := [1 − (1 − γ) α]                                             zijt        ,   e : = Z 1− α (1− γ )
                                                                                                                                Z
                1 − (1 − γ ) α
           e                                e
                                                                                     Rt
With this notation, the firm’s labor demand problem can be expressed as follows:

                                         πijt = max Ze       α
                                                    e zijt neijt − wijt nijt            ,    subject to (7).
                                                     nijt

Define the marginal revenue product of labor: MRPLijt = e e zijt neα−1 .31 Then the first order conditions
                                                        α Ze       ijt
of this problem yields the solution that the wage is a markdown (µijt ) below the marginal revenue product
of labor:
                                                 wijt = µijt MRPLijt               ,        µijt ∈ (0, 1).
   30 To quote in full: “We have seen in what circumstances the supply of a factor to an industry may be less than perfectly elastic. The
supply of labor to an individual firm might be limited ... there may be a certain number of workers in the immediate neighborhood and to
attract workers from further afield it may be necessary to pay a way equal to what hey can earn at home plus their fares to and fro; or there
may be workers attached to the firm by preference or custom... Or ignorance may prevent workers from moving from one firm to another.”
In our micro-foundation of the CES supply structure the heterogeneous ξ ij realizations across workers could reasonably be
interpreted in any of these ways. A firm’s marginal cost of labor curve lies above its supply curve because to hire more labor it
must (i) pay more to hire a new worker away from another firm that workers have a low disutility of working at, (ii) must then
pay this wage to all workers.
    31 Here we have abused description slightly since we are using a value-added production function and maximized out

optimal capital, so this is really the marginal “revenue net of capital and intermediate input expense” product of labor.


                                                                             14
                                             Figure 3: Firm level optimality


   Figure 3 characterizes firm optimality. Decreasing returns to scale in production yields a downward
sloping marginal revenue product of labor strictly below the average revenue product. Firms internalize
the upward sloping labor supply curve, and so their marginal cost of labor is also upward sloping and
lies strictly above labor supply (which is equivalent to the average cost of labor). A marginal unit of
labor costs more than just the higher wage paid to the marginal worker, since the firm must increase
wages paid to all workers. As such, choosing nijt so that labor’s marginal revenue product equals its
marginal cost necessarily implies a markdown of the wage relative to marginal revenue product. Firms
earn profits from difference between average and marginal revenue products of labor due to decreasing
returns to scale and labor market power in the form of the markdown.
   In the Cournot Nash equilibrium, this markdown is determined by the equilibrium (inverse) labor
supply elasticity faced by the firm (1/ε ijt ) at the equilibrium allocation. We refer to ε ijt as the structural
elasticity of labor supply. Computing ε ijt requires us to fix competitors’ labor demand, something which
we will not be able to ask of the data under any configuration of shocks in the market. Using (7):

                                         ∂ log wijt                                   ∂ log N jt
                                                                                 
                                 1                                1         1 1
                                      :=                      =     +        −
                                ε ijt    ∂ log nijt               η         θ η       ∂ log nijt
                                                      n−ijt                                        n−ijt

Conveniently, in the nested-CES case, the inverse labor supply elasticity is linear in the market payroll
                     wn . Markdowns are therefore given by:32
share of the firm, sijt
                
                  wn
             ε sijt                                                 −1
                                                                                                                       wijt nijt
                                             
                                   
                                    wn        1       wn
                                                          1
                                                                wn                                          wn
   µijt =                  ,   ε sijt :=       1 − sijt + sijt                               ,           sijt :=                   .   (8)
               wn + 1
           ε sijt                             η               θ                                                      ∑k∈ j wkjt nkjt

   These markdowns constitute our measure of firm level labor market power and depend on a firm’s own
(observable) market share as well as the degree of within-market (η) and across-market (θ) labor substi-

  32 Appendix   E provides the derivations of these expressions.


                                                                  15
tutability. In other words, markdowns vary by firm characteristics. This can easily seen by returning to
Figure 3. Panel A describes the equilibrium outcomes for a low productivity firm. Relative to the high
productivity firm in panel B, the low productivity firm has a lower MRPLij for any nij . In equilibrium,
it has both lower wages wij∗ , and lower employment nij∗ , so its share of wage payments sijwn∗ , is smaller.
With a smaller share of the labor market wage payments, its elasticity of labor supply is higher, and its
inverse labor supply curve is flatter. A flatter inverse supply curve yields a narrower markdown at its
optimal labor demand, nij∗ . The larger firm faces an endogenously steeper supply curve and hires more
workers at higher wages but a wider markdown.
      Before proceeding, we note that in the tradeable goods market (the focus of our paper) labor market
power, µijt , is identified distinctly from product market power, and that this is robust. We make the sim-
plest assumption: tradeable goods prices are competitive and so not set by any firm. If tradeable goods
firms set output prices in a monopolistically competitive national market, invariant markups would enter
the marginal revenue product, MRPLijt , and remain distinct from our markdown. If tradeable goods
firms set output prices in a oligopolistically competitive national market, then this price setting decision will
not affect our estimation of µijt which exploits variation across labor markets within the same state. So
long as tradeable good prices set by a firm (e.g. furniture prices) do not differ across local labor markets
within a state, our estimate of µijt will only capture labor market power.


2.4     Equilibrium

For the rest of this section we will focus on a steady state equilibrium and drop time subscripts. We
later return to the time dimension when studying welfare counterfactuals under transitions between
steady-states. The economy-wide vector of wage-bill shares, swn = {swn         wn = ( swn , . . . , swn ),
                                                                    j } where s j      1j            Mj j
is the only object that needs to be determined in a steady state equilibrium. This is key to our empirical
strategy, since in Census data we will be able to measure exactly these shares.
      A steady state equilibrium is a vector of wage-bill shares that yields wages and employment consis-
tent with the vector of wage-bill shares. The steady state equilibrium interest rate is determined by the
discount factor.

Definition.    A steady state equilibrium is a vector of wage-bill shares swn and an interest rate r, that are consis-
tent with firm optimization, and that clear the labor market, capital market, and final good market.


3     Characterization
We discuss the properties of the equilibrium in two steps. First, we describe the role of labor market
power in determining employment and wages at the market level. Second, we describe the role of labor
market power in determining employment and wages at the aggregate level.




                                                         16
                              Figure 4: Oligopsonistic equilibrium in three labor markets
Notes: Figure constructed from model under estimated parameters (Table 3). Low, medium and high productivities of the
firms correspond to the 10th , 50th and 90th percentiles of the productivity distribution.


3.1     Market equilibrium

Lemma 3.1 summarizes the relationship between wage-bill shares, labor supply elasticities, and mark-
downs. If µ1 < µ2 our convention will be to describe µ1 as having a greater, or wider, mark-down.

Lemma 3.1. Firms with larger market shares face smaller labor supply elasticities, and pay wages that represent
larger mark-downs:
                                                ∂ε ij                   ∂µij
                                                       <0        ,             < 0.
                                                ∂sijwn                  ∂sijwn
      Under η > θ—which we maintain here but are agnostic about in our empirics—large firms within a
market face lower equilibrium labor supply elasticities (if sij > skj , then ε ij < ε kj ). Single firm monopson-
ists face a labor supply elasticity of θ, whereas infinitesimally small firms face a labor supply elasticity
of η. In Section 4 we will use quasi-natural experiments that shift MRPLij to estimate how ε ij varies by
sij in the data and use this to infer η and θ.
      To further explore how strategic interaction works in the model, Figure 4 plots examples of the equi-
librium shares, markdowns, wages, and employment in three markets. The first market has a single low
productivity firm (red), the second adds a firm with median productivity (blue), the third an additional
high productivity firm (green).33
      Consider the market with a single firm (red). By construction, the wage bill share is one (Panel A).
Panel B shows that the markdown on the marginal product of labor is approximately 39 percent which
   33 Figure   ?? is constructed from our benchmark calibration of the model (Section 4).


                                                                17
is equal to θ/(θ + 1) since the firm faces the lower bound on labor supply elasticities, θ (see Lemma
E.2). Panel C shows that wages are low due to low productivity and a wide markdown. Despite this, the
relatively inelastic labor supply across markets means the firm still employs many workers (panel D).
      Consider the addition of a firm with higher productivity, a duopsony (blue). The low-productivity
firm’s wage bill share drops to around 30 percent and the firm with higher productivity employs the
majority of the market, and market employment is higher. As its share falls, the low-productivity firm’s
markdown narrows to around 60 percent, as more competition increases their equilibrium labor supply
elasticity toward η. Panel C shows that with no change to its productivity, but with a narrower mark-
down, the less productive firm’s wage increases. Despite this wage increase, the higher wage at its new
competitor bids away labor, causing the low productivity firm’s employment to fall. Adding another
firm (green), the markdown at the low- and mid-productivity firms decline. The largest firm has the
widest markdown (Panel B), but pays more (Panel C) and employs more workers (Panel D).
      In equilibrium, strategic interaction naturally occurs when there is local labor market power (η > θ )
and finitely many firms. This leads to a negative covariance between markdowns and productivity—
visible along the green line in Panel B. This will show up as a wedge in the aggregate conditions that we
now turn to. This endogenous covariance is a direct consequences of labor market power that would be
ignored in a model of monopsonistic competition.


3.2     General equilibrium

A key measure in the macroeconomic study of labor markets is the share of total output being paid to
labor. In this section, we aggregate across markets to characterize the general equilibrium labor share.
      We show that labor’s share of income is a function of the distribution of market-level wage-bill
Herfindahl indexes which we define as HH Ijtwn := ∑i∈ j (sijt  wn )2 . The model relevant aggregate measure of

the extent of local labor market concentration is the inverse of the payroll weighted wage-bill Herfindahl:
                                  "ˆ                    # −1
                            wn
                                       1
                                          wn      wn                       ∑i∈ j wijt nijt
                       IgH It =          s jt HH Ijt dj      , swn
                                                                jt = ´ 1                          ,
                                     0
                                                                         0 ∑ i ∈ j w ijt n ijt dj
where swn
        jt is market   j’s share of aggregate    income.
      Under Cournot competition, we can show that the labor share is determined by this statistic, inter-
mediated by the key parameters of our model, η and θ:
                                                                 wn
                                                             Ig
                                                              H It
                                 LSt =     αγ                                                             (9)
                                                η +1 g wn
                                                                                  
                                                                     θ +1    η +1
                                                      I H I    +       θ −
                                          |{z}              t
                                         Comp. LS η                            η

The intuition for the reduction relative to the competitive labor share is as follows. A single firm’s labor
share is proportional to its equilibrium markdown. The market-level labor share LS jt will put highest
weight on firms that pay the largest share of wages in each market, which, in our model, are also firms
with the widest markdowns and so lowest labor shares. Comparing two markets, a market with a higher
HH Ijtwn has more dispersed shares, a measurement that captures the fact that larger firms have both a


                                                       18
wider markdown and a greater share of wage payments, leading to a lower market-level labor share.
This delivers a closed-form relationship between LS jt and HH Ijtwn . That local labor shares LS jt are then
aggregated to the economy-wide labor share using payroll weights swn
                                                                  jt , owes to simple accounting.
      Under the assumption of stable preferences—and once θ and η are known—equation (9) implies
that the dynamics of the distribution of local wage-bill Herfindahls is sufficient to forecast labor share
dynamics. A contribution of this paper is to (i) identify θ and η, and (ii) measure this statistic in the same
Census data. Lemma 3.2 shows these expressions have important implications for measurement.

Lemma 3.2.
    (i) Under oligopsonistic competition (η > θ) the labor share is an increasing function of the wage-bill weighted
                                          ∂LS
        inverse Herfindahl index,         > 0. Under monopsonistic competition (η = θ), the labor share is inde-
                                             wn
                                       ∂ Ig
                                          HI
        pendent of the wage-bill weighted inverse Herfindahl index.
    (ii) Suppose cov(wij , nij ) > 0, then the wage-bill Herfindahl is strictly larger than the employment Herfindahl,
        HH Ijwn ≡ ∑i∈ j (sijwn )2 > HH Ijn ≡ ∑i∈ j (sijn )2 .

Part (i) implies that labor’s share of income is determined by the wage-bill Herfindahl. Our theory ratio-
nalizes why the wage-bill Herfindahl can be used as a proxy for both local and national labor shares.
      The model-implied measure of labor market concentration differs from most existing studies. For ex-
ample, recent work by Benmelech, Bergman, and Kim (2018) and Rinz (2018) use employment Herfind-
ahls and various weighting schemes. Independent of our model framework, employment Herfindahls
understate concentration since they ignore the positive relationship between wages and employment, i.e.
the positive size-wage premium. Part (ii) states this formally. So long as there is a size-wage premium—
a robust feature of the data (Brown and Medoff, 1989; Lallemand, Plasman, and Rycx, 2007; Bloom,
Guvenen, Smith, Song, and von Wachter, 2018)—Lemma 3.2 shows that the employment Herfindahl
understates concentration relative to the wage-bill Herfindahl.34


4      Estimation
Our key parameters to estimate are the degree of across- (θ) and within- (η) market labor substitutability.
We first describe our novel approach which integrates (i) new empirical estimates from a quasi-natural
experiment in a large cross-section of firms and (ii) moments from Table 1 into (iii) a simulated method
of moments routine in which all unknown parameters are estimated jointly.


4.1     Approach - Structural vs. reduced form labor supply elasticities

Structural elasticities.         We motivate our approach from the following observation. If a researcher could
observe the structural elasticity of labor supply that firms perceive at their Nash equilibrium level of em-
ployment, then they could combine these with data on payroll shares to exactly pin down (θ, η ) by

    34 The   unconditional firm-level correlation of log employment and log wages is 0.30 in our 2014 tradeable LBD sample.


                                                                19
inverting one of our key model equations:
                                                                              −1
                                                                                                           −1
                                      ∂ log wijt  wn 
                                                                                        
                                                                                      1           1
                  ε sijwn , θ, η :=              sij                               =          wn     wn
                                                                                           1 − sij + sij       .             (10)
                                      ∂ log nij                                         η            θ
                                                                       n−ij

The structural elasticity of labor supply ε(sijwn , θ, η ) depends only on observable shares and parameters.

Reduced form elasticities. When firms behave strategically, however, the structural elasticity cannot
be measured using wage and employment responses even to well identified firm-level shocks. As is clear
from the notation above, the structural elasticity is a strictly partial equilibrium concept and answers the
question: How much will firm i’s wage have to increase in order to expand employment by 1 percent, holding its
competitors’ employment fixed? This is the correct notion for the Nash equilibrium, however given a shock
to any firm in the market, an employment change at firm i will lead competitors to best-respond, which
will cause i to best respond and so on. What we measure in the data following a shock is therefore a
reduced form elasticity e(sijt , θ, η, . . . ) that encodes all other firms’ employment, wages, productivity, etc.35
    Our key insight is that, despite this, the reduced form elasticities that we may aspire to measure in
the data are still informative of (θ, η ). The following expression provides a first order approximation of
the reduced form elasticity of labor supply a researcher would measure for firm ij following a shock to
it or any other firm(s) in the market:
                                                                                                
                                                                                       wn , θ, η
                                                                                   ε sijt
                    
                      wn
                                                 d log nijt
                   e sijt , θ, η, . . .       =                =                                ∑ swn d log n  .          (11)
                                                  d log wijt          
                                                                        wn , θ, η
                                                                                  
                                                                                      1     1      k6=i kjt       kjt
                                                                 1 + ε sijt           θ −   η          d log nijt

We unpack this below, but immediately note a distinct property of (11). The reduced form and structural
elasticities coincide exactly under two special cases: (i) θ = η, that is the labor market structure is one of
national monopsonistic competition, (ii) d log nkjt is zero at all other firms in the market. Case (ii) occurs
when the shock hits firm i and firm i is either infinitesimal or the only firm in the market. Outside of these
two special cases, strategic interaction and finiteness of firms jointly imply that micro-estimates of labor
supply elasticities cannot be used to directly infer labor supply elasticities or underlying parameters.

Bias.    To facilitate the relationship between structural and reduced form elasticities, we consider two
cases: (i) a revenue productivity shock that hits one firm only, and (ii) a shock that hits a handful of firms
in the market. The latter will be our empirical case.
    If a shock hits only one firm and a researcher computes eij , then this will overstate ε ij . An increase in
zij causes firm i to increase its employment and wages. An increase in nij when θ < η contracts labor
supply at competing firms.36 Competitors best responses move them back along their demand curves,
decreasing their employment and increasing wages, such that ∑k6=i swn kj d log nkjt < 0. This best response
from competitors shifts out labor supply for firm i, such that reaching its desired employment requires a
  35 We borrow the notation of e for reduced form elasticities and ε for structural elasticities from the estimation of structural

macroeconomic models. In this literature reduced form shocks which are empirical objects estimated out of VARs are often
denoted e, and structural shocks that are backed out of an estimated structural model are denoted ε.
  36 This from the point of view of Cournot, from the point of view of Bertrand other firms would see higher market wages.



                                                                       20
smaller increase in wages. On net, wages at firm i increase less which—since they enter the denominator
of the reduced form elasticity—lead to a larger estimate of eij > ε ij . Since eij overstates ε ij , the researcher
would conclude that the firm faces a high labor supply elasticity and markets are more competitive than
they truly are.
      Now consider a shock that hits a small firm and a large firm but misses medium sized firms. For the
large firm the above holds, despite employment growth at the small firm, the share-weighted response of
its competitors to the large firm’s increase in employment is negative. For the small firm, the decrease
in labor supply due to the expansion of the large firm will lead it to increase wages by more in order to
grow, leading to a smaller estimate of eij < ε ij . Since eij understates ε ij , the researcher would conclude
that the small firm faces a low labor supply elasticity and markets are less competitive than they truly are.

Indirect inference.       The above demonstrates that the full equilibrium structure of the model is neces-
sary to take observed responses of wages and employment following identified shocks and map them
into the underlying structural parameters. Our approach recognizes this. We first use a quasi-natural
policy experiment to estimate the relationship between payroll shares and average reduced form labor
supply elasticities:                                     h                     i
                                       e Model s, θ, η := E e Model s, θ, η, . . . .
                                       b
The expectation being taken with respect to the distribution of all relevant labor market variables
and shocks. We then replicate this experiment in our model and choose (θ, η )—along with other
parameters—to replicate the empirical relationship between average reduced form elasticities and pay-
roll shares. Formally, we proceed by indirect inference, where we minimize distance between average
reduced forms estimates by share in the model and in the data: be Data (s) − b
                                                                             e Model (s, θ, η ) . We now de-
scribe how we construct each of these terms.


4.2                                                                    e Data (s)
        Estimating reduced form labor supply elasticities in the data: b

                                  e Data (s)—the relationship between labor market payroll-shares
Regression framework. To estimate b
and average reduced form labor supply elasticities—we compare how plants owned by the same firm,
within the same state, but in different markets and with different market shares sijwn , change wages and
employment differently following a change in state corporate taxes.
      We employ a regression framework. Let i denote the firm identifier (firmid), j industry (3-digit
NAICS), s state, k commuting zone, and t year. Let yijkt denote the outcome of interest at the firm-i,
                                                                                        wn and are
market-jk, year-t level, such as employment or the wage. We control for payroll shares sijkt
interested in coefficients on state corporate taxes τs(k)t and their interaction with payroll shares.37 To
isolate the variation described above, we introduce fixed effects at the firm-state level αis(k) as well as,




   37 State-level
               corporate taxes are proportional flat-taxes on firms’ accounting profits. Our data for state-level corporate taxes
comes from the data made publicly available by Giroud and Rauh (2019): (https://web.stanford.edu/ rauh/).


                                                               21
                                                         A. Employment                          B. Wages
                                                       log nijkt      log nijt          log wijt       log wijt
                                                          (1)            (2)              (3)              (4)
              State corporate tax         τs(k)t       -0.00357     -0.00368         -0.00181      -0.00187 
                                                       0.000644      0.000757          0.000584       0.000588

              Payroll share                wn
                                          sijkt                        2.085                            0.214
                                                                                                             
                                                                      0.0467                           0.0072

              Interaction                       wn
                                      τs(k)t × sijkt                  0.0158                           0.0031
                                                                                                             
                                                                      0.00495                         0.00075
              R-squared                                  0.872         0.877             0.819         0.821
              Observations                             4,425,000     4,425,000         4,425,000     4,425,000

                                     Table 2: Estimation results for equation (12)
Notes: All specifications include fixed effects for: (i) year, (ii) commuting zone, (iii) NAICS3 industry (iv) Firm×State. Accord-
ing to Census requirements, the number of observations is rounded to the nearest 1,000. Standard errors are clustered at State
× Year level. Sample includes tradeable C-Corps from 2002 to 2012.


separately, industry and commuting zone.38 Our regression specification is as follows:
                                                                                        
                                                    wn
             log nijkt = αis(k) + δj + φk + µt + ψ sijkt + βn τs(k)t + γn τs(k)t × sijkt
                                                                                    wn
                                                                                           + νijkt .                         (12)
The coefficients β and γ capture the average effect of state corporate tax rate changes and their differ-
ential effect by market share. We first estimate (12) separately for log employment and log wages (total
                                                                                               e Data (s).
payroll per worker). We then show how coefficient estimates from (12) can be used to construct b

Sample.      To abstract from changes in product market power we restrict our sample to tradeable in-
dustries identified by Delgado, Bryden, and Zyontz (2014) and listed in Appendix C.39 As in Section
1, a market is a 3-digit NAICS industry within a commuting zone. Plants owned by the same firm are
aggregated within a market, such that an observation is a firm-market-year. As we rely on state-level
corporate tax variation to isolate changes in labor demand, we restrict our sample to C-Corporation
firms (C-Corps) in the LBD from 2002 to 2012.40 Table A2 includes summary statistics of our 4.5 million
observations at the firm-market-year level.

Estimates. Table 2 presents our empirical estimates of (12). We start with (log) employment as a depen-
dent variable. Column (1) projects firm-market-year employment on corporate taxes τs(k)t alone. Since
units of τs(k)t are percents, the coefficient on τs(k)t is an elasticity: a one percent increase in corporate taxes
results in a 0.36 percent reduction in employment at the firm-market-year level. Column (3) presents the
same specification for wages, which fall following an increase in taxes. Positively correlated employ-

   38 In this exercise only, we exclude commuting zones that straddle multiple states since defining a market gives rise to

conceptual issues.
   39 See additional discussion in Section 1
   40 Firms are identified in Census by the variable firmid. The tax series ends in 2012.



                                                                22
ment and wage changes verify our interpretation of the tax change as shifting firm labor demand, which
we formalize in the model below.
      Columns (2) and (4) present the full set of interaction terms between payroll shares and corporate
taxes. Both interaction terms are positive and significant, combined with negative direct effects of taxes,
these indicate that the average responses of larger firms are smaller. Consider the mean effect of a 1 ppt
increase in τs( j)t on a small firm at the mean payroll share of 0.03 and a large firm with a one standard
deviation higher share of 0.14. Employment declines by −0.32 percent at the small firm and −0.15
percent at the large firm. Consistent with Giroud and Rauh (2019), corporate tax rate increases reduce
employment, but this reduction is around half as large at larger firms.

Share-dependent reduced form labor supply elasticities.                 These regression results may be used to read
off the relationship between the average reduced form labor supply elasticity and payroll shares which,
as we previously argued, is informative regarding θ and η. Differentiate (12) with respect to τs( j)t to
obtain share-dependent reduced form wage and employment elasticities:
                           d log nijkt                            d log wijkt
                                       = βn + γn sijkt
                                                  wn
                                                             ,                = βw + γw sijkt
                                                                                         wn
                                                                                              .                 (13)
                            dτs(k)t                                 dτs(k)t
The ratio of the expressions in (13) yields the average reduced form labor supply elasticity by share:
                                         \
                                       d log nijkt        βbn + γ
                                                                bn s   −0.00368 + 0.0158 × s
                        e Data (s) =                 =               =                       .                  (14)
                                                                       −0.00187 + 0.0031 × s
                        b
                                         \                  w
                                                         βb + γ   w
                                                                b s
                                       d log wijkt
One might be concerned that this differs from the true expected reduced form labor supply elasticity
because we divide the expected labor response by the expected wage response, however we compute
the object in the model in the same way.
                   e Data (s) over sijwn ∈ [0, 0.15] which covers the bulk of our data. Nothing in our empirical
    Figure 5 plots b
exercise forces the relationship to be negative, but the blue dashed line is indeed downward sloping. The
average reduced form labor supply elasticity at the smallest firms is around 2, while around 1 for the
largest firms. Equipped with our estimate of the relationship between the average reduced form labor
supply elasticity and payroll shares for this particular quasi-experiment, we now replicate the shock in the
model and choose θ and η to minimize the distance between b      e Model (s, θ, η ) and b
                                                                                        e Data (s).


4.3                                                                     e Model (s, θ, η )
        Simulating reduced form labor supply elasticities in the model: b

                      e Model (s, θ, η ), we add corporate taxes to the environment and show how they shift
In order to construct b
marginal revenue products of labor.
      We make several modifications to our theory. Corporate taxes are a tax on profits, net of interest
payments on debt. The firm therefore maximizes post-tax accounting profits:
                                          α                          
                                      1− γ γ
               πijt = 1 − τC Zzijt k ijt nijt − 1 − τC λK Rk ijt − 1 − τC wijt nijt ,

where we have assumed that all firms finance a fraction λK ∈ [0, 1] of their capital using debt. Only a


                                                             23
                            Figure 5: Labor supply elasticity by firm market wage share
Notes: This graph compares reduced form and structural labor supply elasticities by firm payroll share in response to a corpo-
rate tax shock of 1 percentage point. The line labeled ‘Data - Reduced form’ is the labor supply elasticity given by equation (14).
The line labeled ‘Model - Reduced form’ plots reduced form labor supply elasticity estimates, estimated on simulated model
data as described in Appendix H.2. The line labeled ’Model - Structural’ plots ε(·) from equation (10).


random fraction ωC ∈ [0, 1] of firms in each market are C-corps and so subject to τC . For all other firms
τC = 0. To capture average size differences we assume C-corps are ∆C more productive:
                                   
                           N 1, σz2                if i is not a C-corp (i.e. w.prob 1 − ωC )
             log(zijt ) ∼                    
                           N 1 + log(∆ ), σ2       if i is a C-corp (i.e. w.prob ωC )
                                        C   z

To simplify notation, we substitute in the firm’s optimal capital choice—which is non-strategic—and
write the employment decision of the firm as:

                                     eijt = max Ze
                                     π                   α
                                                e zijt neijt − wijt nijt   ,   subject to (7)
                                              nijt

where we make the following modifications to our prior notation,
                                                                                       α (1− γ )
                                                                   α (1 − γ) (1 − τC ) 1−α(1−γ) 1−α(11−γ) e
                                                                 
              πijt            αγ                                                                                      1
   π
   eijt   =         α :=
                   ,e                     zijt = [1 − α (1 − γ)]
                                        , e                                                       zijt   , Z = Z 1− α (1− γ )
            1 − τC       1 − α (1 − γ )                               (1 − τC λK ) R
 For C-corps, an increase in τC reduces the marginal revenue product of labor via its distortion of the
firm’s capital decision.
    We can now compute the model-based average reduced form labor supply elasticity by payroll share:
e Model (s, θ, η ).
b                     Given parameters {ωC , λK , τC }, we solve the initial equilibrium. For the ωC fraction of
firms that are C-corps, we increase τC by ∆τC . We solve the model again and then treat our model panel
like our Census data: we run regression (12) and apply (14) to compute be Model (s, θ, η ).




                                                                24
4.4     Indirect inference

Average reduced form labor supply elasticities are not available in closed form, so we proceed by indirect
inference implemented as simulated method of moments (SMM).


Externally calibrated.        To capture the distribution of firms across markets in 2014, M j ∼ G ( M j ), we use
a mixture of two Pareto distributions. We fit this mixture to the first three moments of the distribution,
given in Table H1. Appendix H provides additional details, including parameter estimates. By construc-
tion we generate the correct fraction of markets with one firm. Throughout we simulate 5, 000 markets
and verify that our results are not sensitive to this choice.
      We proxy the fraction of capital that is debt financed by the debt to capital ratio defined by Graham,
Leary, and Roberts (2015). We compute this in Compustat, restricting our sample to tradeable industries
in 2014 and obtain λK = 0.309. We assume that ωC = 0.428 of firms are C-corps based on the 2014
County Business Patterns data for our tradeable sectors (CBP).41
      In each iteration of the simulated method of moments, we compute two steady-state model
economies. One with τC set to the mean state corporate tax rate of 7.14 percent, and a second with
higher taxes τC0 = τC + ∆τ . We assume ∆τ is 1 percent, approximately one standard deviation of the
distribution of state corporate tax changes observed in our data (e.g. see Table A2 in Appendix C)). We
compute these from the data made publicly available by Giroud and Rauh (2019). We then treat the
outcomes across these two model economies as panel data and estimate regression (12) with firm fixed
effects. Replicating our treatment of the data, we transform these point estimates into average reduced
form elasticities by local labor market payroll share using equations (13, 14). Appendix H.2 includes
additional details on the simulated tax experiment.
      We assume a baseline aggregate Frisch elasticity of labor supply is ϕ = 0.50 which lies in the range of
estimates obtained in micro-data analyses (Keane and Rogerson, 2012).42 Our main results also consider
ϕ ∈ {0.2, 0.8}. On an annual basis, the discount rate is 4 percent ( β = 0.9615), and the depreciation rate
is 10 percent (δ = 0.10).


Internally estimated. We now estimate ψ = {θ, η, γ, α, σez , ∆C , Z, ϕ}. In any solution of the model ( Z, ϕ)
can be chosen to match average firm size (27.96) and payroll per worker ($65, 773) (Table 1).43
   41 We were unable to release this share from the Census. A higher value of ω is conservative in that the shock is more, rather
                                                                               C
than less, at the market level. We therefore choose an upper bound for ωC . The fraction of establishments in the U.S. that are
C-corps represents such an upper bound in four steps. (i) The CBP has only establishment data. (ii) On average, C-corps have
more establishments than other firms. (iii) Our approach throughout the paper has been to aggregate firms’ establishments
within a market. (iv) Therefore the share of establishments that are C-corps in the data is an upper bound on the share of our
‘market-firms’ that are C-corps.
   42 The U.S. Congressional Budget Office uses estimates between 0.27 and 0.53. Reichling and Whalen (2012) discuss.
   43 We provide the closed-form mapping in Appendix F.1. As an alternative approach, we have considered inverting the

model’s equilibrium conditions to recover the distribution of productivities. Appendix Section F.2 provides the details. Given
                                         wn within a market determines mark-downs, and ratios of markdowns deliver ratios of
θ and η, the vector of wage-bill shares sijt
productivities (equation F6). Up to a normalization of productivity at one firm, the distribution of relative productivities can
be obtained. Absolute productivities can then be obtained by integrating employment data. In practice, however, the logistics
of working with U.S. Census data render this approach infeasible.


                                                               25
  Parameter      Description                            Value     Moment                                          Model   Data
  A. Assigned
  r              Risk free rate                           0.04
  δ              Depreciation rate                        0.10
  ϕ              Aggregate Frisch elasticity              0.50
  J              Number of markets                       5,000
  G( Mj )        Mix two paretos                                  Mean, Std. Dev., Skewness of distribution
                                                                  15 percent of markets have only 1 firm
  ωC             Share of firms that are C-corps          0.43    Share of estabs. that are C-corps (CBP, 2014)
  τC             State corporate tax rate                0.071    Mean of state corp. tax rate τC,st (Giroud Rauh, 2019)
  ∆τ             State corporate tax rate increase       0.010    Std. dev. of annual τC,st (Giroud Rauh, 2019)
  λK             Fraction of capital debt financed       0.309    Tradeable industries (Compustat, 2014)
  B. Estimated
  η              Within market substitutability           5.38    Average be Data (swn ) for swn ∈ [0, 0.05]       1.70   1.80
  θ              Across market substitutability           0.66    Average be Data (swn ) for swn ∈ [0.05, 0.10]    1.60   1.52
  ∆C             Relative productivity of C-corps         1.29    Emp. share of C-corps                            0.65   0.66
  σez            Productivity dispersion                 0.227    Payroll weighted E[ HH I wn ]                    0.14   0.14
  α              DRS parameter                           0.985    Labor share                                      0.58   0.57
  γ              Labor exponent                          0.811    Capital share                                    0.18   0.18
  Z
  e              Productivity shifter                2.10e+04     Ave. firm size                                   28.0   28.0
  ϕ              Labor disutility shifter                5.383    Ave. payroll per worker ($000)                   65.8   65.8

                                            Table 3: Summary of Parameters
Notes: See Table H1 and Figure H1 for model and data moments of the across-market firm distribution G ( M j )


      We estimate θ = 0.66 and η = 5.38 so that average reduced form labor supply elasticities by payroll
share in the model coincide with our data estimates (e.g. Figure 5). Rather than targeting the entire
function (13), we compute the average reduced form labor supply elasticity of firms with payroll shares
between 0 and 5 percent, and 5 and 10 percent. This captures the bulk of variation in our data, spanning
roughly ±1 standard deviation around the mean wage-bill share. The reduced form elasticity of small
firms is most informative of η whereas the reduced form elasticity of the larger firms contains more
information about θ.
      We estimate productivity dispersion σez to match the payroll weighted wage-bill Herfindahl of 0.14
(Table 1). Increasing σez increases the market power of large firms, increasing concentration.
      We estimate α and γ to match the capital share and labor share of income. As can be seen from
equation (9), α shifts the labor share, which is 57 percent in the data (Giandrea and Sprague, 2017). We
then choose γ to match the aggregate capital share, which we take to be 18 percent (Barkai, 2016). Our
estimate of α implies a small degree of decreasing returns to scale.
      Finally, we choose ∆C to match the 66 percent employment share of C-corps in tradeables, measured
exactly from the CBP. Table 3 summarizes all parameters and the model’s fit to the target moments.




                                                             26
4.5     Discussion

We quantify the importance of strategic complementarities in our inference by computing the bias asso-
ciated with assuming that reduced form labor supply elasticities directly reveal structural labor supply
elasticities and therefore the key underlying parameters. We also discuss caveats related to the labor
demand shifter used here: state corporate taxes.

Structural v. reduced form labor supply elasticities.          Using data on employment and wage changes
in response to identified firm-level shocks to infer key structural parameters creates sizeable bias. This
shows that strategic complementarities are a quantitatively important feature of labor markets.
    Consider a truly idiosyncratic shock to a single randomly selected firm in our economy. Drawing
the treated firm at random, compute b eij and compare it to ε ij . We repeat this 5,000 times for small (one
percent), medium (20 percent) and large (50 percent) productivity shocks. We plot the results in Figure
6. This Monte Carlo exercise reveals a significant difference in reduced form and structural labor supply
elasticities for firms with market shares not equal to 0 or 1, even when the identifying variation is perfectly
idiosyncratic. The bias between reduced form and structural elasticities is nearly 15 percent even for
large firms with market shares nearing 10 percent. In fact, for relatively small firms with market shares
between 1 and 2 percent, which is below the average in our sample, the bias exceeds 7 percent for any
size shock we consider. Accounting for the Nash equilibrium of the local labor market is quantitatively
important for recovering fundamental parameters of the model.
      This exercise implies that even if a researcher aims to use perfect idiosyncratic variation in produc-
tivity to infer structural elasticities and do welfare analysis, they would have to deflate their reduced form
elasticity estimates substantially in order to recover the true structural elasticities. Inferring structural elas-
ticities that are too large one would infer narrower markdowns which would bias downward the welfare
costs of labor market power. The details of our Monte Carlo exercise are included in Appendix H.3.
      Figure 6 shows that two important caveats apply, both summarized in equation (11). If the firm has
a share of one, then reduced form and structural elasticity estimates coincide and reveal θ. If the firm
has an infinitesimal share, then reduced form and structural elasticity estimates coincide and reveal η.
Finally, a market level shock will directly reveal θ, so long as the market itself is not large. If the market is
very large then a market level shock will also effect the macroeconomic equilibrium of the labor market,
and reduced form elasticities will be contaminated by ϕ.

Corporate taxes.        Three aspects of our corporate tax rate estimation are worth discussing: (i) appor-
tionment of state taxes across multi-state production units may mean that state corporate taxes do not
affect firms within a state, (ii) anticipation of tax changes, (iii) if corporate taxes affect all firms in a region
then they can only be used to identify θ. To address the first two issues, we rely on prior analysis by
Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2016) and Giroud and Rauh (2019). Our baseline estimation addresses the
third issue directly.
      First, Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2016) show that the impact of state corporate taxes on local economic
activity is extremely similar for both (i) the statutory corporate taxes used here, and (ii) effective corpo-


                                                        27
   Figure 6: Reduced form and structural elasticities in response to idiosyncratic productivity shocks.
Notes: Panel A plots Monte Carlo results which compare reduced form to structural labor supply elasticities in response to a
perfectly idiosyncratic shock to a single firm. The lines labeled ‘Reduced form elasticity’ plot the average estimated reduced
                             e(s) as detailed in Appendix H.3. The dashed line labeled ‘Structural elasticity’ plots ε(s) from
form labor supply elasticity b
equation (10). Panel B reports the error of the average reduced form elasticity relative to the structural elasticity: 100 × (b
                                                                                                                              e(s) −
ε(s))/ε(s).


rate taxes—i.e. ‘business taxes’—carefully adjusted for apportionment weights.44 Since establishment
sales and company property values are not available to us, we cannot construct accurate apportionment
weights and thus we focus on statutory tax rates compiled by Giroud and Rauh (2019).
    Second, both Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2016) and Giroud and Rauh (2019) establish that including
other aspects of changes to fiscal policy around corporate tax adjustments have negligible affects on their
measured elasticities of local economic activity to state corporate taxes.45 We interpret this as indirect
evidence that the reforms are not paired with other predictable components of fiscal stimulus, such as
unemployment insurance, which follow time-invariant threshold rules and are typically triggered in
recessions (e.g. Mitman and Rabinovich (2019)).
    Third, only a fraction of firms pay statutory corporate tax rates. According to the County Business
Patterns database, the employment share of C-corps is 66 percent. Our model estimation took this into
account. We chose an upper bound for the fraction of C-corp firms in our economy, and matched the
aggregate share of employment in C-corps. The fact that C-corps are not all firms is in fact key to our
approach of using one shock and its effect across the distribution of payroll shares to estimate both within-
and across- market labor substitutability.



   44 See their discussion of Table A21, p.19 (emphasis added):       “Column (6) of Table 5 and Appendix Table A21 show that using
statutory state corporate tax rates in Equation 21 (instead of business tax rates τb ) results in similar and significant estimates,
indicating that our measure of business tax rates is not crucial for the results.”
   45 Giroud and Rauh (2019) establish the plausible exogeneity of state-corporate tax changes. From a public finance perspec-

tive they study the effects of state corporate tax changes on employment and wages. Their focus is within firm, across state
responses, and the reallocation of firm employment across states following tax changes. For an exhaustive description of these
tax changes we point the interested reader to their paper.


                                                                  28
5     Validation
Before conducting our key measurement exercises, we carry out two over-identifying tests of the model.
We compare our model to (i) pass-through rates which are often used to infer and measure monopsony
power, and (ii) the cross-market distribution of concentration, both of which have been at the forefront
of the “labor market power” discussion. We argue that these tests situate the model well for our mea-
surement exercises and future research on labor markets.
      Since it does not fit neatly below, we note here that in terms of the size-wage relationship in the model
and data, we measure an unconditional 0.30 (0.56) correlation between log employment and log wages
across firms in our 2014 sample (the model).


5.1     Pass-through

We check that the model produces rates of pass-through from value added per worker to wages consis-
tent with recent empirical estimates (Kline, Petkova, Williams, and Zidar, 2019; Card, Cardoso, Heining,
and Kline, 2018). With strategic complementarities, increases in firm productivity lead to more hiring
and higher wages, but with an expanding market share the firm’s markdown widens, which dampens
the wage increase. As a result, with strategic complementarities, pass through from value added per
worker to wages is less than 1, consistent with (Kline, Petkova, Williams, and Zidar, 2019; Card, Car-
doso, Heining, and Kline, 2018). Standard models without variable markdowns, such as neoclassical
models of monopsony (e.g. Manning (2003) and Card, Cardoso, Heining, and Kline (2018)), imply pass
through from value added per worker to wages of 1.

Background.          Throughout this section, we define pass-through to be the elasticity of wages with respect
to value added per worker (VAPW) following a productivity shock. This metric conforms with the
literature. Since productivity is often not observed, most empirical studies compare how some identified
shock affects wages relative to sales- or value added.46
      While many papers compute pass-through estimates, we focus on Kline, Petkova, Williams, and
Zidar (2019) (henceforth KPWZ). KPWZ provides sufficient summary statistics to replicate their quasi-
experiment in our model. The quasi-experiment exploits patent issuance as an instrument, comparing
consequent changes in value added per worker (VAPW) and wages. They find that the receipt of a high-
value patent increases VAPW by approximately 13 percent, and for every one percent increase in VAPW,
wages increase by approximately 0.47 percent.

Replication. We replicate KPWZ as follows. Given the baseline equilibrium, we randomly sample
one percent of firms. We match the large average size of the regression sample in KPWZ by drawing
from firms with employment greater than n. We increase the productivity of treated firms by a factor
∆. The values of n and ∆ are calibrated to match the KPWZ (1) median firm size of 25 employees, (2)



    46 Wages   are measured either as labor compensation per worker or as an hourly wage.


                                                              29
increase in post-tax value added per worker of 13 percent.47 To replicate the partial equilibrium nature
of the experiment, we keep aggregates fixed and solve the new market equilibrium. Table A3 compares
summary statistics of our regression sample to theirs.
    For our estimate of pass-through, we conduct an apples-to-apples comparison adopting the proce-
dure of KPWZ.48 We treat the untreated and treated observations for each
                                                                     n firmoas a panel with two ob-
                                                                       y     y
servations per firm of wages wij0 , wij1 and value added per worker, nij0   , ij1 .49 We then regress the
                            
                                                                         ij0 nij1
wages in levels on VAPW in levels and a firm-specific fixed effect. The regression coefficient is converted
into an elasticity using untreated mean wages and mean value added per worker (see their Section 7).

Results. Table 4 reports our estimates. We find a pass-through rate of 79.5 percent, which is larger
than the KPWZ estimate of 47.0 percent (Table VIII, panel B, column 2) but significantly less than the
100 percent pass-through rate that standard models of monopsony would imply. Recent work by Card,
Cardoso, Heining, and Kline (2018) uses lagged log sales per worker as an instrument for log value
added per worker. We have insufficient information to replicate their empirics, but report their pass-
through estimate of 32.7 percent.50 Finally, a structural approach is taken by Friedrich, Laun, Meghir,
and Pistaferri (2019), who estimate pass-through of 31 percent from permanent shocks in a model of
worker and firm dynamics estimated on Swedish employer-employee data.51
    We compute the same statistic in two model economies that lack strategic complementarities: (1) the
competitive version of our model, defined below (section 6.2), and (2) the monopsonistically competitive
version of our model in which θ = η. From the perspective of pass-through, both market structures are
counterfactual, producing pass-through one one in both cases.

Importance of strategic complementarities. Absent endogenous markdown responses to productivity
shocks, our model would not match these facts. A large class of monopsony models that abstract from
variable markdowns would predict an elasticity of wages with respect to value added per worker of
1 (e.g. Manning, 2003; Card, Cardoso, Heining, and Kline, 2018). Our model nests such models under
                                                                 1/η
η = θ, in which case firms face a labor supply curve wijt ∝ nijt . There are no strategic complementarities
between wages within a market. Markdowns are therefore constant and common to all firms: µijt =
η/(η + 1). Value added is vaijt ∝ Ze
                                   e zijt neα . The wage is therefore proportional to value added per worker.
                                            ijt
Following any shock, the measured elasticity of wages to value added per worker is one:

                 vaijt        1      e zijt neα
                                     Ze       ijt                 η                          ∆ log(wijt )
                       =                            ,   wijt =         e zijt neα−1
                                                                     α Ze             ,                       =1
                         1 − α(1 − γ) nijt                                      ijt       ∆ log(vaijt /nijt )
                                                                     e
                 nijt                                            η+1

 This simple result establishes that a large class of models without strategic complementarities yield
pass-through rates of one, which a growing body of evidence from reduced form and structural studies
   47 See  KPWZ. We take the Median firm size of 25.36 from their Table II, panel A, column 7. The percentage increase in VAPW
is 0.13=15.74/120.16, where 15.74 is the mean increase in value added per worker (Table V, column 4), and 120.16 is the mean
value added per worker (Table II, panel A, column 5). This is exactly equal to our value-added production function which
represents sales minus costs of intermediate inputs.
    48 They describe this procedure in Section VII, and footnotes to Table VIII.
    49 Value-added in KPWZ is defined as sales minus costs of goods sold net of labor costs.
    50 See their Table 2, panel A, row IV, column 1.
    51 See their Table 12, column 1.



                                                             30
                                  (1)           (2)                        (3)                       (4)              (5)
                                  Oligopoly     Kline et al (2018)         Card et al (2018)         Competitive      θ=η
      Pass-through coefficient    0.795         0.470                      0.327                     1.000            1.000
      Dependent Variable          wij           Wage bill per worker       Hourly wage               wij              wij
      Independent Variable        VAPWij        VAPWij                     VAPWij                    VAPWij           VAPWij
                                                (IV: Patent approvals)     (IV: Sales per worker)

                                 Table 4: Wage pass-through, model versus U.S. data
Notes: Description of estimation procedure in text. See Table A3 for a comparison of the model-based summary statistics for
the simulated KPWZ experiment and the summary statistics reported in KPZW.


rejects.52 In summary, we view the model’s ability to match this moment as (i) validation of our model’s
transmission mechanism from productivity to wages, and (ii) evidence that strategic complementarities
are important for understanding wage setting.


5.2     Distribution of labor market concentration

In calibrating the model we matched the payroll weighted average of payroll concentration across mar-
kets, and by construction the 15% of markets with only one firm. In those markets with one firm, we
trivially match payroll and firm concentration. Our second exercise establishes that the model matches
the non-targeted spatial variation in concentration.

Data.     Figure 7 compares the weighted and unweighted distributions of wage-bill Herfindahl indexes
in the model and new data that we have extracted from the Census.53 Panel A plots the payroll weighted
distribution of the wage-bill Herfindahl. Very little of aggregate wage payments are accounted for by
concentrated markets with a payroll HH I more than 0.25. On the other hand, by plotting the unweighted
distribution in Panel B, we see that the majority of markets are highly concentrated. The weighted mean
HH I is 0.14, while the unweighted mean is more than three times larger (0.45).
      The stark difference is due to the negative correlation between concentration and total payroll /
employment. While 15 percent of markets have one firm, those markets comprise less than half of one
percent of total employment. To show that this large difference between the weighted and unweighted
Herfindahl distributions is not specific to the tradeable sector, Figure 7 also includes the economy-wide
distribution.

Model.       The model fits both distributions, and while it matches the weighted average HH Ijwn exactly
by construction it also generates an unweighted average payroll Herfindahl of 0.33, which is quite close
to the data counterpart. In the model, markets with one firm have high labor market power, restrict-
ing quantity (lower employment) and widening markdowns (lowering wages). The model correlation
between market size and market concentration is −0.80, whereas in the data the correlation is −0.21.

   52 Note that pass-through in levels is less than one, but is not direct evidence of monopsony since it conflates the elasticity of
labor supply and the output elasticity of labor in value-added.
   53 Table A1 in Appendix C provides point estimates referenced in this section and additional statistics.



                                                                 31
        Figure 7: Cross-market distribution of concentration: Model and Data (U.S. Census), 2014.
Notes: Figure plots the across market distribution of the payroll Herindahl index ( HH Ijwn ). Bins are determined by the fol-
lowing bounds: {0, 0.10, 0.25, 0.50, 0.75, 0.99, 1}. The horizontal axis gives the center of each bin. Panel A plots the fraction of
total payroll in each bin. Panel B plots the fraction of markets in each bin. The former informs the payroll weighted index, the
latter informs the unweighted index referenced in the text. Data is Census LBD. See Appendix C for additional details. Table A4
provides the exact weighted and unweighted means of employment and payroll HHIs. Counterfactuals are described in the
text.


Counterfactuals. The model’s endogenous firm size heterogeneity is important for matching the data.
Two counterfactual distributions are plotted. Under C1 we arbitrarily set all wages and employment
equal to one, so that the only object in the model is G ( M j ) and each market’s HH Ijwn is simply (1/M j ),
and its payroll share is proportional to M j . Under C2 we keep this counterfactual distribution of HH Ijwn
but construct the weighted distribution using payroll shares from the baseline model swn
                                                                                      j,baseline :
                                               !
                                          Mj
                                                                                           
                     wn wn          1                              wn wn        1     wn
         C1:     HH Ij , s j   =       ,          , C2:       HH Ij , s j   =      ,s
                                   Mj ∑ j Mj                                    M j j,baseline
Relative to C1, model and data display a smaller fraction of payroll in competitive markets ( HH Ijwn <
0.10). With symmetric firms and the benchmark distribution of wage payments across markets, C2 also
misses the data substantially. We conclude that within market heterogeneity in employment and payroll
is key to matching the data.


6    Measurement
We measure labor market power in three exercises. First, at the micro-level we compute the distribution
of markdowns and labor supply elasticities in the economy. Second, to compute the macroeconomic
affects of labor market power, we compare our benchmark oligopoly model economy to a counterfactual
competitive economy. Third, to measure the time-series impact of labor market power on the labor share
we combine our closed form expression with our estimates of (θ, η ) and data on concentration over time.
With all deep parameters of the model estimated we remove all features of the model related to corporate
taxes that were introduced for estimation.


                                                                32
        Figure 8: Model implied distribution of structural labor supply elasticities and markdowns
Notes: Panel A plots the distribution of equilibrium structural labor supply elasticities ε(·) from equation (10), unweighted
(‘Firms’) and weighted (’Wage Payments’). E[ε ij ] is the unweighted mean structural elasticity, and E is the aggregate structural
labor supply elasticity defined in section 6.2. Panel B conducts the same exercise for markdowns. E[µij ] is the unweighted
mean markdown, and µ = E +   E is the aggregate markdown defined in section 6.2.
                              1



      These exercises speak to the two key sources of labor market power in our model. First, at our
estimated parameters, firms face upward sloping labor supply curves. Firms internalize this feature of
their environment, understanding that hiring an additional worker requires not only a higher wage to the
marginal worker, but also all previous workers hired. In a competitive market, firms perceive flat supply
curves. Second, in concentrated labor markets firms are non-atomistic and so compete strategically for
workers. In this framework, a higher HH I implies that larger firms can differentially distort their input
choices and wages to an even greater extent.


6.1     Microeconomic measurement

Figure 8 plots the model implied distribution of structural labor supply elasticities ε ij and associated
markdowns µij . In red, the average firm has a labor supply elasticity close to η and a narrow markdown.
However, in blue, the distribution of wage payments which determines where the average dollar of wages
is earned is skewed toward low elasticity, wider markdown firms.
      Looking forward, a key step in what follows is the stipulation of a representative monopsonist economy
that delivers the same allocations as the benchmark heterogeneous oligopsonist economy. The elasticity of
labor supply that would face these fictitious identical firms would be E , marked in blue. This reflects the
distribution of wage payments, and so it is much lower than the average elasticity. Even if a researcher
did have the distribution of structural labor supply elasticities, this figure cautions against inferring
welfare from simple averages.
      The next two exercises use the macroeconomic structure of the model to aggregate these microeco-
nomic distributions into macroeconomic measures of labor market power.



                                                               33
6.2     Macroeconomic measurement I - Counterfactual competitive economy

We define a competitive equilibrium, and then compute the welfare gain associated with a transition to
a competitive equilibrium.

Competitive equilibrium.             To measure the welfare losses from both sources of market power, we com-
pare our benchmark oligopsonistic equilibrium to a competitive equilibrium. We keep preferences, tech-
nology and the distribution of firms-per-market (M j ) fixed, changing only the equilibrium concept. The
competitive equilibrium still features upward sloping labor supply curves, but firms do not internalize
this. The competitive equilibrium still features finitely many firms in each market, but firms behave as
atomistic price takers.54 Thus, there are no strategic complementarities.
      We formally define the competitive equilibrium as follows:

Definition A Walrasian equilibrium is an allocation of employment nijt , and wages wijt such that:
   1. Taking wijt as given, nijt solves each firm’s optimization problem
                                                  nijt = arg max Ze       α
                                                                 e zijt neijt − wijt nijt
                                                                    nij

   2. Taking wij as given, nij solves the household’s labor supply problem:
                                                         wijt η W jt θ ϕ
                                                                   
                                             nijt = ϕ                    Wt
                                                         W jt     Wt
Figure 9 describes the difference between a firm behaving monopsonistically (Panel A) and competi-
tively (Panel B). The wage is unambiguously higher in the competitive equilibrium, but the net equilib-
rium effect on employment varies. Since large firms have the widest markdowns in the oligopsonistic
equilibrium, their wages increase the most. This reallocates employment away from small firms toward
large firms. This undoes the direct effect of small firms’ higher wages to the extent that employment may
decline at small firms. To demonstrate this reallocation, Figure J1 shows how the prices and allocations
from our example Figure 4 change under Walrasian competition.

Welfare.       Throughout the paper we use the term welfare gain / loss to mean the λSS percent subsidy to
consumption in the benchmark oligopsonistic economy that would be required to make the household
indifferent with respect to the counterfactual allocation.55
      First, we compute the welfare gain from competition across steady-states: λSS . Let {Co , No } denote
consumption and disutility of labor in the benchmark oligopsonistic equilibrium. Let {Cc , Nc } denote
consumption and disutility of labor in the competitive equilibrium, such that
                                                   1+ ϕ1                  1+ ϕ1
                                                                             
                                            1  N o                 1 N
                                                          = u Cc − 1 c 
                       u  1 + λSS Co − 1             1                      1
                                                                                                                           (15)
                                             ϕ ϕ 1 + ϕ              ϕϕ 1 + ϕ
   54 Keeping   M j constant in each market purges our exercise of changes in welfare due to ‘love of variety’ effects.
   55 Note   that aggregate consumption   incorporates the effect
                                                              of competition on wages, employment and firm profits. Ag-
gregating firms’ profit conditions    πij = yij − wij nij − Rk ij     under goods market clearing and the definition of W and C,
returns ´the household budget constraint (Π =´ C − WN − RK ), so C = Π + WN + RK.                   Recall that W is defined by
WN = ∑i∈ j wij nij dj, and C is defined by C = ∑i∈ j cij dj.


                                                                     34
                                Figure 9: Oligopsonistic vs. Competitive equilibrium
Notes: In a oligopsonistic equilibrium (Panel A) the firm understands that its marginal cost MCij is increasing in its employment.
In a competitive equilibrium (Panel B) the firm perceives that its marginal cost MCij is simply equal to its wage, which it takes as
given. The true labor supply curve to the firm, however, is still upward sloping, reflecting household preferences.


    Second, we compute the welfare gain from competition along the transition path between steady
states: λ Trans . We assume that market structure changes, unexpectedly, at date 0:
                                                 1+ ϕ1                                  1+ ϕ1
                                                                                           
                                                                      ∞
                                            1  N o                                  1 N
                                                        = (1 − β ) ∑ β t u  C t − 1 t 
                     u (1 + λ Trans ) Co − 1       1                                      1
                                                                                                                               (16)
                                           ϕ ϕ 1 + ϕ                t =0           ϕϕ 1 + ϕ
    As discussed in Section 2, market-level equilibrium payroll shares are independent of aggregates. In
Appendix F.2, we show that payroll shares are determined by underlying firm-level productivities, zijt ,
and the competitive structure of the economy (e.g. Cournot, Bertrand, Perfect Competition). Since firm-
level productivity immediately jumps and then remains constant along the transition path, our model
                              wn }, the aggregate wage index { W }, and the aggregate employment in-
implies that payroll shares {sijt                               t
dex {Nt } jump immediately to their competitive steady-state values. However, consumption slowly
increases to its competitive steady-state level because the representative household’s Euler equation dic-
tates a gradual accumulation of capital. As a result, welfare gains along the transition path, λ Trans , are
lower than across steady-states, λSS . Figure A1 and its footnote describe the transition dynamics of the
economy in detail and show that utility is higher at all points along the transition.
    Table 5 reports welfare gains at our benchmark calibration, which assumes a Frisch elasticity of
ϕ = 0.5. Across steady states, individuals would require 5.4 percent more consumption under 2014
oligopsonistic labor market conditions in order to compensate them for their losses relative to the com-
petitive benchmark. With higher wages, aggregate employment increases 14.6 percent, producing higher
consumption. As expected welfare gains along the transition are smaller, but not drastically so. Welfare
gains vary with ϕ: the larger is ϕ, the lower the utility cost of additional labor supply so the larger the
welfare gains.

Statistical decomposition - Aggregate employment vs. Reallocation.                             A shift to competitive labor
market conditions generates reallocation of labor from lower productivity firms to higher productivity

                                                                35
      Frisch elasticity               A. Welfare                    B. Labor market                C. Concentration
                           Steady state      Transition       Ave. wage      Agg. emp.         Unweighted       Weighted
               ϕ            λSS × 100       λ Trans × 100       E[wit ]        ∑i nit           ∆HH I wn        ∆HH I wn
               0.2              3.3                2.8              41.8          4.1              0.14            0.09
               0.5              5.4                4.1              41.6         14.6              0.14            0.09
               0.8              7.6                5.6              41.3         26.1              0.14            0.09

                                         Table 5: Welfare gains from competition
Notes: Welfare gain λSS is given by (15), λ Trans is given by (16). Both correspond to moving from the benchmark oligopsony to
competitive equilibrium. Average wage and aggregate employment are expressed in percentage increases from oligopsony to
competitive steady-state. Average wage is total wage payments divided by total employment, and aggregate employment is in
‘bodies’ not disutility.


firms as high productivity firms markdowns narrow disproportionately more. Figure 10 compares low
and high productivity firms and their changes in employment across market structures. In the lowest
deciles of productivity, firms decrease employment. High-productivity, high wage-bill share firms had
disproportionately larger markdowns in the oligopsonistic equilibrium. In the competitive equilibrium,
they pay disproportionately higher wages and expand, attracting a greater share of employment. The
result is a reallocation to bigger, more productive firms. Appendix J characterizes this reallocation by
replicating Figure 4 in the competitive equilibrium.
    To isolate the contribution of reallocation we decompose output gains into two components through
a simple statistical exercise: (1) an aggregate employment effect due to overall higher wages, (2) real-
location toward more productive firms.56 To isolate scale effects, we distribute the competitive level of
aggregate employment among firms according to their employment shares in the benchmark oligop-
sony equilibrium. Output gains not generated by scale effects are attributable to reallocation. Our main
result is that around one-quarter of the 19 percent increase in output is due to aggregate employment
effects. This channel is amplified by a high Frisch elasticity, which explains the sensitivity of welfare gain
calculations in Table 5.
    Despite playing a small role in output, reallocation leads to significant increases in concentration (Ta-
ble 5). Bigger, more productive firms gain market share in the competitive economy, such that weighted
and unweighted wage-bill Herfindahls increase by 0.14 and 0.09, respectively. This exercise highlights an
important lesson of the paper. Extrapolating from this exercise, pro-competitive labor market reforms
may increase concentration and welfare. Concentration itself is an imperfect measure of welfare absent
a general equilibrium theory.

Theoretical decomposition - Representative firm and monopsony. Another approach to decompos-
ing welfare gains across steady-states is to identify a representative firm economy that reproduces the

   56 Baqaee and Farhi (2017) advocate a general decomposition of output into technology and reallocation effects. The former
are changes in output due to productivity shocks and aggregate changes in factor supply, holding fixed the distribution of
input shares across production units. Reallocation effects are changes in output due only to changes in this distribution. Hence,
our decomposition into an aggregate employment, or ‘scale’, effect and a reallocation effect is exactly consistent with theirs. As
they document, this has many advantages relative to previously used ad-hoc decompositions.


                                                               36
                          Figure 10: Employment reallocation due to perfect competition.
Notes: Percent change in total employment within productivity decile bin. Change measured between benchmark oligop-
sony equilibrium and competitive equilibrium. Let nijo (N o ) denote firm-level (aggregate) employment in the oligopsonistic
equilibrium, and nijc (N c ) competitive equilibrium values. Counterfactual firm employment and output under no reallocation
(n
 bij , ybij ) are computed keeping firms’ share of aggregate employment constant: nbij = (nijo /No ) × Nc , ybij = 1−α(11−γ) Ze    beijα ,
                                                                                                                             e zij n
         ´
b = ∑i ybij dj. The share of output gains due to aggregate employment effects are (Y
Y                                                                                       b − Yo )/(Yc − Yo ) where Yc and Yo are
output in the competitive and oligopsony equilibria.


same macroeconomic aggregates, and then understand what changes in that economy represent wedges
between the oligopsony and competitive heterogeneous firm models. We refer to this economy as the
representative firm economy.
    The representative firm economy is constructed as follows. A continuum of firms that have identical
productivity Z. We assume that these firms face the same labor supply elasticity E and compete in a
national monopsonistic labor market.57 Each firm solves:
                                            1− γ γ α
                                                 
                               max      Z k ij nij − wij nij − Rk ij                                                                (17)
                                           nij ,k ij
                                                                                     E1
                                                                              nij
                                                                          
                                                                   − ϕ1
                                             s.t.        wij = ϕ                           W
                                                                              N

Each firm chooses identical wages, employment and capital, such that aggregate factor demands can be
read off of the first order conditions of (17).

Proposition 1.         Under the following two values of Z and E , the equilibrium quantities (consumption C, output
Y, capital K, labor disutility N) and prices (wage index W) of the representative firm economy coincide with the




   57 Another way to view this is that we take our benchmark model, set zij = Z for all ij, and then make workers as substi-
tutable across as within markets (θ = η = E ) resulting in a national monopsonistic labor market.


                                                                   37
equilibrium quantities and prices of the heterogeneous firm benchmark:
                "                    −1                               −1 # −1             ˆ 1
       E
                                                           
                         wn     θ                       wn       η                      wn
            =     HH IH A                + (1 − HH IH A )                       , HH IH A =     swn         wn
                                                                                                 j,H A HH I j,H A dj(18)
    E +1                       θ+1                             η+1                           0
                   "ˆ M                              #1−(1−γ)α
                           j
                                         1                                   nij,H A
         Z = Z          ∑ zij νij,H A γα 1−(1−γ)α dj            , νij,H A :=
                                                                               NH A
                                                                                      ,                             (19)
                        i =1


where νij,H A is a parameter equal to firm ij’s share of aggregate labor disutility in the heterogenous firm benchmark
                            wn is the associated concentration measure. The wage index is
equilibrium N H A , and HH IH A

                                E                E                               E
                                                            
                                                          Y            WN
                        W=         MRPL =              γα        →          =        γα.
                             E +1              E +1       N              Y     E +1
Proof See Appendix E.

      This representation isolates the two sources of inefficiency in the oligopsony economy. First, in a com-
petitive economy, E = ∞ which returns the standard result that equilibrium factor shares are equated to
output elasticities, adjusted for the profit share due to decreasing returns. The source of finite E is clearly
                                                                                               wn > 0).
due to (i) upward sloping labor supply (θ, η > 0), and exacerbated by (ii) concentration ( HH IH A
Second, in the competitive equilibrium of the underlying economy we know that employment shares are
higher at more productive firms (Figure 10). The higher correlation between zij and νij,H A in the compet-
itive economy generates higher aggregate productivity. The lower correlation between zij and νij,H A in
the benchmark oligoposony economy implies lower Z and a misallocation of labor to firms. From capital
demand and the aggregate production function, it is clear that this misallocation depresses both capital
and output:                                                         1
                                               (1 − γ ) α
                                                           
                                    1                           1−(1−γ)α        γα                         α
                        K=Z     1−(1−γ)α                                   N 1−(1−γ)α   ,   Y = Z K 1− γ N γ .
                                                   R

Decomposition.          We can assess the roles of misallocation and labor market power through the lens of
the representative firm economy. We solve the oligoposony and competitive equilibrium economies as
before and compute (Zo , Eo ) and (Zc , Ec ), respectively. We know that moving from (Zo , Eo ) to (Zc , Ec )
leads to a welfare gain of 5.4 percent (Table 5, λSS ). Leveraging the representative agent formulation,
we can isolate the role of misallocation by leaving E = Eo , but setting Z = Zc . Table 6 shows that
this accounts for 56 percent of the increase in welfare in the competitive economy. Shutting down labor
market power by setting E = Ec while keeping aggregate productivity fixed accounts for 38 percent of
the welfare increase.58 Labor market power and the misallocation it induces are both important sources
of welfare losses.


6.3     Macroeconomic measurement II - Labor share

We combine three of the novel contributions of this paper to link the dynamics of labor’s share of income
to labor market power: (i) the closed-form expression for labor’s share of income given by equation (9)
  58 These   do not add to 100 since the decomposition is not additive. The interaction of the two forces further reduces welfare.


                                                                       38
                          Counterfactual                      Welfare gain (λSS )   Percent of total
                          Competitive            (Ec , Zc )                   5.4               —
                          Efficiency only        (Eo , Zc )                   3.0              56.0
                          Labor market only      (Ec , Zo )                   2.0              37.9

          Table 6: Decomposing welfare gains through the lens of the representative agent model
Notes: Welfare gains in the counterfactual exercise consider only steady-state to steady-state, hence λSS . The Efficiency only
counterfactual takes the competitive TFP Zc but keeps the oligoposony model level of labor market power Eo . The Labor market
only counterfactual considers the opposite case. The final column gives the fraction of the total welfare gain (λSS ), that is
accounted for by the given counterfactual.


of Section 3, (ii) our estimates of θ and η, and (iii) our new measures of wage-bill Herfindahls in Table 1.
    We conclude that changes in labor market concentration are unlikely to have contributed to the
declining labor share in the United States (e.g. Karabarbounis and Neiman (2013)). The weighted
wage-bill Herfindahl fell from 0.20 in 1976 to 0.14 in 2014, which implies that the inverse weighted
wage-bill Herfindahl increased from 5.01 to 7.09. Under the assumption of stable preference parameters
(θ = 0.66, η = 5.38) and technology (e
                                     α = 0.913) as calibrated in Table 3, equation (9) implies that declin-
ing wage-bill Herfindahls between 1976 and 2014 have contributed to an increase in the labor share of
3.13 percentage points.


7    Applications
Having concluded our main measurement exercise we now consider two real world applications of the
model. These contribute new theoretical results, demonstrate the applicability of the framework, and
further illustrate the complicated relationship between concentration and welfare.


Application I - Minimum wages in strategic labor markets

As an application of the model, we study minimum wages. That monopsony can rationalize small,
and positive, employment responses to minimum wages is in part responsible for the theory’s historical
development (Card and Krueger, 1994; Boal and Ransom, 1997; Manning, 2003). A minimum wage may
force some firms paying below their marginal revenue products to compress their markdowns, increase
wages, and at the same time expand employment along their labor supply curves. Our model shares
this prediction, but due to decreasing returns to scale and strategic complementarities, the mechanics
are more complex.
    Our main contribution is theoretical. We show that the presence of decreasing returns to scale and
strategic complementarities in wages has new implications for the theory of minimum wages, and an
elegant solution in our model. We provide a graphical characterization of the theory and then show that,
consistent with the theory, our calibrated model features an optimal minimum wage that significantly
increases welfare relative to the baseline.



                                                               39
Theory.     Firms choose employment subject to the household labor supply constraint and the additional
constraint that their wage wij is greater than a minimum wage w. At the minimum wage, households
may wish to supply more labor than—due to decreasing returns to scale—a firm demands, so we add a
firm-by-firm constraint that labor supply is less than labor demand, which the household takes as given.
The representative household maximizes utility as before with the additional constraint (∗): nijt ≤ nijt .
   An intuitive shadow wage weijt equates labor supply and demand in this context. The marginal utility
of sending an extra worker to firm ij when the minimum wage binds and labor supply would otherwise
outstrip demand is given by the multiplier νijt associated with (∗).59 From the household’s perspective,
nijt workers are supplied according to the shadow wage, weijt = wijt − νijt .
    The key theoretical result is that the Cournot-Nash equilibrium of labor market j can be solved as
before but in terms of shadow objects. In fact,the equilibrium
                                                               is characterized by a vector of markdowns
that are functions of shadow payroll shares µ e   wn   60
                                                 sijt . Strategic complementarities are also now rendered
through shadow wages. In the baseline model a higher wage at one firm always leads to a higher wage
as a best response from a competitor. Here, despite an increase in the minimum wage pushing one firm’s
wages up, its unconstrained competitors may cut wages in response to the firm’s falling shadow wage.
The macroeconomy is then solved in terms of the shadow aggregate wage f
                                                                      Wt . We derive these result and
provide a solution algorithm in detail in Appendix I.

Characterization.      Figure 11 illustrates the economics underlying the impact of a minimum wage on a
firm. There are four relevant cases:
                                                                   Comp.
             Range for w:      0 ————— wij∗ ————— wij                      ————— MCij∗ ————— ∞
                                    Region I          Region II             Region III          Region IV

    Panel A illustrates the impact of a very low minimum wage. In Region I the minimum wage has
no effect on equilibrium labor supply (w < wij∗ ). In Panel B, the minimum wage now binds, but still
below the competitive wage. Here in Region II the firm absorbs the effects of minimum wage into its
markdown. Employment increases relative to Region I and the household remains on its labor supply
curve.
    The marginal cost curve is now quite different from the benchmark economy. The new marginal cost
curve is horizontal and equal to w until it reaches the labor supply curve at nij workers. Up to this point
workers are paid w. Marginal cost then jumps, as above the minimum wage, additional hiring requires
increasing pay for existing workers. Since marginal cost jumps above the marginal revenue product of
labor, profit maximizing employment is nij . Firms still generate profits from a non-zero markdown µij
and the wedge between average and marginal revenue products due to decreasing returns to scale.
    Increasing the minimum wage further pushes the firm into Region III (Panel C). Here the minimum
wage is above the competitive wage so labor supply exceeds demand. Since wij = w = MRPLij , the


  59 We normalize νijt by the household budget constraint multiplier for ease of interpretation. We discuss these details in
Appendix I.
  60 The shadow wage payment share is e wn = w
                                       sijt  eijt nijt / ∑k∈ j w                 eijt = wijt − νijt .
                                                               ekjt nkjt , where w


                                                             40
                                        Figure 11: Theory of minimum wage

wage markdown is zero but profits πij are positive due to decreasing returns to scale.61 Our theory
                                              Supply
rationalizes household labor supply of nij < nij     through the shadow wage. At weij = w − νij , the
household supplies nij workers to the firm. Our key result was that competitors respond to the shadow
payroll share of the firm (in green), which is less than the measured share, and falling as w increases.
    Increasing the minimum wage beyond the equilibrium marginal cost in the unconstrained case
causes the firm to enter Region IV (Panel D). The same economics apply as in Region III, but here equi-
librium employment is less than what would occur absent a minimum wage. Note also that relative to
Region III the shadow wage and shadow share have declined as νij increases as excess supply widens.
   Our shadow wage result permits a sharp characterization of the equilibrium effect of a minimum wage
on unconstrained firms (Region I). The shadow wages w   eij of their smaller competitors are lower than
their actual wages, and falling as the minimum wage increases. As an unconstrained firm responds to
the shadow sectoral wage W f j , which is falling, they best-respond by cutting their own wages. Despite
lower wages, employment at large firms grow as employment is reallocated from small to large firms.



   61 Notethat Region III does not exist with constant returns to scale. With constant returns to scale the competitive wage is
equal to MRPLij which is a constant. Therefore as w increases past the competitive wage, the firm exits.


                                                              41
                            Figure 12: Welfare, concentration and the minimum wage
Notes: On the y-axis the figure plots the λ(w) associated with each level of the minimum wage w (see equation (15)). This gives
the percent increase in aggregate consumption in the benchmark economy (w = 0) required to leave the household indifferent
between the benchmark allocation and the allocation under a positive minimum wage (w > 0). On the x-axis is the fraction of
employment in the benchmark economy (w = 0) that is employed at firms that pay a wage wij < w.


Welfare maximizing minimum wage. In our model, a welfare maximizing minimum wage exists:
w∗ > 0. This trades off narrower markups at small firms against more market power for large firms,
a mechanism that is unique to our model. Figure 12A shows that the optimal minimum wage welfare
gains are roughly .4 percent, delivering around one tenth of the welfare gains associated with the Wal-
rasian allocation (Table 5). The latter could be obtained through minimum wages but would require a
menu of wij each equal to the firm specific competitive wage. In the presence of significant heterogeneity,
an economy-wide minimum wage is a relatively blunt tool at undoing labor market power. Indeed, this
heterogeneity implies that as minimum wages rise too much, concentration (Panel B.) and the market
power of unconstrained firms increases undoing the positive welfare gains of a lower minimum wage.


Application II - Mergers in strategic labor markets

Here we conduct a simple quantitative experiment to show the potential welfare effects that might pro-
pogate through local labor markets following mergers. We do so, as we have throughout, by abstract-
ing from product market effects and potential productivity gains associated with mergers. For both a
comprehensive exposition of the theory and cross-sectional empirical analysis of mergers see Berger,
Herkenhoff, and Mongey (2019).

Experiment. Consider a single sector in the baseline oligopsony model and take two single plant firms
i and i0 . A merger gives control of both plants to a single central manager who chooses employment at
both plants simultaneously. As usual the central manager takes competitors’ employment decisions as
given, but now internalizes the spillovers from labor demand at plant i on wages at plant i0 . To bound
welfare gains / losses we consider three possible cases, merging firms in all markets with 5 or more
firms: (i) the two least productive firms in a market merge, (ii) the two most productive merge, (iii) two


                                                              42
 Merger firms                A. Welfare         B. Labor market            C. Concentration            D. Counterfactual
                            Steady state     Ave. wage   Agg. emp.      Unweighted    Weighted       Unweighted    Weighted
                             λSS × 100         E[wit ]     ∑i nit        ∆HH I wn     ∆HH I wn        ∆HH I wn     ∆HH I wn
 Two highest productivity      -1.063          -2.83        -0.38           0.013        0.025          0.044        0.070
 Two random                    -0.083          -0.23        -0.34           0.003        0.009          0.005        0.013
 Two lowest productivity        0.003          -0.01        -0.10           0.001        0.003          0.000        0.002

                                           Table 7: Welfare effects of mergers
Notes: The welfare gain λSS is given by (15). These correspond to moving from benchmark oligopsony economy to oligopsony
economy under mergers. In all three cases mergers occur in all markets with 5 or more firms. The counterfactual change in
concentration is obtained by adding the benchmark equilibrium shares of the merging firms, and computing concentration
measures with these combined shares and benchmark equilibrium shares of all other firms. Comparisons of concentration are
for markets with mergers only. For comparison, recall that in the benchmark equilibrium the unweighted (weighted) HH I wn
is 0.33 (0.14).

random firms merge.62

Results. Table 7 provides results. Merging the two largest firms in each market can cause sizeable
welfare losses, with λSS around minus 1 percent. The merged firms exert additional market power,
cutting wages and restricting quantity (employment). With less employment at the most productive
firms, misallocation worsens and total factor productivity falls.
    Results vary by the type of merger. With less directed mergers, welfare losses shrink substantially as
misallocation effects are muted. Merging low productivity firms is welfare improving. As the merged
firms increase their market power their wages fall, which reallocates labor toward more productive firms.
    Two important lessons emerge from the small positive effects on concentration. First, the endogenous
response of firms mitigates the ‘partial equilibrium’ increase in concentration that comes from combin-
ing firms. Suppose that the shares of non-merging firms remain constant, the increase in concentration
given by this counterfactual is given in Panel D.63 Such back of the envelope calculations overstate the
equilibrium increase in concentration by a factor of three. Merging firms increase market power, reduc-
ing wages and employment, which reallocates employment to other firms. This dampens the increase
in concentration that comes from effectively removing a firm from the market, especially so when the
merging firms are the largest firms.
    Second, the exercise highlights the deceptive nature of concentration as a measure of welfare. Our
main competitive equilibrium counterfactual of Section 6 was a ‘pro-competitive’ intervention that drove
up concentration and increased welfare. The merger experiment is an ‘anti-competitive’ intervention that
also drives up concentration but reduces welfare. The relationship is non-trivial.
    We view these results as suggestive evidence that mergers between the largest firms in a local labor
market may generate significant welfare losses through more labor market power and increased mis-
allocation. We further explore the welfare implications of mergers as well as optimal merger policy in
Berger, Herkenhoff, and Mongey (2019).
   62 We focus on markets with 5 or more firms in order to make the distinction between two low vs. two high productivity

firms meaningful.
   63 More precisely, counterfactual market j payroll concentration uses benchmark equilibrium payroll shares and is computed
      wn                                  wn 2                  2
HH Ij,Counter f actual = ∑k∈
                           / {i,i0 } = ( skj ) + ( sij + si0 j ) .


                                                             43
8   Conclusion
In this paper, we develop a general equilibrium model of labor market oligopsony. We use the frame-
work to (1) inform measurement of labor market concentration and map labor market concentration to
labor market power, (2) link labor market power to labor’s share of income, (3) measure the welfare losses
of labor market power, and (4) the effects of minimum wages and mergers in strategic environments.
    In our framework, we show that the relevant measure of labor market concentration is the wage-bill
Herfindahl and the distribution of wage-bill Herfindahls is a sufficient statistic for the labor share. We
apply our measures of labor market concentration to tradeable sector firms in the Longitudinal Business
Database (LBD). We show that the payroll weighted wage-bill Herfindahl fell from 0.20 to 0.14 between
1976 and 2014, indicating a significant decrease in labor market concentration. Using our theory’s closed-
form mapping between labor’s share of income and wage-bill Herfindahls, we show that declining labor
market concentration has increased labor’s share of income by 3.13 percent between 1976 and 2014.
    To assess the normative implications of our measures of labor market concentration, we estimate
our model and conduct several counterfactuals. We use within-state-firm, across-market differences
in the response of employment and wages to state corporate tax changes (Giroud and Rauh, 2019) to
estimate reduced form size-dependent labor supply elasticities. In conjunction with the model, these
reduced form estimates imply parameters and structural elasticities that are key to measuring welfare.
To test how sensible our estimated model is, we show that the model successfully replicates two key
non-targeted moments: the large discrepancy that we document between weighted and unweighted
distributions of market concentration, and the degree of imperfect pass-through between value added
per worker and wages. To the best of our knowledge our model is the first to simultaneously replicate
the difference between weighted and unweighted Herfindahls, as well as generate a pass-through rate
from value added per worker to wages that is less than 100%.
    We then use our model to measure the welfare gains associated with a transition to a competitive
equilibrium. We find that households in our 2014 benchmark economy would require an additional
5.4 percent more lifetime consumption to be indifferent between the status-quo and transitioning to
a competitive economy with no labor market power. Welfare gains associated with lower labor market
power come from a reallocation of workers from smaller, less productive firms to larger, more productive
firms.
    Finally, as applications of the model, we derive a new theoretical characterization of minimum wages
under oligopsony and decreasing returns to scale. Our perceived wage formulation allows us to charac-
terize the hump-shaped profile of welfare with respect to the minimum wage. Concentration goes up,
but welfare is non-monotonic. The same holds for merger counterfactuals. When two productive firms
merge or two unproductive firms merge, concentration increases. However, the former generates wel-
fare losses whereas the latter generates welfare gains. Thus, these two applications make clear that an
observed increase in concentration in a market cannot be used to make statements about welfare without
understanding driving forces.



                                                   44
References
A MITI , M., O. I TSKHOKI , AND J. K ONINGS (2014): “Importers, exporters, and exchange rate disconnect,” American
  Economic Review, 104(7), 1942–78.

       (2016): “International shocks and domestic prices: how large are strategic complementarities?,” NBER
  Working Paper 22119, National Bureau of Economic Research.

A NDERSON , S. P., A. D E PALMA ,    AND   J.-F. T HISSE (1987): “The CES is a Discrete Choice Model?,” Economics
  Letters, 24(2), 139–140.

A SHENFELTER , O. C., H. FARBER ,     AND   M. R. R ANSOM (2010): “Labor Market Monopsony,” Journal of Labor
   Economics, 28(2), 203–210.

ATKESON , A., AND A. B URSTEIN (2008): “Pricing-to-market, trade costs, and international relative prices,” Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 98(5), 1998–2031.

A UTOR , D., D. D ORN , L. F. K ATZ , C. PATTERSON , AND J. VAN R EENEN (2017): “The fall of the labor share and
  the rise of superstar firms,” NBER Working Paper 23396, National Bureau of Economic Research.

A ZAR , J., I. M ARINESCU , AND M. I. S TEINBAUM (2017): “Labor market concentration,” NBER Working Paper
  24147, National Bureau of Economic Research.

A ZAR , J. A., I. M ARINESCU , M. I. S TEINBAUM , AND B. TASKA (2019): “Concentration in US labor markets:
  Evidence from online vacancy data,” NBER Working Paper 24395, National Bureau of Economic Research.

B ANFI , S., AND B. V ILLENA -R OLDAN (2018): “Do high-wage jobs attract more applicants? Directed search evi-
   dence from the online labor market,” Journal of Labor Economics, 37(3).

B AQAEE , D. R., AND E. FARHI (2017): “Productivity and Misallocation in General Equilibrium,” NBER Working
   Paper 24007, National Bureau of Economic Research.

B ARKAI , S. (2016): “Declining labor and capital shares,” New Working Paper Series 2, Stigler Center for the Study
   of the Economy and the State.

B ECKER , G. S. (1962): “Investment in human capital: A theoretical analysis,” Journal of Political Economy, 70(5, Part
   2), 9–49.

B ELOT, M., P. K IRCHER , AND P. M ULLER (2017): “How Wage Announcements Affect Job Search Behaviour-A
   Field Experimental Investigation,” Working papers, European University Institute.

B ENMELECH , E., N. B ERGMAN , AND H. K IM (2018): “Strong employers and weak employees: How does employer
   concentration affect wages?,” NBER Working Paper 24307, National Bureau of Economic Research.

B ERGER , D., K. H ERKENHOFF , AND S. M ONGEY (2019): “Mergers and the Labor Market,” Working paper.

B HASKAR , V., A. M ANNING , AND T. T O (2002): “Oligopsony and monopsonistic competition in labor markets,”
   Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16(2), 155–174.

B LOOM , N., F. G UVENEN , B. S. S MITH , J. S ONG , AND T. VON WACHTER (2018): “Inequality and the disappearing
   large firm wage premium,” in American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings, vol. 108, pp. 317–22.

                                                          45
B OAL , W. M., AND M. R. R ANSOM (1997): “Monopsony in the Labor Market,” Journal of Economic Literature, 35(1),
   86–112.

B OROVICKOVA , K., AND R. S HIMER (2017): “High Wage Workers Work for High Wage Firms,” NBER Working
   Paper 24074, National Bureau of Economic Research.

B ROOKS , W. J., J. P. K ABOSKI , Y. A. L I , AND W. Q IAN (2019): “Exploitation of Labor? Classical Monopsony Power
   and Labor’s Share,” NBER Working Paper 25660, National Bureau of Economic Research.

B ROWN , C., AND J. M EDOFF (1989): “The employer size-wage effect,” Journal of Political Economy, 97(5), 1027–1059.

B URDETT, K., AND D. M ORTENSEN (1998): “Wage differentials, employer size, and unemployment,” International
   Economic Review, 39(2), 257–73.

C ARD , D., A. R. C ARDOSO , J. H EINING , AND P. K LINE (2018): “Firms and labor market inequality: Evidence and
  some theory,” Journal of Labor Economics, 36(S1), 13–70.

C ARD , D., AND A. B. K RUEGER (1994): “Pricing-to-market, trade costs, and international relative prices,” American
  Economic Review, 84(4), 772–793.

D E L OECKER , J., AND J. E ECKHOUT (2017): “The Rise of Market Power and the Macroeconomic Implications,”
   NBER Working Paper 23687, National Bureau of Economic Research.

D ELGADO , M., R. B RYDEN , AND S. Z YONTZ (2014): “Categorization of traded and local industries in the US
  economy,” Discussion paper, Mimeo. Available online at: http://www. clustermapping. us/[Accessed May
  2015].

D UBE , A., D. C ENGIZ , A. L INDNER , AND B. Z IPPERER (2019): “The effect of minimum wages on low-wage jobs:
  Evidence from the United States using a bunching estimator,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134(3).

D UBE , A., J. J ACOBS , S. N AIDU ,   AND   S. S URI (2019): “Monopsony in Online Labor Markets,” American Economic
  Review: Insights, Forthcoming.

E DMOND , C., V. M IDRIGAN , AND D. Y. X U (2018): “How Costly Are Markups?,” NBER Working Paper 24800,
   National Bureau of Economic Research.

F ORT, T. C., AND S. D. K LIMEK (2016): “The Effects of Industry Classification Changes on US Employment Com-
   position,” Tuck School at Dartmouth.

F RIEDRICH , B., L. L AUN , C. M EGHIR , AND L. P ISTAFERRI (2019): “Earnings Dynamics and Firm-Level Shocks,”
   NBER Working Paper 25786, National Bureau of Economic Research.

G IANDREA , M. D., AND S. A. S PRAGUE (2017): “Estimating the US labor share,” Monthly Labor Review.

G IROUD , X., AND J. R AUH (2019): “State Taxation and the Reallocation of Business Activity: Evidence from
   Establishment-Level Data,” Journal of Political Economy, Forthcoming.

G RAHAM , J. R., M. T. L EARY, AND M. R. R OBERTS (2015): “A century of capital structure: The leveraging of
  corporate America,” Journal of Financial Economics, 118(3), 658–683.



                                                             46
G UTIÉRREZ , G., AND T. P HILIPPON (2016): “Investment-less growth: An empirical investigation,” NBER Working
  Paper 22897, National Bureau of Economic Research.

H ANDWERKER , E. W., AND M. D EY (2018): “Megafirms and Monopsonists: Not the same employers, not the same
  workers,” BLS Working Paper Series, 2.

H ERSHBEIN , B., AND C. M ACALUSO (2018): “Labor market concentration and the demand for skills,” .

H OTELLING , H. (1990): “Stability in competition,” in The Collected Economics Articles of Harold Hotelling, pp. 50–63.
  Springer.

J AROSCH , G., J. S. N IMCSIK , AND I. S ORKIN (2019): “Granular Search, Market Structure, and Wages,” NBER
   Working Paper 26239, National Bureau of Economic Research.

K ARABARBOUNIS , L., AND B. N EIMAN (2013): “The Global Decline of the Labor Share,” The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 129(1), 61–103.

K EANE , M., AND R. R OGERSON (2012): “Micro and macro labor supply elasticities: A reassessment of conven-
   tional wisdom,” Journal of Economic Literature, 50(2), 464–76.

K ENNAN , J., AND J. R. WALKER (2011): “The effect of expected income on individual migration decisions,” Econo-
   metrica, 79(1), 211–251.

K LINE , P., N. P ETKOVA , H. W ILLIAMS , AND O. Z IDAR (2019): “Who Profits from Patents? Rent-Sharing at Inno-
   vative Firms,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134(3), 1343–404.

L ALLEMAND , T., R. P LASMAN , AND F. RYCX (2007): “The Establishment-size Wage Premium: Evidence from
   European Countries,” Empirica, 34(5), 427–451.

L AMADON , T., M. M OGSTAD , AND B. S ETZLER (2019): “Imperfect Competition and Rent Sharing in the U.S. Labor
   Market,” NBER Working Paper 25954, National Bureau of Economic Research.

M ALMBERG , H. (2013): “Random Choice over a Continuous Set of Options,” Ph.D. thesis, Department of Mathe-
  matics, Stockholm University.

M ANNING , A. (2003): Monopsony in motion: Imperfect competition in labor markets. Princeton University Press.

       (2011): “Imperfect Competition in the Labor Market,” in Handbook of labor economics, vol. 4, pp. 973–1041.
  Elsevier.

M ITMAN , K., AND S. R ABINOVICH (2019): “Do Changes in Unemployment Insurance Explain the Emergence of
  Jobless Recoveries?,” Discussion Paper Series ZA DP No. 12365, IZA Institute of Labor Economics.

R EICHLING , F., AND C. W HALEN (2012): “Review of Estimates of the Frisch Elasticity of Labor Supply,” Working
   Paper 2012-13, Congressional Budget Office Washington, D.C.

R INZ , K. (2018): “Labor Market Concentration, Earnings Inequality, and Earnings Mobility,” CARRA Working
   Paper Series 2018-10, Center for Administrative Records Research and Applications , US Census Bureau.

R OBINSON , J. (1933): The Economics of Imperfect Competition. Palgrave Macmillan.


                                                          47
R OSSI -H ANSBERG , E., P.-D. S ARTE , AND N. T RACHTER (2018): “Diverging Trends in National and Local Concen-
   tration,” NBER Working Paper 25066, National Bureau of Economic Research.

S ALOP, S. C. (1979): “Monopolistic Competition with Outside Goods,” The Bell Journal of Economics, pp. 141–156.

S TAIGER , D. O., J. S PETZ , AND C. S. P HIBBS (2010): “Is There Monopsony in the Labor Market? Evidence from a
   Natural Experiment,” Journal of Labor Economics, 28(2), 211–236.

S UÁREZ S ERRATO , J. C., AND O. Z IDAR (2016): “Who benefits from state corporate tax cuts? A local labor markets
   approach with heterogeneous firms,” American Economic Review, 106(9), 2582–2624.

V ERBOVEN , F. (1996): “The nested logit model and representative consumer theory,” Economics Letters, 50(1), 57–
   63.

W EBBER , D. A. (2016): “Firm-Level Monopsony and the Gender Pay Gap,” Industrial Relations: A Journal of Econ-
  omy and Society, 55(2), 323–345.




                                                       48
                               A PPENDIX F OR O NLINE P UBLICATION

This Appendix is organized as follows. Section A provides additional tables and figures references in
the text. Section B provides our micro-foundation for nested-CES preferences used in the main text
and references in Section 2. Section C contains details about the data and sample selection criteria.
Section E contains derivations of the household labor supply curves, optimal firm markdowns, and other
formulas referenced in the main text. Section F contains additional details regarding the computation of
the baseline model. Section G provides a model of the effect of corporate taxes on the marginal revenue
product of labor. Section H provides additional details regarding the calibration. Section I provides our
solution algorithm for the model with a minimum wage.


A     Additional tables and figures

        Moment                                                                            Model    Data
        A. Unweighted
        Wage-bill Herfindahl (unweighted)                                                  0.35    0.45
        Std. Dev. of Wage-bill Herfindahl (unweighted)                                     0.33    0.33
        Skewness of Wage-bill Herfindahl (unweighted)                                      1.07    0.48

        B. Weighted
        Wage-bill Herfindahl (weighted by market’s share of total payroll)                 0.14    0.14
        Std. Dev. of Wage-bill Herfindahl (weighted by market’s share of total payroll)    0.03    0.20
        Skewness of Wage-bill Herfindahl (weighted by market’s share of total payroll)     3.01    2.20

        C. Correlations of Wage-bill Herfindahl
        Number of firms                                                                    -0.52   -0.21
        Std. Dev. Of Relative Wages                                                        -0.31   -0.51
        Employment Herfindahl                                                               1.00    0.98
        Market Employment                                                                  -0.75   -0.21

         Table A1: Labor market concentration and cross-market correlations, model versus data

Notes: Benchmark oligopsonistic equilibrium. See data notes in Section 1.




                                                             49
         Variable                                                                             Mean               Std. Dev.
         Corporate tax rate (percent)                              τs(k)t                     7.14               3.19
         Change in corporate tax rate                              ∆τs(k)t                    0.05               0.78
         Total Pay At Firm (Thousands)                             wijt nijt                  2,148              19,010
         Employment                                                nijt                       37.99              215.2
         Wage bill Herfindahl                                      HH Ijtwn                   0.10               0.16
         Employment Herfindahl                                     HH Ijtn                    0.09               0.15
         Wage bill share                                            wn
                                                                   sijkt                      0.03               0.12
         Employment share                                           n
                                                                   sijt                       0.03               0.11
         Number of firms per market                                Mj                         1,345              2,813
         Log number of firms per market                            log M j                    5.56               2.01
         Log employment                                            log nijkt                  2.39               1.32
         Log wage                                                  log wijkt                  3.58               0.71
         Observations                                                                                            4,425,000

                                    Table A2: Regression sample summary statistics

Notes: Tradeable C-Corps from 2002 to 2012.




                        Description                                              Model       Data (KPZW)
                                                 e z̃ij nα̃−1 )
                        Log change in VAPW (VAPW=Z                               0.13        0.13
                                                         ij
                        Median firm size                                         25.26       25.26
                        Mean firm size                                           50.55       61.49
                        Median VAPW (dollars)                                    81900       86870
                        Mean VAPW (dollars)                                      83734       120160
                        Model Simulation Parameters
                        Size cutoff (Employees)                                  7.00
                        Fraction of Firms Shocked                                0.01
                        Shock size (dlog(z̃ij ))                                 0.15

                                    Table A3: Wage pass-through experiment details
Notes: Summary statistics for replication of Kline, Petkova, Williams, and Zidar (2019) regressions. We randomly sample one
percent of firms in our benchmark economy. We draw firms with employment greater than n. We increase the productivity of
treated firms by a factor ∆logezi j. The values of n and ∆ are calibrated to match the KPWZ (1) median firm size of 25 employees,
(2) increase in post-tax value added per worker of 13 percent. We keep aggregates fixed and solve the new market equilibrium.
                                                                                                                      n        o
We treat the untreated and treated observations for each firm as a panel with two observations per firm of wages wij0 , wij1
                                 y       yij1
                               n               o
and value added per worker, nij0   ij0
                                       , n ij1
                                                 . We then regress the wages in levels on VAPW in levels and a firm-specific fixed effect.
The regression coefficient is converted into an elasticity using untreated mean wages and mean value added per worker.




                                                                   50
                             Wage bill Herfindahl                           Model      Data
                             Payroll weighted average                          0.14     0.14

                             Unweighted average                                0.33     0.45

                             Correlation with market employment               -0.80    -0.21


                                    Table A4: Concentration and competition
Notes: Reports the average HH Ijwn weighted by employment across markets. Computed for the baseline calibration with Frisch
elasticity of ϕ.




                                                            51
                     Figure A1: Transition dynamics to change in market structure.

Notes: This figure provides transition dynamics of aggregates to an unexpected change in market struc-
ture in period t = 1. Transition dynamics are computed under ϕ = 0.50. Aggregate TFP Zt is as in
the representative agent model (19), and similarly the aggregate markdown µt = EtE+t 1 with Et from
(18). Both depend only on payroll shares, which are determined in labor equilibria and so independent
of aggregates. Given shares, we can compute Wt . So Wt jumps, as does Nt given the labor supply
                 ϕ
curve Nt = ϕWt . The path for capital and consumption is then determined by the resource constraint
Ct = Yt + (1 − δ)Kt − Kt+1 , household Euler equation uC (Ct , Nt ) = βuC (Ct+1 , Nt+1 ) [ Rt+1 + 1 − δ], and
equilibrium price of capital Rt Kt = (1 − γ)αYt . Since capital is undistorted, its paid the competitive
factor share equal to its output elasticity.




                                                     52
B     Microfounding the nested CES labor supply system
In this section we provide a micro-foundation for the nested CES preferences used in the main text.
The arguments used here adapt those in Verboven (1996). We begin with the case of monopsonistic
competition to develop ideas and then move to the case of oligopsonistic labor markets studied in the
text. We then show that the same supply system occurs in a setting where workers solve a dynamic
discrete choice problem and firms compete in a dynamic oligopoly.


B.1   Static discrete choice framework

Agents. There is a unit measure of ex-ante identical individuals indexed by l ∈ [0, 1]. There is a large
but finite set of J sectors in the economy, with finitely many firms i ∈ {1, . . . , M j } in each sector.


Preferences. Each individual has random preferences for working at each firm ij. Their disutility of
labor supply is convex in hours worked hl . Worker l’s disutility of working hlij hours at firm ij are:

                             νlij = e−µε lij hlij   ,        log νlij = log hij − µε ij ,

where the random utility term ε lij from a multi-variate Gumbel distribution:
                                                              "                         #
                                   F (ε i1 , ..., ε N J ) = exp − ∑ e−(1+η )ε ij .
                                                                  ij


The term ε lij is a worker-firm specific term which reduces labor disutility and hence could capture (i) an
inverse measure of commuting costs, or (ii) a positive amenity.


Decisions. Each individual must earn yl ∼ F (y), where earnings yl = wij hlij . After drawing their
      
vector ε lij , each worker solves
                                                    
                            min log hij − ε lij ≡ max log wij − log yl + ε lij .
                             ij                         ij


This problem delivers the following probability that worker l chooses to work at firm ij, which is inde-
pendent of yl :
                                                                        1+ η
                                                                      wij
                                          Probl wij , w−ij =                 1+ η
                                                                                    .                     (B1)
                                                                  ∑ij wij




                                                         53
Aggregation.    Total labor supply to firm ij, is then found by integrating these probabilities, multiplied
by the hours supplied by each worker l:
                                ˆ     1                   
                        nij =             Probl wij , w−ij hlij dF (yl )                                        ,              hlij = yl /wij
                                  0
                                            η
                                          wij          ˆ       1
                        nij =                   1+ η
                                                                   yl dF (yl )                                                                  (B2)
                                 ∑i∈ j wij             |   0
                                                                     {z     }
                                                                    : =Y

Aggregating this expression we obtain the obvious result that ∑i∈ j wij nij = Y. Now define the following
indexes:
                                                "                    # 1+1 η                             "                      # η +η 1
                                                                                                                         η +1

                                                    ∑                                                         ∑ nij
                                                            1+ η                                                           η
                                 W :=                      wij                     ,       N :=                                            .
                                                    i∈ j                                                      i∈ j

Along with (B2), these indexes imply that WN = Y. Using these definitions along with WN = Y in (B2)
yields the CES supply curve:                                                               η
                                                                                   wij
                                                                               
                                                                    nij =                         N.
                                                                                   W
We therefore have the result that the supply curves that face firms in this model of individual discrete
choice are equivalent to those that face the firms when a representative household solves the following
income maximization problem:
                                                                                       "                      # η +η 1
                                                                                                       η +1

                                                    ∑ wij nij                              ∑ nij
                                                                                                         η
                                          max                              s.t.                                          = N.
                                          {nij }    i∈ j                                   i∈ j


Since at the solution, the objective function is equal to WN, then the envelope condition delivers a natural
interpretation of W as the equilibrium payment to total labor input in the economy for one additional
unit of aggregate labor disutility. That is, the following equalities hold:

                                     ∂                                                                                   ∂
                                    ∂N      ∑ wij nij∗ (wij , w−ij ) = λ = W = ∂N WN.
                                            i∈ j


Nested logit and nested CES.              Consider changing the distribution of preference shocks as follows:
                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                  Mj
                                                                                                                               ! 11++ηθ
                                                                                       J
                                F (ε i1 , ..., ε N J ) = exp − ∑                             ∑ e−(1+η)ε                  ij
                                                                                                                                           .
                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                   j =1       i =1


We recover the distribution (B1) above if η = θ. Otherwise, if η > θ the problem is convex and the condi-
tional covariance of within sector preference draws differ from the economy wide variance of preference
draws. We discuss this more below.
   In this setting, choice probabilities can be expressed as the product of the conditional choice prob-


                                                                                  54
ability of supplying labor to firm i conditional on supplying labor to market j, and the probability of
supplying labor to market j:

                                                                                Mj
                                                                                            i 1+ θ   h
                                                                   1+ η                1 + η 1+ η
                                                              wij            ∑     w
                                                                                i =1 ij
                Probl wij , w−ij =               Mj    1+ η
                                                                        ×                       i 1+ θ .
                                              ∑i=1 wij
                                                                               h
                                                                            J       Ml     1 + η 1+ η
                                              | {z }                      ∑l =1 ∑k=1 wkl
                                   Prob (Choose firm i|Choose market j)
                                                                          |          {z              }
                                                l
                                                                                                    Probl (Choose market j)


Following the same steps as above, we can aggregate these choice probabilities and hours decisions to
obtain firm level labor supply:

                                                                         h  Mj
                                                                                       i 1+ θ
                                                                                  1 + η 1+ η
                                                                          ∑i=1 wij
                                                       η
                                                      wij
                                   nij =            Mj      1+ η                           i 1+θ Y.                               (B3)
                                                ∑i=1 wij
                                                                           h
                                                                       J       Ml     1 + η 1+ η
                                                                      ∑l =1 ∑k=1 wkl

We can now define the following indexes:

                                       "M                   # 1+1 η                  "M                  # 1+η η
                                                j                                             j   1+ η

                                           ∑ wij                                         ∑ nij
                                                     1+ η                                          η
                               Wj =                                       ,   Nj =                                 ,
                                           i =1                                          i =1
                                       "                     # 1+1 θ                 "                   # 1+θ θ
                                            J                                             J       1+ θ
                                W=         ∑ W1j +θ                       ,    N=        ∑ Nj      θ
                                                                                                                   .
                                           j =1                                          j =1

                                                                                                                              M
Using these definitions and similar results to the above we can show that W j N j = ∑i=j1 wij nij , and
Y = WN = ∑ jJ=1 W j N j .
   Consider the thought experiment of adding more markets J (which is necessary to identically map
these formulas to our model). While the min of an infinite number of draws from a Gumbel distribution
is not defined (it asymptotes to −∞), the distribution of choices across markets is defined at each point in
the limit as we add more markets J (Malmberg (2013)). As a result, the distribution of choices will have
a well defined limit, and with the correct scaling as we add more markets (we can scale the disutilities at
each step and not affect the market choice), as described in (Malmberg (2013)), the limiting wage indexes
will be defined as above. We can then express (B3) as:
                                                                        η         θ
                                                                 wij           Wj
                                                             
                                                    nij =                                N,
                                                                 Wj            W

which completes the CES supply system defined in the text.


Comment.     The above has established that it is straightforward to derive the supply system in the
model through a discrete choice framework. This is particularly appealing given recent modeling of
labor supply using familiar discrete choice frameworks first in models of economic geography and more

                                                                        55
recently in labor (Borovickova and Shimer (2017), Card, Cardoso, Heining, and Kline (2018), Lamadon,
Mogstad, and Setzler (2019)). Since firms take this supply system as given, we can then work with the
nested CES supply functions as if they were derived from the preferences and decisions of a representa-
tive household. This vastly simplifies welfare computations and allows for the integration of the model
into more familiar macroeconomic environments.
   A second advantage of this micro-foundation is that it provides a natural interpretation of the some-
what nebulous elasticities of substitution in the CES specification: η and θ. Returning to the Gumbel
distribution we observe the following
                                                                                               
                                                                   Mj
                                                                                     ! 11++ηθ
                                                               J
                              F (ε i1 , ..., ε N J ) = exp − ∑    ∑ e−(1+η)ε   ij
                                                                                               
                                                                                                
                                                           j =1    i =1


A higher value of η increases the correlation of draws within a market (McFadden, 1978). Within a market
if η is high, then an individual’s preference draws are likely to be clustered. With little difference in non-
pecuniary idiosyncratic preferences for working at different firms, wages dominate in an individual’s
labor supply decision and wage posting in the market is closer to the competitive outcome. A higher
value of θ decreases the overall variance of draws across all firms (i.e. it increases the correlation across
any two randomly chosen sub-vectors of an individual’s draws). An individual is therefore more likely
to find that their lowest levels of idiosyncratic disutility are in two different markets, increasing across
market wage competition.
   In the case that η = θ, the model collapses to the standard logit model. In this case the following
obtains. Take an individual’s ε lij for some firm. The conditional probability distribution of some other
draw ε li0 j0 is the same whether firm i0 is in the same market ( j0 = j) or some other market ( j0 6= j).
Individuals are as likely to find somewhere local that incurs the same level of labor disability as finding
somewhere in another market. In this setting economy-wide monopsonistic competition obtains. When
an individual is more likely to find their other low disutility draws in the same market, then firms within
that market have local market power. This is precisely the case that obtains when η > θ.


B.2   Dynamic discrete choice framework

We show that the above discrete choice framework can be adapted to an environment where some indi-
viduals draw new vectors ε l each period and reoptimize their labor supply. Firms therefore compete in
a dynamic oligopoly. Restricting attention to the stationary solution to the model where firms keep em-
ployment and wages constant—as in the tradition of Burdett and Mortensen (1998)—we show that the
allocation of employment and wages once again coincide with the solution to the problem in the main
text. To simplify notation we consider the problem for a market with M firms i ∈ {1, . . . , M} which may
be generalized to the model in the text.




                                                          56
Environment.       Every period a random fraction λ of workers each draw a new vector ε l . Let ni be
employment at firm i. Let wi be the average wage of workers at firm i, such that the total wage bill in the
firm is wi ni . Let the equilibrium labor supply function h(wi , w−i ) determine the amount of hires a firm
makes if it posts a wage wi when its competitors wages in the market are given by the vector w−i .


Value function.       Let V (ni , wi ) be the firm’s present discounted value of profits, where the firm has
discount rate β = 1. Then V (ni , wi ) satisfies:

                                                                                  Pzi − wi0 h wi0 , w−
                                                                                                     0        0    0
                                                                                                                  
                V (ni , wi ) = ( Pzi − wi ) (1 − λ) ni + max
                                                          0                                            i + V ni , wi     , (B4)
                                                                         wi

          n0 ni , wi0 , w−
                         0
                                = (1 − λ) ni + h wi0 , w− 0
                                                             
                           i                                i       ,                                                      (B5)
                                                        0      0
                                                                   0
                                  (1 − λ ) w i n i + h wi , w −i wi
      w0 ni , wi , wi0 , w−
                          0
                              
                            i   =                                   .                                                     (B6)
                                     (1 − λ) ni + h wi0 , w−   0
                                                                 i

The firm operates a constant returns to scale production function. Of the firm’s ni workers, a fraction (1 −
λ) do not draw new preferences. The total profit associated with these workers is then average revenue
( Pzi ) minus average cost (wi ). The firm chooses a new wage wi0 to post in the market. In equilibrium,
given its competitor’s wages w−    0 , it hires h ( w , w ) workers. The total profit associated with these
                                     i               i   −i
workers is again average revenue ( Pzi ) minus average cost (wi0 ). The second and third equations account
for the evolution of the firm’s state variables.


Optimality.     Given its competitor’s prices, the first order condition with respect to wi0 is:

  Pzi − wi0 h1 wi0 , w−
                      0        0    0        0    0
                                                  0      0    0
                                                                          0    0
                                                                                               0    0
                                                                                                       
                        i − h wi , w−i + Vn ni , wi nw ni , wi , w−i + Vw ni , wi ww ni , wi , wi , w−i = 0


The relevant envelope conditions are

    Vn (ni , wi ) = ( Pzi − wi ) (1 − λ) + Vn ni0 , wi0 n0n ni , wi0 , w0−i + Vw ni0 , wi0 w0n ni , wi , wi0 , w0−i
                                                                                                                 

    Vw (ni , wi ) = − (1 − λ) ni + Vw ni0 , wi0 ww
                                                0
                                                       ni , wi , wi0 , w0−i
                                                                            


In a stationary equilibrium wi = wi0 , and ni0 = ni . One can compute the partial derivatives involved in
these expressions, and evaluate the conditions under stationarity to obtain

                                           ( Pzi − wi ) h1 (wi , w−i ) = h (wi , w−i ) .

Rearranging this expression:

                                       ε i ( wi , w −i )                                        h1 ( wi , w −i ) wi
                        wi =                             Pzi   ,        ε i ( wi , w −i ) : =
                                   ε i ( wi , w −i ) + 1                                          h ( wi , w −i )

The solution to the dynamic oligopsony problem for a given supply system is identical to the solution
of the static problem. In this setting, the supply system is obviously that which is obtained from the

                                                                   57
individual discrete choice problem in the previous section.


Comments.     This setting establishes that the model considered in the main text can also be conceived
as a setting where individuals periodically receive some preference shock that causes them to relocate,
and firms engage in a dynamic oligopoly given these worker decisions. When η > θ the shock causes a
worker to consider all firms in one market very carefully to the exclusion of other markets when they are
making their relocation decision. When η = θ the individual considers all firms in all markets equally.




                                                   58
C      Data
This section provides additional details regarding the data sources used in the paper, sample restrictions,
and construction of a number of variables.


C.1     Census Longitudinal Business Database (LBD)

The LBD is built on the Business Register (BR), Economic Census and surveys. The BR began in 1972 and
is a database of all U.S. business establishments. The business register is also called the Standard Statis-
tical Establishment List (SSEL). The SSEL contains records for all industries except private households
and illegal or underground activities. Most government owner entities are not in the SSEL. The SSEL
includes single and multi unit establishments. The longitudinal links are constructed using the SSEL.
The database is annual.


C.2     Sample restrictions

For both the summary statistics and corporate tax analysis, we isolate all plants (lbdnums) with non
missing firmids, with strictly positive pay, strictly positive employment, non-missing county codes for
the continental US (we exclude Alaska, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico). We then isolate all lbdnums with
non-missing 2 digit NAICS codes equal to 11,21,31,32,33, or 55. We use the consistent 2007 NAICS codes
provided by Fort and Klimek (2016) throughout the paper. These are the top tradeable 2-digit NAICS
codes as defined by Delgado, Bryden, and Zyontz (2014). We winsorize the relative wage at the 1%
level to remove outliers. Each plant has a unique firmid which corresponds to the owner of the plant.64
Throughout the paper, we define a firm to be the sum of all establishments in a commuting zone with a
common firmid and NAICS3 classification.
     Summary Statistics Sample: Our summary statistics include all observations that satisfy the above
criteria in 1976 and 2014.
     Corporate Tax Sample: The corporate tax analysis includes all observations that satisfy the above
criteria between 2002 and 2012 (note the tax series ends in 2012, but the ‘Year t+1’ estimates use 2013
observations). We further restrict the sample to firmid-market-year observations which have a ‘Corpo-
ration’ legal form of organization. The legal form of organization changes discontinuously in 2001 and
earlier years, and thus we restrict our analysis to post-2002 observations. We must further restrict our
attention to corporations that operate in at least two markets, since we use variation across markets,
within a state, in order to isolate the impact of the corporate tax shocks on employment and wages.
     Sample NAICS Codes and Commuting Zones: Table C1 describes the NAICS 3 codes in our sam-
ple. Table C2 provides examples of commuting zones and the counties that are associated with those
commuting zones.


    64 Each firm only has one firmid. The firmid is different from the EIN. The firmid aggregates EINS to build a consistent firm
identifier in the cross-section and over time.


                                                               59
                                         Table C1: NAICS 3 digit examples

NAICS3     Description                                        NAICS3   Description
111        Crop Production                                    322      Paper Manuf.
112        Animal Production and Aquaculture                  323      Printing and Related Support Activities
113        Forestry and Logging                               324      Petroleum and Coal Products Manuf.
114        Fishing, Hunting and Trapping                      325      Chemical Manuf.
115        Support Activities for Agriculture and Forestry    326      Plastics and Rubber Products Manuf.
211        Oil and Gas Extraction                             327      Nonmetallic Mineral Product Manuf.
212        Mining (except Oil and Gas)                        331      Primary Metal Manuf.
213        Support Activities for Mining                      332      Fabricated Metal Product Manuf.
311        Food Manuf.                                        333      Machinery Manuf.
312        Beverage and Tobacco Product Manuf.                334      Computer and Electronic Product Manuf.
313        Textile Mills                                      335      Electrical Equipment, Appliance, Component Manuf.
314        Textile Product Mills                              336      Transportation Equipment Manuf.
315        Apparel Manufacturing                              337      Furniture and Related Product Manuf.
316        Leather and Allied Product Manuf.                  339      Miscellaneous Manuf.
321        Wood Product Manuf.                                551      Management of Companies and Enterprises




      Table C2: Commuting Zone (CZ) examples: Census commuting zones numbers 58 and 47

CZ ID, 2000   County Name            Metro. Area, 2003                                   County Pop. 2000   CZ Pop. 2000
      58      Cook County            Chicago-Naperville-Joliet, IL Metro. Division              5,376,741      8,704,935
      58      DeKalb County          Chicago-Naperville-Joliet, IL Metro. Division                 88,969      8,704,935
      58      DuPage County          Chicago-Naperville-Joliet, IL Metro. Division                904,161      8,704,935
      58      Grundy County          Chicago-Naperville-Joliet, IL Metro. Division                 37,535      8,704,935
      58      Kane County            Chicago-Naperville-Joliet, IL Metro. Division                404,119      8,704,935
      58      Kendall County         Chicago-Naperville-Joliet, IL Metro. Division                 54,544      8,704,935
      58      Lake County            Lake County-Kenosha County, IL-WI Metro. Division            644,356      8,704,935
      58      McHenry County         Chicago-Naperville-Joliet, IL Metro. Division                260,077      8,704,935
      58      Will County            Chicago-Naperville-Joliet, IL Metro. Division                502,266      8,704,935
      58      Kenosha County         Lake County-Kenosha County, IL-WI Metro. Division            149,577      8,704,935
      58      Racine County          Racine, WI MSA                                               188,831      8,704,935
      58      Walworth County        Whitewater, WI Micropolitan SA                                93,759      8,704,935
      47      Anoka County           Minneapolis-St.   Paul-Bloomington, MN-WI MSA                298,084      2,904,389
      47      Carver County          Minneapolis-St.   Paul-Bloomington, MN-WI MSA                 70,205      2,904,389
      47      Chisago County         Minneapolis-St.   Paul-Bloomington, MN-WI MSA                 41,101      2,904,389
      47      Dakota County          Minneapolis-St.   Paul-Bloomington, MN-WI MSA                355,904      2,904,389
      47      Hennepin County        Minneapolis-St.   Paul-Bloomington, MN-WI MSA              1,116,200      2,904,389
      47      Isanti County          Minneapolis-St.   Paul-Bloomington, MN-WI MSA                 31,287      2,904,389
      47      Ramsey County          Minneapolis-St.   Paul-Bloomington, MN-WI MSA                511,035      2,904,389
      47      Scott County           Minneapolis-St.   Paul-Bloomington, MN-WI MSA                 89,498      2,904,389
      47      Washington County      Minneapolis-St.   Paul-Bloomington, MN-WI MSA                201,130      2,904,389
      47      Wright County          Minneapolis-St.   Paul-Bloomington, MN-WI MSA                 89,986      2,904,389
      47      Pierce County          Minneapolis-St.   Paul-Bloomington, MN-WI MSA                 36,804      2,904,389
      47      St. Croix County       Minneapolis-St.   Paul-Bloomington, MN-WI MSA                 63,155      2,904,389




                                                             60
D     Labor market concentration in all industries
Table D1 includes summary statistics of labor market concentration across all industries. Similar to
tradeable industries, the market-level unweighted and weighted Herfindahls decline. The unweighted
wage-bill Herfindahl declines from 0.36 to 0.34. The payroll weighted wage-bill Herfindahl declines
from 0.17 to 0.11. The payroll weighted employment Herfindahl declines from 0.15 to 0.09. Similar
to tradeable industries, Herfindahls are negatively correlated with the number of firms as well as total
employment in the market.

                                                                                      (A) Firm-market-level averages
                                                                                     1976             2014
    Total firm pay (000s)                                                            209.40            1102.00
    Total firm employment                                                            19.43             23.21
    Pay per employee                                                                 $ 10,777          $ 47,480
    Firm-Market level observations                                                   3,746,000         5,854,000


                                                                                         (B) Market-level averages
                                                                                     1976              2014
    Wage-bill Herfindahl (Unweighted)                                                0.36              0.34
    Employment Herfindahl (Unweighted)                                               0.33              0.32
    Wage-bill Herfindahl (Weighted by market’s share of total wage-bill)             0.17              0.11
    Employment Herfindahl (Weighted by market’s share of total wage-bill)            0.15              0.09
    Firms per market                                                                 75.70             113.20
    Percent of markets with 1 firm                                                   10.4%             9.4%
    Market level observations                                                        49,000            52,000


                                                                                       (C) Market-level correlations
                                                                                     1976             2014
    Correlation of Wage-bill Herfindahl and number of firms                          -0.20             -0.17
    Correlation of Wage-bill Herfindahl and Employment Herfindahl                    0.97              0.97
    Correlation of Wage-bill Herfindahl and Market Employment                        -0.15             -0.16
    Market-level observations                                                        49,000            52,000



              Table D1: Summary Statistics, Longitudinal Employer Database 1976 and 2014

Notes: All NAICS. Market defined to be NAICS3 within Commuting Zone. Observations rounded to nearest thousand and
numbers rounded to 4 significant digits according to Census disclosure rules. Firm-market-level refers to a ‘firmid by Com-
muting Zone by 3-digit NAICs by Year’ observation. Market-level refers to a ‘Commuting Zone by 3-digit NAICs by Year’
aggregation of observations.




                                                            61
E      Mathematical derivations
This section details derivation of mathematical formulae appearing in the main text. It covers: (i) the
household problem, (ii) sectoral equilibria of the firm problem, (iii) the labor share, (iv) wage pass-
through results.


E.1     Household problem derivations

We solve for demand of the final good by taking the first order condition of the household problem with
respect to Ct
                                                                                                           1+ 1
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                 1       Nt ϕ
                                                                 βt u0 Ct −                                          = Λt
                                                                                                         1 + ϕ1
                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                 ϕ   ϕ



The optimality condition for capital yields:

                                                                 Λ t = Λ t +1 R t +1 + ( 1 − δ ) .
                                                                                                


      To determine labor supply, we proceed with a three-step budgeting problem. Consider the first stage.
Suppose the household must earn St by choosing labor supply across markets:

                                                                 "ˆ                              # θ +θ 1               ˆ
                                                                             1        θ +1                                      1
                                        Nt = min                                 N jt djθ
                                                                                                                 s.t                W jt N jt dj ≥ St
                                             {N jt }                     0                                                  0


The FOC N jt is65
            


                                                                                         −1          1
                                                                          Nt θ N jtθ = λW jt
                                                                     "ˆ          #      ˆ 1
                                                                        1   θ +1
                                                             − 1θ
                                                          Nt              N jt dj = λ
                                                                              θ
                                                                                             W jt N jt dj
                                                                             0                                      0
                                                                                                                 ˆ      1
                                                                                                 Nt = λ                     W jt N jt dj
                                                                                                                    0

                                                                                                            ´1
then define Wt by the number that satisfies Wt Nt =                                                         0    W jt N jt dj, which implies that λ = W− 1
                                                                                                                                                       t . Using
the wage index in the first-order condition, we obtain:

                                                                                 −1          1
                                                                         Nt θ N jtθ = λW jt
                                                                                        W jt θ
                                                                                           
                                                                              N jt =           Nt                                                          (E1)
                                                                                        Wt



                                                                                                    1
                                                      θ +1 − 1
                                                                                             −
                                  ´1                                     ´1
                                                      θ            
                                         θ +1                                     θ +1
    65 Where
                                                                                                  θ +1           − 1θ
               we have used       0    N jtθ dj                  =       0    N jtθ dj                   = Nt


                                                                                                   62
   We then recover the wage index by multiplying (E1) by W jt and integrating across markets:

                                         W jt N jt = W1jt+θ W−    θ
                                                                t Nt
                                    ˆ 1                ˆ 1
                                        W jt N jt dj =     W1jt+θ djW− θ
                                                                     t Nt
                                      0                               0
                                                                  ˆ       1
                                               Wt Nt =                        W1jt+θ djW− θ
                                                                                        t Nt
                                                                      0
                                                                  "ˆ                            # 1+1 θ
                                                                              1
                                                     Wt =                         W1jt+θ dj
                                                                          0


   Moving to the second stage, suppose that a household must raise resources St within a market and
chooses labor supply to each firm within that market:
                                                              ! η +η 1
                                              M        η +1                                     M
                                              ∑ nijt                                         ∑ wijt nijt ≥ St
                                                         η
                            N jt = min                                            s.t.
                                   {nijt }    i =1                                           i =1


   Let W jt be the number such that W jt N jt = ∑i wijt nijt . Taking first order conditions and proceeding
similarly to the first stage we obtain the following:
                                                                              η
                                                                  wijt
                                                              
                                                nijt =                                N jt                        (E2)
                                                                  W jt
                                                              "                       # 1+1 η
                                                                  ∑ wijt
                                                                              1+ η
                                               W jt =
                                                                  i


   Moving to the third stage, we recast the original problem and take first order conditions for Nt :

                                                                                                     1+ ϕ1
                                                                                                             
                                                         ∞
                                                                     1 N
                                 U=          max
                                       {Nt ,Ct ,Kt }
                                                        ∑ βt u Ct − ϕ1 1 +t                              1
                                                                                                              
                                                        t =0        ϕ                                     ϕ




subject to the household’s budget constraint which is given by,
                                 h                i
                             Ct + Kt+1 − (1 − δ)Kt = Nt Wt + Rt Kt + Πt .

This yields the following expression for the aggregate labor supply index:

                                                                                  ϕ
                                                        Nt = ϕWt                                                  (E3)




                                                                  63
      Substituting (E1) and (E3) into equation (E2), we derive the labor supply curve in the main text:
                                                                            η               θ
                                                                   wijt             W jt
                                                              
                                                                                                    ϕ
                                                 nijt = ϕ                                          Wt
                                                                   W jt             Wt
                                                          "                   # 1+1 η
                                                              ∑
                                                                    1+ η
                                             W jt =                wijt
                                                               i
                                                          "ˆ                        # 1+1 θ
                                                                   1
                                                 Wt =                  W1jt+θ dj
                                                               0


      To obtain the inverse labor supply curve, we use the first order conditions for labor supply within
the market:                                                                       η
                                                                           wijt
                                                                       
                                                         nijt =                         N jt
                                                                           W jt
Inverting this equation yields,
                                                                                  1/η
                                                                           nijt
                                                                       
                                                        wijt =                           W jt                                (E4)
                                                                           N jt

Labor supply across markets is given by the following expression:
                                                                                   θ
                                                                            W jt
                                                                       
                                                         N jt =                         Nt
                                                                            Wt

Inverting this equation yields,
                                                                                  1/θ
                                                                           N jt
                                                                       
                                                        W jt =                           Wt                                  (E5)
                                                                           Nt

Combining (E5), (E4) and (E3) yields the expression in the text.


E.2     Derivation of firm problem under Cournot competition
                   1− γ γ α
                          
Let yijt = Zzijt k ijt nijt . The firm problem with capital and decreasing returns to scale is given by,

                                                               1− γ γ α
                                                                       
                                   max Zzijt                 k ijt nijt           − Rt k ijt − wijt nijt
                                   k ijt ,nijt


                                                                                                           Rt k ijt
subject to the household labor supply curve. Taking first order conditions for k ijt yields                 yijt      = (1 − γ) α.
We substitute this expression into the profit function

                                           max [1 − (1 − γ) α] yijt − wijt nijt
                                          k ijt ,nijt




                                                                           64
We solve for capital using the first order condition for capital (again):66

                                                                                         !         1
                                                                                               1−(1−γ)α
                                                         (1 − γ) αzijt Z                                     1−(1−γ)α
                                                                                                                         γα

                                          k ijt =                                                           nijt
                                                              Rt

We substitute this into the expression for yijt to obtain firm-level output as a function of nijt :

                                                                             (1− γ ) α
                                                   (1 − γ ) α
                                                                                                                                γα
                                                                            1−(1−γ)α                            1
                                                                                                             1−(1−γ)α
                                      yijt =                                             (zijt Z ) 1−(1−γ)α nijt
                                                      Rt

The firm profit function becomes:

                                                                                  (1− γ ) α
                                                        (1 − γ ) α
                                                                                                                                     γα
                                                                                 1−(1−γ)α                              1
                                                                                                                    1−(1−γ)α
                     πijt = [1 − (1 − γ) α]                                                     (zijt Z ) 1−(1−γ)α nijt      − wijt nijt
                                                           Rt

                                                                                                      (1− γ ) α               1
                                                                                                                                             1
                            γα                                                     (1− γ ) α         1−(1−γ)α         1−(1−γ)α
             α :=
    Defining e             zijt := [1 − (1 − γ) α]
                         1−(1−γ)α
                           e      ,                                                  Rt                              zijt            e := Z 1−(1−γ)α yields the
                                                                                                                               , and Z
firm profit maximization problem, expression (2.3), in the text.
                                                                                           1
                                                                                               −1/θ
    Define MRPLijt = e e zijt neα−1 . Define Xt =
                     α Ze                                                         1
                                                                                   1
                                                                                        Ntϕ               and substitute this into the inverse labor
                                ijt
                                                                                 ϕϕ
supply function to derive the following expression:

                                                                             1/η        1/θ −1/η
                                                         wijt = nijt N jt                              Xt                                                 (E6)

We substitute this expression into the profit function to obtain,
                                                                                                 1          1
                                                                                                     +1         − η1
                                               πijt = max Ze       α
                                                          e zijt neijt − nijt
                                                                          η
                                                                              n jtθ                                    Xt
                                                          nijt


                                                                                                          ∂N jt nijt             wn .
Before taking first order conditions, we derive a useful result,                                          ∂nijt N jt          = sijt
                ∂n jt nijt      wn
Lemma E.1.      ∂nijt n jt   = sijt
                                                                η +1
                                                                         η +η 1
    Proof: Using the definition of N jt = ∑i nijt                  η
                                                                                       and taking first order conditions yields:

                                                                 "                      # η +η 1 −1
                                                                                 η +1                     η +1
                                                   ∂N jt                                                            −1
                                                                     ∑ nijt
                                                                                   η
                                                         =                                             nijtη
                                                   ∂nijt                i
                                                                  − 1 η1
                                                           =     N jt η nijt



  66
                       γ                              1          αγ
                                                (1−α)γzi 1−(1−α)γ 1−(1−α)γ
  (1 − α) γzi k1i −α niα = rk i implies k i =      r             n i


                                                                                 65
This yields the elasticity of market level labor supply:

                                                                                                η +η 1
                                                              ∂N jt nijt               nijt
                                                                                   
                                                                         =                                                                         (E7)
                                                              ∂nijt N jt               N jt

Substituting (E7) into the definition of the wage-bill share:

                                   1          1                                                        η +1        η +1
                                  η    +1         − η1               1
                                                                         +1
                wijt nijt        nijt N jtθ              X          η
                                                                   nijt                         nijtη              nijtη              ∂N jt nijt
       wn                                                                                                                       wn
      sijt   =              =                                 =                  =                              =         =⇒ s ijt =
               ∑i wijt nijt            1
                                       η +1
                                                  1 1
                                                  θ−η
                                                                          1
                                                                          η +1                  η +1
                                                                                                         η η
                                                                                                      η +1 η+ 1     η + 1
                                                                                                                                      ∂nijt N jt
                                ∑i nijt N jt              X       ∑i nijt                                          N jtη
                                                                                          ∑i   n η
                                                                                                 ijt




Lemma E.2. The equilibrium markdown µijt is a wage bill share weighted harmonic mean of the monopsonistically
competitive markup under η or θ.

                                                         wijt = µijt MRPLijt
                                                                    ε ijt
                                                         µijt =
                                                                ε ijt + 1
                                                                                        −1
                                                                          wn 1     wn 1
                                                                            
                                                         ε ijt = 1 − sijt       + sijt                                                             (E8)
                                                                              η        θ

      Proof: Using Lemma E.1, we take first-order conditions to derive the optimal employment decision:
                                           1 1 1                 1      1
                                                                                        
                                      1                 −        1 1    η +1      −1       1 ∂N jt
                    0 = MRPLijt −       + 1 nijt η
                                                   N jtθ η Xt −   −    nijt  N jtθ η Xt
                                      η                          θ η                      N jt ∂nijt
                                                        
                           η+1      θ + 1 η + 1 wn
               MRPLijt =        +         −            sijt wijt
                            η         θ        η
                                                   −1
                                    wn 1     wn 1
                                     
                  wijt = 1 + 1 − sijt     + sijt         MRPLijt
                                        η        θ




E.3     Equilibrium properties - Labor Share

Using Lemma E.2, an individual firm’s labor share, lsij , can be written in terms of the equilibrium
markup:

                                                                            wij nij
                                                                  lsij =
                                                                            Ze
                                                                            e zij neijα
                                                                                       wij
                                                                  lsij = (αγ)
                                                                                      MRPLij
                                                                  lsij = (αγ)µij


                                                                                 66
      Accounting for payments to capital, value added is yij = (1/(1 − (1 − γ)α)) Ze
                                                                                  e zij neα . At the market
                                                                                          ij
level, the inverse labor share in market j, LS− 1
                                              j , is given by the following expression:


                                                   ∑i yij                         wij nij          yij
                                                                                             
                                     LS− 1
                                       j =
                                                  ∑i wij nij
                                                             =          ∑        ∑i wij nij       wij nij
                                                                         i

Using the definition of the wage-bill share,

                                                  yij
                          LS− 1
                            j =       ∑ sijwn wij nij
                                         i

                                                      1           Ze
                                                                   e zij neα
                                      ∑ sijwn
                                                                           ij
                          LS− 1
                            j =
                                                            n                  o
                                         i
                                                1 − (1 − γ)α µ α̃ Ze      α −1
                                                                    zij nij
                                                                          e
                                                                                 nij
                                                              ij
                                                                  e

                          LS− 1
                            j =       ∑ sijwn (αγ)−1 µij−1
                                         i
                                                                
                                                                          
                                                    η+1           θ+1 η+1
                          LS−
                            j
                              1
                                    = (αγ) ∑ −1
                                                        sijwnwn
                                                         + sij       −
                                              i
                                                      η            θ    η
                                                                      
                                             η+1             θ+1 η+1
                          LS−
                            j
                              1
                                    = (αγ)−1      + (αγ)−1         −      HH Ijwn
                                                η               θ    η

Aggregating across markets yields the economy-wide labor share:
                                         ´                 ˆ                                       ˆ
                                          ∑ yij                      ∑ wij nij ∑ yij
                         LS   −1
                                    =´             =                ´                     =            swn   −1
                                                                                                        j LS j dj
                                         ∑ wij nij                    ∑ wij nij ∑ wij nij

This yields the expression in the text:
                                                                                      ˆ                     !
                               −1      1     η+1                    θ+1 η+1
                          LS        =            +                     −                      swn     wn
                                                                                               j HH I j dj          (E9)
                                      αγ      η                      θ   η


E.4     Representative firm problem

In this appendix, we derive the representative firm problem and prove Proposition 1. We proceed as
follows: (1) we aggregate firm-level variables, (2) we define the representative firm’s first order condi-
tions, (3) we then show under what restrictions factor demands and output of the representative and
heterogeneous firm problems coincide, and (4) we then consider an auxiliary economy with a contin-
uum of identical symmetric firms and characterize the equilibrium set of equations and factor shares
for the auxiliary economy, (5) we derive the conditions (stated in Proposition 1) under which the first
order conditions in this auxiliary economy coincide with the representative firm economy, and thus the
heterogeneous firm economy.




                                                                        67
Step 1. Recall that optimal capital demand as a function of labor solves,

                                                                1− γ γ α
                                                                     
                                       k∗ nij = arg max Zzij k ij nij − Rk ij
                                             

                                                                ! 1
                                                  (1 − γ) αzij Z 1−(1−γ)α 1−(1γα−γ)α
                                           k ij =                        nij
                                                        R

   Define νij as the number which satisfies nij = νij N. νij is the contribution of nij to the aggregate labor
index. Using this definition, labor supply is given by,
                                                                            η           θ
                                                                      wij            Wj
                                                                  
                                                   nij = ϕ                                     N
                                                                      Wj             W
                                                   nij = νij N

                                                                          1− γ γ α
                                                                               
   Substituting capital demand into the definition of output yij = Zzij k ij nij , and then using the
definition of νij yields,

                                                                                      (1− γ ) α
                                                                  (1 − γ ) α
                                                                                
                                               1−(11−γ)α                            1−(1−γ)α                  γα
                              yij = zij Z                                                         (νij N) 1−(1−γ)α
                                                                      R

   Aggregating firm-level output implies that aggregate output is given by,
                                        (ˆ                                       )                        (1− γ ) α
                                                                          1
                                                                                      (1 − γ ) α
                                                                                                      
                                1                                                                       1−(1−γ)α          γα

                                             ∑
                            1−(1−γ)α                         γα       1−(1−γ)α
                     Y=Z                                zij νij                                                        N 1−(1−γ)α   (E10)
                                               i
                                                                                          R

   Likewise, aggregating firm-level capital demand implies that aggregate capital is given by,
                                        (ˆ                                       )                           1
                                                                          1
                                                                                      (1 − γ ) α
                                                                                                      
                                1                                                                       1−(1−γ)α          γα

                                             ∑
                            1−(1−γ)α                         γα       1−(1−γ)α
                     K=Z                                zij νij                                                        N 1−(1−γ)α   (E11)
                                               i
                                                                                          R


Step 2. We define the aggregate production function as follows:
                                                                          α
                                                          Y = Z K 1− γ N γ

   Since the capital market is competitive, capital demand by the representative firm would be
                                                             1                                               1
                                       (1 − γ ) α                                         (1 − γ ) α
                                                                                                 
                            1                            1−(1−γ)α            γα                              1−(1−γ)α
                                                                                                         γα
                 K=Z    1−(1−γ)α                                      N   1−(1−γ)α   = Z               N                            (E12)
                                           R                                                  R




                                                                          68
   Substituting capital demand back into output, output of the representative firm would be,

                                                        (1− γ ) α                                "                     # 1
                                      (1 − γ ) α                                                     (1 − γ) α (1−γ)α γα 1−(1−γ)α
                                                                                                            
                           1                           1−(1−γ)α                γα
               Y=Z     1−(1−γ)α                                         N   1−(1−γ)α            = Z                  N                                (E13)
                                          R                                                              R


Step 3.      This leads us to the first result.                         Comparing equations (E11) and (E10) with (E12) and
(E13), capital demand and output are the same as derived from a representative firm when Z =
  
    ´           1 1−(1−γ)α
              γα 1−(1−γ)α
Z     ∑i ij ij
          z ν                 .
   Lemma E1: The representative firm and heterogeneous firm problems coincide for the following aggregate
production function,                                                         α
                                                             Y = Z K 1− γ N γ

where the economy total factor productivity index TFP Z
                                                        "ˆ                                                 #1−(1−γ)α
                                                                                                  1

                                                                ∑
                                                                                 γα             1−(1−γ)α
                                            Z=Z                             zij νij
                                                                    i




Step 4. Consider the following economy. Assume there is a continuum of identical firms indexed by ij,
as before, with productivity Z. Assume these firms are monopsonistically competitive, in that the across
market and within market elasticities of labor substitution are equal and equal to E . The representative
household solves the following problem

                                                                                    "ˆ                             # E +E 1        ˆ
                                                   1+ ϕ1
                                                            !
                                                                                                1                                      1
                                           − ϕ1   N                                                     E +1
                   max u          C−ϕ
                                                  1+    1
                                                                        N=                          ∑ Nij dj
                                                                                                          E
                                                                                                                              C=           ∑ cij dj
                  {Nij ,K }                             ϕ                                   0       i                              0        i


subject to                                                              ˆ
                                                    C+I =                       ∑ Wij Nij dj + Π
                                                                                    i

   The solution to this problem is an aggregate labor supply function and labor supply to each firm:

                                                        N = ϕW ϕ
                                                            "ˆ                                          # E +1 1
                                                                                1
                                                        W=
                                                                            0
                                                                                    ∑ WijE +1 dj
                                                                                        i
                                                                                    E
                                                                        Wij
                                                                    
                                                       Nij =                                N
                                                                        W

                                                 1− γ γ α
                                                      
   The firm has the production function Yij = Z Kij Nij and chooses Nij and Kij to maximize profits


                                                                                    69
subject to their labor supply curve:
                                                                                                                                 1/E
                                                                                                                          Nij
                                                                                                                      
                                        1− γ γ α                                                               − ϕ1
                                              
                        max Z          Kij Nij     − Wij Nij − RKij               s.t.         Wij = ϕ                                     W
                        Nij ,Kij                                                                                          N

The firm’s optimality condition for capital is

                                                                          1
                                                        (1 − γ ) α
                                                                 
                                                                          1−(1−γ)α
                                                                      γα
                                               Kij = Z               Nij
                                                            R

This can be substituted back into the firm’s maximization problem to yield

                                                                              (1− γ ) α
                                                            (1 − γ ) α
                                                                                                   γα
                                                 1                           1−(1−γ)α
                                    max Z    1−(1−γ)α                                     Nij1−(1−γ)α − Wij Nij
                                       Nij                      R

                                                                                                                               (1− γ ) α
                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                         
                                                    e = Z 1−(1−γ)α                                            (1− γ ) α       1−(1−γ)α                  γα
    We can group terms to simplify notation. Define Z                                                            R                             α =
                                                                                                                                           and e     1−(1−γ)α
                                                                                                                                                                in
order to rewrite the firm problem as follows:

                                                                e eijα − Wij Nij
                                                            max ZN
                                                            Nij ,Kij


Define MRPLij = e e eα−1 . Then the firm’s optimality condition for labor implies a wage Wij that is a
                αZN  ij
                        E
markdown, µ =         E +1 ,   on the marginal revenue product of labor:

                                                              Wij = µ MRPLij                                                                              (E14)

    Now we use the homogeneity of firms. Since all firms are identical, {Wij , Nij , Kij } will be com-
mon across all firms.67 Using this symmetry and integrating the first order conditions (E14) over
                                                                                                                                                         WN
firms and markets yields W = µMRPL. The labor share in this auxiliary economy is LS =                                                                     Y     =
                                                                                RK
µ 1−(1γα−γ)α   [1 − (1 − γ) α] and the capital share is KS =                    Y    = (1 − γ) α.

Step 5. Let H A denote values of variables taken from our benchmark heterogeneous agent economy.
                  wn
For example, Ig
              H I H A denotes our benchmark heterogneoeus agent economy’s inverse wage-bill Herfind-
ahl. Equation (9) in the text defines the aggregate labor share in our benchmark economy, LS H A . First,
                                     E
using the definition µ =           E +1   it is clear that the factor shares in the auxiliary and benchmark economies
coincide, LS = LS H A , only when
            "               −1                         −1 # −1             ˆ 1
        E
                                                
                 wn     θ                  wn       η                  wn
           = HH IH A            + (1 − HH IH A )                 , HH IH A =     swn         wn
                                                                                  j,H A HH I j,H A dj
      E +1             θ+1                         η+1                        0


Second, we showed in Lemma E1, that aggregating representative monopsonists’ capital demand, labor
                                                                                          ´
   67 Note   W = M1/(E +1) Wij , N = ME /(E +1) Nij , K = MKij where M =                      M j dj.


                                                                       70
demand and output yield aggregate capital, labor disutility and output that coincide with the heteroge-
neous agent economy if

                       "ˆ   Mj
                                                                      #1−(1−γ)α
                                                          1                                               nij,H A
                            ∑                γα
                                                  
                Z=Z                zij νij            1−(1−γ)α
                                                                 dj               ,   where   ,   νij =
                            i =1
                                                                                                          NH A

We can therefore solve the H A economy, compute (E , Z) from data generated by that economy, and then
solve for aggregate quantities using the RA economy treating (E , Z) as exogenous parameters.




                                                                        71
F    Non-Constant Returns to Scale Computation γ 6= 1
We solve the model by (i) guessing a vector of wage-bill shares, swn
                                                                  j
                                                                         wn , . . . , swn ), (ii) solving for
                                                                     = (s1j            Mj j
firm-level markdowns, firm-level wages, and the sectoral wage index, and (iii) updating the wage-bill
share using firm-level wages and the sectoral wage index.
    From the main text, we define the marginal revenue product of labor as follows:

                                                                    α −1
                                                 MRPLij = Ze
                                                          e zijt e
                                                                 αneijt

                                                                                                                              Z
                                                                        zij = e
Substituting for nijt using the labor supply equation (6), and defining b       zij and ω =                                        ,   then the
                                                                                                                              e
                                                                              αe
                                                                                                                             ϕ1−eα
marginal revenue product of labor can be written as:

                                                              −η η −θ 1−e
                                                            n        o α
                                MRPLij = ωW(1−eα)(θ − ϕ) b
                                                         zij wij W j

Use Lemma E.2 to write the wage in terms of the marginal revenue product of labor:

                                  wij = µij MRPLij
                                                                 −η η −θ 1−e
                                                               n        o α
                                  wij = µij ωW(1−eα)(θ − ϕ) b
                                                            zij wij W j

                                     1
                                 −
    Use the fact that W j = wij sij η +1 to write this expression in terms of wage-bill shares, and then solve
for wij . The resulting expression is given below:

                                         1      (1−e
                                                   α)(θ − ϕ)             1              1
                                                                                                − (1−αη)( η −θ )     1
                                                                                                       e

                                                                 µij1+(1−α)θ b
                                                                             zij1+(1−α)θ sij
                                                                                                       +1        1+(1−eα)θ
                          wij = ω 1+(1−eα)θ W    1+(1−eα)θ                   e              e




    We will solve for an equilibrium in ‘hatted’ variables, and then rescale the ‘hatted’ variables to recover
the equilibrium values of nij and wij . Define the following ‘hatted’ variables:

                                                        1            1
                                                                                 − (1−αη)( η −θ )     1
                                                                                       e

                                     bij := µij1+(1−eα)θ b
                                                         zij1+(1−α)θ sij
                                                                                        +1        1+(1−eα)θ
                                     w
                                                                   e


                                            "               # η +1 1
                                     c j := ∑ w
                                     W
                                                      η +1
                                                   b        ij
                                                 i∈ j
                                              ˆ                      θ +1 1
                                     W :=
                                     c                  Wθj +1 dj
                                                        c
                                                            !η               !θ             !ϕ
                                                  w
                                                  bij               Wj
                                                                    c                 W
                                                                                      c
                                     bij :=
                                     n
                                                  W
                                                  cj                W
                                                                    c                 1




                                                                    72
   These definitions imply that

                                                                       1            (1−e
                                                                                       α)(θ − ϕ)
                                               wij = ω 1+(1−eα)θ W                   1+(1−eα)θ     w
                                                                                                   bij
                                                                       1            (1−e
                                                                                       α)(θ − ϕ)
                                               W j = ω 1+(1−eα)θ W                   1+(1−eα)θ     Wj
                                                                                                   c
                                                                       1            (1−e
                                                                                       α)(θ − ϕ)
                                                W = ω 1+(1−eα)θ W                    1+(1−eα)θ     W
                                                                                                   c

These definitions allow us to compute the equilibrium market shares in terms of ‘hatted’ variables:
                                                        w  η +1                     w
                                                                                       b  η +1
                                                                  ij                          ij
                                              swn
                                               j =                               =                                      (F1)
                                                          Wj                               Wj
                                                                                           c

   For a given set of values for parameters { Z,   α, β, δ}, we can solve for the non-constant returns to
                                              e ϕ, e
scale equilibrium as follows:

  1. Guess swn     wn            wn
            j = ( s1j , . . . , s M j j )

  2. Compute {ε ij } and {µij } using the expressions in Lemma E.2.

  3. Construct the ‘hatted’ equilibrium values as follows:

                                                              1                 1
                                                                                           − (1−αη)( η −θ )     1
                                                                                                   e

                                            bij = µij1+(1−eα)θ b
                                                               zij1+(1−α)θ sij
                                                                                                  +1        1+(1−eα)θ
                                            w
                                                                         e


                                                  "               # η +1 1
                                            cj = ∑ w
                                            W
                                                            η +1
                                                         b         ij
                                                       i∈ j
                                                     ˆ                          θ +1 1
                                            W=
                                            c                 Wθj +1 dj
                                                              c
                                                                  !η                 !θ                !ϕ
                                                        w
                                                        bij                     Wj
                                                                                c                  W
                                                                                                   c
                                            bij =
                                            n
                                                        W
                                                        cj                      W
                                                                                c                  1


  4. Update the wage-bill share vector using equation (F1).

  5. Iterate until convergence of wage-bill shares.

   Recovering true equilibrium values from ‘hatted’ equilibrium: Once the ‘hatted’ equilibrium is
solved, we can construct the true equilibrium values by rescaling as follows:




                                                                           73
                                                  Z
                                                  e
                                        ω=        1−e
                                                    α
                                                                                                   (F2a)
                                              ϕ
                                                      1          1+(1−e
                                                                      α)θ
                                       W = ω 1+(1−eα) ϕ c
                                                        W 1+(1−eα) ϕ                               (F2b)
                                                      1         (1−e
                                                                   α)(θ − ϕ)
                                       wij = ω 1+(1−eα)θ W       1+(1−eα)θ      w
                                                                                bij                 (F2c)
                                                      1         (1−e
                                                                   α)(θ − ϕ)
                                       Wj = ω     1+(1−eα)θ  W   1+(1−e Wj
                                                                       α)θ
                                                                        c                          (F2d)
                                                            η       θ   ϕ
                                                      wij          Wj
                                                  
                                                                          W
                                       nij = ϕ                                                     (F2e)
                                                      Wj           W       1

F.1    Scaling the economy

We set the scale parameters ϕ and Z
                                  e in order to match average firm size observed in the
data (AveFirmSize Data     = 27.96 from Table ??), and average earnings per worker in the data
(AveEarnings Data   = $65, 773 from Table A2):
                                                                   ´n      o
                                                      Data        ∑i∈ j nij dj
                                   AveFirmSize
                                      \                       = ´                                 (F3a)
                                                                    M j dj
                                                               ´n              o
                                                      Data        ∑i∈ j wij nij dj
                                  AveEarnings
                                     \                        = ´n           o                     (F3b)
                                                                   ∑i∈ j ij dj
                                                                         n

                                     e that allow us to match AveFirmSize Data and AveEarnings Data ,
      To compute the values of ϕ and Z
we substitute the model’s values for nij , wij , and M j into AveFirmSize Data and AveEarnings Data . We
repetitively substitute equations (F2a) through (F2e) into (F3a) and (F3b). We then solve for ϕ and Ze in
terms of ‘hatted’ variables as follows:
                                                          AveFirmSize Data
                                                                      Model
                                                          AveFirmSize
                                                             \
                                            ϕ=                                 ϕ                   (F4)
                                                          AveEarnings Data
                                                                        Model
                                                          AveEarnings
                                                             \



                                                      1+(1−eα) ϕ
                                     AveEarnings Data
                         e = ϕ1−eα 
                         Z                                         c −(1−eα)(θ − ϕ)
                                                                   ×W                                (F5)
                                                 Model
                                     AveEarnings
                                        \




                                                              74
where
                                                                                          ´n      o
                                                                          Model         ∑i ∈ j n
                                                                                               bij dj
                                                AveFirmSize
                                                   \                                = ´
                                                                                          M j dj
                                                                                     ´n               o
                                                                          Model         ∑i ∈ j w
                                                                                               bij n
                                                                                                   bij dj
                                                AveEarnings
                                                   \                                = ´n            o
                                                                                         ∑i ∈ j nbij dj

      The scaled model equilibrium values (defined by (F2a) through (F2e) evaluated at (F4) and (F5)) will
now match AveFirmSize Data and AveEarnings Data .


F.2    Recovering productivities

In Section 4 we discuss the potential to invert the model to recover productivities. We show how this may
be achieved. Proceeding as below one may obtain, non-parameterically, the distribution of productivities
of firms in the economy. In contrast, our approach in the body of the paper is instead to make a param-
eteric assumption on the distribution of productivities. Why? The approach of non-parameterically
determining the distribution requires computation of the model within the Census Research Data Cen-
ter, which is costly. However we detail this procedure here as it is straight-forward to implement on data
that researchers have easier access to.
      Take the expression for a firm’s equilibrium wage from above, where we recognize that µij is a closed
form function of the wage-bill share sij :

                                                1             (1−e
                                                                 α)(θ − ϕ)                    1            1
                                                                                                                        − (1−αη)( η −θ )     1
                                                                                                                               e

                                                                                               zij1+(1−α)θ sij
                                                                                                                               +1        1+(1−eα)θ
                         wij = ω 1+(1−eα)θ W                   1+(1−eα)θ     µ(sij ) 1+(1−eα)θ b
                                                                                                               e




We can divide these expressions for two firms 1 and 2 in sector j. We drop extraneous subscripts:

                                                                1                       1               − (1−eαη)(+η1−θ )         1
                            w1                 µ ( s1 )       1+(1−eα)θ        z1
                                                                               b        1+(1−eα)θ       s1                          1+(1−eα)θ
                               =                                                                                                                 .
                            w2                 µ ( s2 )                        z2
                                                                               b                        s2

Recall that sij = (wij /W j )η +1 . Which implies that (s1 /s2 ) = (w1 /w2 )η +1 . Using this

                                η +1 1                             1                        1                   − (1−eαη)(+η1−θ )       1
                           s1                       µ ( s1 )       1+(1−eα)θ        z1
                                                                                    b         1+(1−eα)θ        s1                           1+(1−eα)θ
                                           =                                                                                                            .
                           s2                       µ ( s2 )                        z2
                                                                                    b                          s2

which implies that
                                                                                              1+(1η−+eα1)(η )
                                                              z2
                                                              b    µ ( s1 )              s2
                                                                 =                                                 .                                        (F6)
                                                              z1
                                                              b    µ ( s2 )              s1
Given data on shares, and our estimates of the parameters η and θ which index the function µ, the right
hand side can be treated as data. We can therefore invert the model to obtain relative productivities. Data
on employment and wages in one firm can then be used to determine absolute productivities.


                                                                                    75
G     Corporate Taxes and Labor Demand
Consider a single firm i. Assume constant returns to scale. Let the corporate tax rate be given by τc , and
let the fraction of capital financed by debt be λ. Accounting profits of a firm (on which taxes are based)
are given by


                                  π A = Pzi k1i −α niα − wi ni −                     λrk                −δk i
                                                                                     |{z}i
                                                                              interest expense

    The pre-tax economic profits of a firm are given by


                                         π E = Pzi k1i −α niα − wi ni − rk i − δk i

    The after-tax economic profits of a firm are given by


                                                          π = π E − τc π A

    Define zei = (1 − τc )zi , w
                               ei = (1 + τc )wi , and e
                                                      r = (1 + λτc )r + (1 + τc )δ. After substituting and solving,
the profit maximization problem of the firm becomes:


                                               max zei Pk1i −α niα − w
                                                                     ei ni − e
                                                                             rki
                                               k i ,ni

    Substituting for capital, the profit maximization problem becomes
                                          h                                                                    
                                                            1− α                 1
                                                                                     i    1
                                                                                              − 1−α α
                             π = max           (1 − α )      α     − (1 − α )    α       zi e
                                                                                         eα
                                                                                            r           −w
                                                                                                         ei ni
                                    ni

                                   1
    We can scale the profits by   1+τc   and then use the definition of w
                                                                        ei to write profits as follows:

                                                 π          h         i
                                                              \ i − wi n i
                                     b=
                                     π                = max MRPL
                                               1 + τc    ni

    Where the marginal product is given by,
                                                    h               1− α              1
                                                                                        i 1 1− α
                                                         (1 − α )    α     − (1 − α ) α e    r− α
                                                                                         ziα e
                                  \i=
                                  MRPL
                                                                            1 + τc

In the estimation, we do not need to take a stance on the value of λ (the share of capital financed by
debt), but this expression shows how corporate tax rates map to labor demand.




                                                                     76
H     Estimation details and bias exercise
H.1    Distribution of firms across markets

We assume there are 5,000 markets. For computational reasons, we must cap the number of firms per
market since the Pareto distribution has a fat tail. We set the cap equal to 200 firms per market. Our
results are not sensitive to the number of markets or the cap on firms per market. Figure H1 plots the
mixture of Pareto distributions from which we draw the number of firms per market, M j . The distri-
bution of the number of firms per market, G ( M j ), is a mixture of Pareto distributions. The thin tailed
Pareto has the following parameters: Shape=0.67, Scale=5.7, Location=2.0. The fat tailed Pareto has the
following parameters: Shape=0.67, Scale=6.25×5.7, Location=2.0.




                         Figure H1: Distribution of the number of firms across sectors

Notes: This is a mixture of Pareto distributions. Thin Tailed: Shape=0.67, Scale=5.7, Location=2.0. Fat Tailed: Shape=0.67,
Scale=6.25×5.7, Location=2.0.



                    Distribution of number of firms M j           Mean      Std.Dev.      Skewness
                                                                   (1)         (2)           (3)
                    Data (LBD, 2014)                                51.6      264.9          29.9
                    Model                                           51.6      264.9          28.7

                         Table H1: Distribution of firms across markets, M j ∼ G ( M j )




                                                            77
H.2   Tax Experiment Details

In each simulation of the model, we conduct a tax experiment where we simulate a common corporate
tax change of ∆τ = τC0 − τC = .01, holding aggregate quantities fixed. We rerun our reduced-form
regressions on the simulated data in order to recover average reduced form labor supply elasticities as
a function of wage-bill shares. These market-share-dependent reduced form labor supply elasticities are
the moments used to recover η and θ in Section 4. We describe the details of the exercise below:

  1. Simulate the benchmark equilibrium, treat as date t = 1 ‘data.’

  2. C-corps in the model economy (recall there is a share ωC of C-corps in all markets) have their taxes
      raised by 1 percentage point.

  3. Simulate the ‘post-shock’ equilibrium, treat as date t = 2 ‘data.’

  4. Estimate the same reduced form regressions as Section 4 using the t = 1, 2 simulated data. Estimate
      the following regressions for each firm i in region j:

                               log(nijt ) = αi + β n τCt + γ0s sijt + β ns τCt ∗ sijt + eijt
                              log(wijt ) = αi + β w τCt + ω0s sijt + β ws τCt ∗ sijt + uijt

                                                                                               d log(nijt )         d log(wijt )
  5. Compute the employment and wage elasticities with respect to productivity,                    dτCt       and       dτCt     .
      Use these expressions to recover the average reduced form labor supply elasticities using the for-
      mula:
                                                              β n + β ns sij
                                                 e(sij ) =
                                                 b
                                                              β w + β ws sij

  6. Use the recovered {b
                        e(sijt ), sijt } pairs as moments to recover η and θ.


H.3   Biases

To explore the difference between structural and reduced form labor supply elasticities, we conduct a
Monte Carlo exercise where we simulate a perfectly idiosyncratic shock and then rerun our reduced-
form regressions on the simulated data to recover reduced form labor supply elasticities. We average
these across firms within payroll share bins and compare these to the structural labor supply elasticity
implied by (8). We repeat this exercise for 5,000 simulations and report the averages in Figure 6. We
describe the details of the exercise below:

  1. Simulate the benchmark equilibrium, treat as date t = 1 ‘data.’

  2. Randomly select 1 firms in each market and increase their productivity by 1% (20% or 50%), hold-
      ing aggregates fixed (assuming partial equilibrium).



                                                         78
3. Simulate ‘post-shock’ partial equilibrium (industry competitors adjust but aggregates are held
   fixed), treat as date t = 2 ‘data.’

4. Estimate the same reduced form regressions as Section 4 using the t = 1, 2 simulated data. Estimate
   the following regressions for firms with payroll share sijwn in bins with nodes [.1, . . . , .9].

                          log(nijt ) = αi + β n log(zijt ) + eijt , log(wijt ) = αi + β w log(zijt ) + uijt

                                                                                                              d log(nijt )
5. In each bin, compute the employment and wage elasticities with respect to productivity,                    d log(zijt )
         d log(wijt )
   and   d log(zijt )
                      .   Use these expressions to recover the predicted average reduced form labor supply
   elasticities using the formula:
                                                                   βn
                                                              e=
                                                              b
                                                                   βw

6. Figure 6 plots these values at the upper cutoff of these bins. For shares equal to 0 and 1, the solution
   is exact ε(1) = b
                   e(1) = θ, ε(0) = be(0) = η.




                                                             79
I   Minimum wage
For ease of exposition, we lay out the minimum wage problem ignoring capital. Consider the household
problem with the added constraint nijt ≤ nijt . For ease of interpretation we attach multiplier λt νijt to the
new labor supply constraint, normalized by the household budget multiplier λt :

                                                                                  1+ 1
                                                                                              
                                              ∞
                                                                       1        Nt ϕ
                   U0 = max                  ∑ βt u Ct −                  1
                                                                                1 + ϕ1
                                                                                                     ,     β ∈ (0, 1)          ,    ϕ>0
                       {nijt ,cijt }         t =0                     ϕ    ϕ




                                                                ˆ
                                                        Ct =            ∑ wijt nijt + Πt                           (λt )
                                                                            i

                                                                       nijt ≤ nijt ∀{ij}                           (λt νijt )
                                                                               ˆ
                                                                         Ct = ∑ cijt dj
                                                                                               i
                                                                                                      θ +θ 1
                                                                           # η +η 1  θ +θ 1
                                              
                                                  ˆ "
                                                    
                                                                    η +1            
                                                           ∑ nijt
                                                                      η
                                  Nt =                                                            dj
                                                                                                    
                                                            i
                                                                                      


In order to solve the firm’s problem, we will have to take account of the normalized households multi-
pliers, νijt , on equation (∗). The firm’s problem is given by:

                                                    πijt = max Ze       α
                                                               e zijt neijt − wijt nijt
                                                                nijt


                                                                                s.t.
                                                                                                   ! 1θ           ! η1
                                                                     − ϕ1
                                                                                  1
                                                                                  ϕ    N jt                nijt
                                             wijt = νijt + ϕ                Nt
                                                                                       Nt                  N jt

                                                                       wijt ≥ w

Define the shadow wage-bill share:
                                                                  (wijt − νijt )nijt
                                                      sijt =
                                                                ∑i∈ j (wijt − νijt )nijt
                                                      e

Define the shadow sectoral and aggregate wage indexes:

                              "
                                                           1+ η
                                                                    # 1+1 η                                       ˆ                  1+1 θ
                    W jt :=
                    f             ∑          wijt − νijt                                   ,          Wt :=
                                                                                                      f                  W1jt+θ dj
                                                                                                                         f                     .
                                  i∈ j




                                                                                80
I.1     Minimum wage solution algorithm
                                                                                                                                                           (0)
We implement the following solution algorithm. Initialize the algorithm by (i) guessing a value for f
                                                                                                    Wt ,
                                                                                                   (0)
(ii) assuming all firms are in Region I, which implies guessing νijt = 0. These will all be updated in the
algorithm.

      1. Solve the sectoral equilibrium:
                                              (0)
                                  sijt .
          (a) Guess shadow shares e
          (b) In Region I, where minimum wage does not bind, solve for the firm’s wage as before, except
              with the shadow aggregate wage index W
                                                   ft instead of Wt :

                                                                                                                             1+(11−eα)θ
                                                                                                     (l )− (1−αη)( η −θ )
                                                                                                               e
                                                                          (1−e
                                                                              α)(θ − ϕ)                         +1
                                            wijt = ωµ e
                                                      sijt               Wt
                                                                         f              zijt e
                                                                                        e    sijt


          (c) In all other regions Region II, III, IV, set wijt = w.
                                                                                (k)                                 (k)
                                                         eijt = wijt − νijt
         (d) Compute shadow wages using the guess νijt : w
          (e) Update shares using w
                                  eijt :
                                                                                                                        η            θ            
                                                                                                                 w
                                                                                                                 eijt             W jt
                                                                                                                                  f             ϕ
                                             w
                                                1+ η                                              w
                                                                                                  eijt ϕ                                      Wt
                                                                                                                                              f
                            ( l +1)
                                             eijt                w
                                                                  eijt nijt                                      W
                                                                                                                 f jt             Wt
                                                                                                                                  f                  
                          sijt        =                      :=                 =
                                                                                                                                                    
                                                   1+ η          ∑i∈ jweijt nijt
                          e                                                                                                    η           θ      
                                          ∑i ∈ j w
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                       w             W jt          ϕ
                                                                                             ∑i ∈ j w
                                                 eijt                                                                   eijt          f
                                                                                                    eijt ϕ                                        Wt
                                                                                                                                                  f
                                                                                                                        W
                                                                                                                        f jt          Wt
                                                                                                                                      f


                                                 ( l +1)      (l )
                                         sijt
          (f) Iterate over (b)-(e) until e                 =e
                                                            sijt .

      2. Recover employment nijt according to the current guess of firm region. First use w
                                                                                          eijt to compute
         W jt , Wt . Then by region:
         f      f

          (I) Firm is unconstrained:
                                                                                      !η                !θ
                                                                              wijt               W jt
                                                                                                 f             ϕ
                                                            nijt = ϕ                                         Wt
                                                                                                             f
                                                                              W jt
                                                                              f                  W
                                                                                                 ft

         (II) Firm is constrained and employment is determined by the household labor supply curve at
              w:
                                                                                      !η                !θ
                                                                              w                  W jt
                                                                                                 f             ϕ
                                                            nijt = ϕ                                         Wt
                                                                                                             f
                                                                              W jt
                                                                              f                  Wt
                                                                                                 f

 (III),(IV) Firm is constrained and employment is determined by firm MRPLij curve at w:

                                                                                                 !    1
                                                                                                     1−e
                                                                                      α Ze
                                                                                      e e zijt          α

                                                                     nijt =
                                                                                        w


                                                                           81
                     (k)
    3. Update νijt :

            (a) Use nijt to compute N jt , Nt .
            (b) Update νijt from the household’s first order conditions:

                                                                                    ! η1             ! 1θ
                                               ( k +1)                − ϕ1   nijt             N jt            1
                                              νijt       = wijt − ϕ                                         Ntϕ
                                                                             N jt             Nt

                      (k)
    4. Update f
              Wt :
                                           ( k +1)
                        eijt = wijt − νijt
            (a) Compute w
                                                                               ( k +1)
            (b) Use w
                    eijt to update the aggregate wage index to f
                                                               Wt                         .

    5. Update firm regions:

                                                      e zijt neα − wnijt .
            (a) Compute profits for all firms: πijt = Ze       ijt

            (b) If in sector j there exists a firm with wijt < w, then move the firm with the lowest wage into
                Region II.
            (c) If in sector j there exists a firm that was initially in Region II and has negative profits πijt < 0,
                move that firm into Region III.68
                                          ( k +1)        (k)     ( k +1)            (k)
    6. Iterate over (1) to (5) until νijt            = νijt and f
                                                                Wt           =f
                                                                              Wt .


J    Discussion of empirical estimation
As discussed in Section 3, the model predicts that the labor supply elasticity faced by firms varies by
their market share (equation 8). If this relationship were known in the data, it would precisely pin
down the elasticities of substitution of labor within and across sectors. Existing work estimating labor
supply elasticities to firms has focused either on specific markets (e.g. (Webber, 2016) or in well identified
responses to small experimental variations in wages (Dube, Jacobs, Naidu, and Suri, 2019; Dube, Cengiz,
Lindner, and Zipperer, 2019). A contribution of this paper is to estimate a share-elasticity relationship
through a novel quasi-natural experiment using a large cross-section of firms.
     The intuition for our procedure is as follows. We first estimate the rate at which labor demand shocks
pass-through to wages and employment and the reduced form relationship between these labor supply
elasticities and local labor market shares. We then invert this empirical relationship using our model
to recover estimates of the structural parameters that control the relative substitutability of labor within
and between markets. To identify how pass-through rates vary by market share, we compare how the


    68 We
       do not need to distinguish Region III from Region IV in the algorithm, since it the determination of equilibrium wages
and employment are the same in each region.


                                                                82
firm responds to these labor demand shocks differentially across markets within the same state, but in
which their shares of the labor market differ.
     This procedure requires a shock to labor demand in order to trace out the labor supply curve. We
use state corporate tax changes which constitute a shock to firm labor demand via their distortion of
accounting profits relative to economic profits, shifting the marginal revenue product of labor.69 Both
Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2016) and Giroud and Rauh (2019) have studied the impact of state-level cor-
porate tax shocks on local economic activity. We address three issues that may arise: (i) apportionment
of state taxes across multi-state production units may mean that state corporate taxes do not affect firms
within a state, (ii) taxes are anticipated, (iii) such shocks affect all firms in a region and so can only be
used to identify θ.
     First, Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2016) show that the impact of corporate taxes on local economic ac-
tivity is extremely similar for both (i) the statutory corporate taxes that we use and (ii) effective corporate
taxes adjusted for apportionment weights.70 Since establishment sales and company property values are
not available to us, we focus on statutory taxes rates compiled by Giroud and Rauh (2019) and based on
Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2016) we do not adjust for the apportionment regime of the state.
     Second, both Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2016) and Giroud and Rauh (2019) establish that the inclu-
sion of other aspects of changes to fiscal policy around the corporate tax changes does not affect their
measured elasticities of local economic activity to corporate taxes.71
     Third, the fact that (i) only C-corps pay statutory corporate tax rates, (ii) the structure of our model
and (iii) Monte Carlo exercises, provide support that we may infer η and θ from a shock that affects some
but not all firms. We briefly discuss this in more detail.


J    Competitive vs. Oligopolistic Economies
Characterization.        To illustrate, Figure J1 extends our example Figure ??, adding the competitive out-
comes for the three labor markets studied. In the sector with three firms, the payroll share of the most
productive firm increases, while that of the two least productive firms fall. As a consequence, concen-
tration increases. Meanwhile, the employment at the most productive firm also increases, while their
competitors’ fall, improving the allocation of employment in the economy and increasing output.




    69 We have not included corporate taxes in our benchmark model. We show that the mapping of our model to the data does
not require us to take a stance on the transmission mechanism linking corporate taxes to productivity. Nevertheless, Appendix
G shows how corporate tax rates map to shocks to the marginal revenue productivity of labor in our framework.
   70 See their discussion of Table A21, p.19 (emphasis added): “Column (6) of Table 5 and Appendix Table A21 show that using

statutory state corporate tax rates in Equation 21 (instead of business tax rates τb ) results in similar and significant estimates,
indicating that our measure of business tax rates is not crucial for the results.”
   71 Giroud and Rauh (2019) establish the plausible exogeneity of state-corporate tax changes. From a public finance perspec-

tive they study the effects of state corporate tax changes on employment and wages. Their focus is within firm, across state
responses, and the reallocation of firm employment across states following tax changes. For an exhaustive description of these
tax changes we point the interested reader to their paper.


                                                                83
      Figure J1: Oligopsonistic [solid] and competitive [dashed] equilibrium in three labor markets

Notes: Figure constructed from model under estimated parameters (Table 3). Low, medium and high productivities of the
firms correspond to the 10th , 50th and 90th percentiles of the productivity distribution.




                                                                84
