                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  INVESTOR IDEOLOGY

                                      Patrick Bolton
                                          Tao Li
                                     Enrichetta Ravina
                                    Howard L. Rosenthal

                                     Working Paper 25717
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25717


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2019




We are grateful to Ian Cooper, Yonca Ertimur, Fabrizio Ferri, Claire Lim, Max Schanzenbach, an
anonymous referee, and seminar participants at Columbia Law School, the ECGI Roundtable on
Shareholder Ideology and Stewardship, the Kellogg School of Management, the NBER Law and
Economics Summer Meeting, Northwestern Law School, CU Boulder, Fudan University, the 1st
Endless Summer Conference, the SHoF-MISUM Conference on Sustainable Finance, the 13th
Annual Conference on Empirical Legal Studies, the American Finance Association 2019 Annual
Meeting for helpful comments, and to Arjuna Anday, Mohammadreza Bolandnazar, Eric
Bolton, Grant Goehring, Ariza Gusti, Menaka Jorring, Roya Arab Loodaricheh, Umberto
Mignozzetti, and Da Tian for very helpful research assistance. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Patrick Bolton, Tao Li, Enrichetta Ravina, and Howard L. Rosenthal. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Investor Ideology
Patrick Bolton, Tao Li, Enrichetta Ravina, and Howard L. Rosenthal
NBER Working Paper No. 25717
March 2019
JEL No. G23,G30

                                          ABSTRACT

We estimate institutional investor preferences based on their proxy voting records in publicly
listed Russell 3000 firms. We employ a spatial model of proxy voting, the W-NOMINATE
method for scaling legislatures, and map institutional investors onto a left-right dimension based
on their votes for fiscal year 2012. The far-left are socially responsible and the far-right are
“money conscious” investors. Significant ideological differences reflect an absence of
shareholder unanimity. The proxy adviser ISS, similar to a political leader, makes voting
recommendations that place it in the center; to the left of most mutual funds. Public pension funds
and other investors on the left support a more social and environment-friendly orientation of the
firm and fewer executive compensation proposals. A second dimension reflects a more traditional
governance view, with management disciplinarian investors, the proxy adviser Glass-Lewis
among them, pitted against more management friendly ones.


Patrick Bolton                                   Enrichetta Ravina
Columbia Business School                         Visting Associate Professor of Finance
804 Uris Hall                                    Kellogg School of Management
New York, NY 10027                               Northwestern University
and NBER                                         Global Hub 4391
pb2208@columbia.edu                              2211 Campus Drive
                                                 Evanston, IL 60208
Tao Li                                           enrichetta.ravina@kellogg.northwestern.edu
University of Florida
Gainesville FL 32611                             Howard L. Rosenthal
Tao.Li@warrington.ufl.edu                        NYU Department of Politics
                                                 19 W. 4th Street
                                                 New York, NY 10012
                                                 United States
                                                 hr31@nyu.edu
1. Introduction
We conduct an empirical analysis of voting by 262 institutional investors and public pension
funds on proxy ballots of publicly listed Russell 3000 firms. Following a “political” approach
pioneered by Poole and Rosenthal (1985), we use proxy voting records to estimate voters’
ideal points along one, or possibly two, salient policy dimensions. The estimates provide a
broad “ideological” interpretation of the diverse ideal points of the multiple institutional asset
managers and owners that goes beyond pure shareholder value considerations.

Kenneth J. Arrow explains that he was led to formulate his celebrated Impossibility Theorem
by his attempts to generalize the theory of the firm to include multiple owners: “To be sure,
it could be assumed that all were seeking to maximize profits; but suppose they had different
expectations of the future? They would then have different preferences over investment
projects. I first supposed that they would decide, as the legal framework would imply, by
majority voting…It was immediately clear that majority voting did not necessarily lead to an
ordering.” He further recounts: “Sometime in the winter of 1947-48 my mind again turned
involuntarily to voting. This time I happened to start with a political context and thought of
parties arrayed in a natural left-right ordering.” [pages 2-3, Collected Papers of Kenneth J. Arrow,
Volume 1, 1984]

In this paper, we reverse the path that led Arrow from the theory of the firm to political
science and ask what light political science could shed on institutional shareholder voting. A
basic question in political science is the extent to which voting is driven by interests or by
ideology, where ideology is broadly conceived as voting behavior across a wide set of different
issues, such as environmental proposals, director elections, votes to declassify the board, or
increase dividends, that is driven by an underlying belief system binding preferences over these
issues together (see Converse, 1964). We ask this question for proxy voting and explore to
what extent institutional investor voting is driven by ideology, and whether ideology can be
uncovered from institutional shareholder votes, just like congressmen’s ideology has been
uncovered from their roll calls (Poole and Rosenthal, 2007). More tantalizingly, are
institutional investors arrayed along a left-right ideological dimension? And if so, what
substantive differences about corporate policy are represented by this dimension?
                                                 2
As Duncan Black (1948) established, majority voting does result in a well-defined social
ordering if voters have single-peaked preferences arrayed along a single left-right dimension.
Thus, if it turns out that institutional investors’ ideological differences can be projected onto
one dimension then Arrow’s difficulty with majority voting by shareholders would be
conveniently resolved.

Another convenient resolution of the majority voting problem is to observe that in a
competitive economy with complete markets there is unanimity among shareholders on the
objectives of the firm (Grossman and Stiglitz, 1976, and Grossman and Hart, 1979). A related
argument is that only shareholder value maximization is compatible with the no-arbitrage
equilibrium condition in financial markets. Any deviation from value maximization would
expose the firm to a takeover.

However, even if a capital gain could be generated by taking over a non-value-maximizing
firm and changing its policies, it is far from obvious that a takeover would succeed under such
circumstances (Grossman and Hart, 1980).

When a takeover is not an immediate threat, and the firm has a choice to pursue non-value
maximizing policies, Friedman (1970) argued that shareholders would still prefer value
maximization because negative externalities are best addressed through public policy. By
implication, socially-minded shareholders may well prefer a non-value-maximizing policy that
causes less negative externalities, if they estimate that the negative externalities are difficult to
undo, and if the government cannot be relied on to internalize all socially harmful activities
(Hart and Zingales, 2016). In sum, when business operations cannot be entirely separated from
their social and environmental effects, when economic forces do not completely shape a firm’s
policies, there is inevitably a political facet to the exercise of corporate control. But how does
this political aspect manifest itself in practice?

A key institutional consideration absent from the literature on the objectives of firms is the
fact that most shares of publicly traded corporations are managed by institutional investors.
In practice the determining votes are cast by asset managers, not by retail investors. Hence,
the politics of corporate voting is manifest in the way in which institutional investors exercise

                                                     3
their voting rights. This paper is a first exploratory attempt to uncover institutional investor
ideology.

In its (2017) Annual Investment Stewardship Report, Vanguard writes “This year, for the first time,
our funds supported a number of climate-related shareholder resolutions opposed by
company management.” The report further states that Vanguard supports effective corporate
governance practices that include advocacy, engagement and “voting proxies at company
shareholder meetings across each of our portfolios and around the globe. Because of our
ongoing advocacy and engagement efforts, companies should be aware of our governance
principles and positions by the time we cast our funds’ votes.” Our estimation of investor ideal
points allows us to identify Vanguard’s ideology; where it stands relative to other investors.
This may help guide companies’ policies and coordinate shareholder governance actions.

Our approach closely tracks the ideal point estimation methodology pioneered by Poole and
Rosenthal (1985, 2007) and by McCarty, Poole, and Rosenthal (1997) for legislative voting.
They estimate a spatial single-peaked representation of voter preferences that are subject to a
random utility (McFadden, 1976). Their method is commonly referred to as NOMINATE; it
has been widely applied to study legislative voting and other binary choice problems such as
consumer preferences across products, the psychometric study of perceptions and educational
testing (see Poole, 2005, and Armstrong et al., 2014, pages 189-221).

Institutional investor voting data also represents binary choices where investors vote “For” or
“Against.” (Institutional abstention is rare). These choices can therefore be analyzed using
NOMINATE scaling. We frame our analysis by treating each fund family as a single investor
with an ideal point in a latent strategy space.2

What do the institutional shareholder votes reveal about the ideology expressed at the fund-
family level? Just as legislators’ ideological differences can be represented along a left-right
spectrum, it turns out that institutional investors’ ideal points can also be mapped onto a line


2Although fund managers have a fiduciary duty to vote, in practice votes are nearly always decided at the fund family level
(Morningstar, 2017). Indeed, we find that only 1.11% of fund-proposal observations have at least one fund within a family
that votes differently than the other funds. By contrast, some public pension funds delegate voting to their asset managers.
When this occurs, we disaggregate to the level of the fund managers retained by the pension fund.

                                                             4
where the far-left investors are best described as socially responsible investors, those that vote
most consistently in favor of pro-social and pro-environment shareholder proposals, and the
far-right investors’ votes can be described as “money-conscious” investors, those who oppose
proposals that could financially cost shareholders. This is a somewhat simplified description.
We provide more nuance to the social versus financial value distinction and, more broadly,
heterogeneous beliefs across investors in our analysis.

It is important to emphasize that NOMINATE is agnostic as to where ideology comes from
and what it represents. Inference is only based on how investors vote. No other information,
such as the identity or the investment philosophy of funds is used to infer ideology. The one-
dimensional representation of differences in investor ideology is a statistical representation,
which best fits the voting behavior of investors. That being said, it would not be entirely
surprising that ideological differences observed in Congress could also be reflected in
shareholder votes.

Still, an important finding is that there actually are significant ideological differences across
institutional investors. The votes are not unanimous. There is no shareholder unanimity.
Consistent with the results of Matvos and Ostrovsky (2010), we find that Institutional investors
differ systematically in how they vote. Moreover, the differences in how they vote reflect
underlying ideological differences. This is all the more remarkable given that unlike in the
political realm institutional investors are not organized in sustained political coalitions that
impose some form of voting discipline.

The closest to something resembling party organization in financial markets are the proxy
advisers, Institutional Shareholder Services (ISS) and Glass, Lewis & Co. (Glass Lewis). The
management of firms also makes recommendations about their proxy proposals. They always
recommend supporting their own proposals but recommend voting against most shareholder
proposals. If we treat ISS and Glass Lewis’ voting recommendations as votes we find that the
ideology of ISS is in the center, to the left of most institutional investors but to the right of
most public pension funds. Glass Lewis, Vanguard, Blackrock, are center-right.



                                                5
We also explore the representation of ideology in a two-dimensional space. By moving to two
dimensions we obtain slightly better classification and we reveal that ideological differences
are not just about more or less social and environmental responsibility but also about
governance, with investors differing on how tight a discipline should be imposed on
management.

Finally, whether these ideological differences reflect the differences in ideology of their client
bases we cannot say. It is not even clear that clients are aware that the funds they invest in
have systematic ideological biases. Another open question is whether ideological differences
are reflected in different portfolio holdings.

Related Literature: The first study of mutual fund proxy voting is by Gillan and Starks (2000).
They find that proposals sponsored by institutions gain significantly more support than those
sponsored by individuals. The subsequent literature takes the perspective that shareholders
seek to maximize shareholder value and that their voting is motivated by managerial agency
problems. Deviations from shareholder value maximization are explained by conflicts of
interest at some institutional investors and by the lack of coordination among institutional
investors.

The proxy voting literature was significantly advanced by the change in mutual fund disclosure
requirements of proxy votes introduced by the SEC in 2003. One of the first studies to rely
on these data is by Davis and Kim (2007); they find that mutual fund family voting in support
of management is more likely when the fund family is also a manager of the company’s
corporate pension plan. (Ashraf, Jayaraman, and Ryan, 2012, and Cvijanovic, Dasgupta, and
Zachariadis, 2016, find additional support for this hypothesis). In a related study, Rothberg
and Lilien (2006) also find that the largest funds are more likely to vote in support of
management, except when proposals on executive compensation or takeover defenses are
under consideration (see also Taub, 2009). Other explanations that have been proposed for
the management-friendly voting behavior of mutual funds are governance failures at mutual
funds (Chou, Ng and Wang, 2011), and that, although mutual funds tend to vote with
management, their support is greater for proposals that increase shareholder wealth (Morgan,


                                                 6
Poulsen, Wolf, and Yang, 2011). Cremers and Romano (2011) also find that the SEC rule
change if anything has increased mutual fund support for management (see Ferri, 2012 for a
review of this early literature).

More recently, the literature has explored other issues, in particular: i) wheher mutual fund
voting is driven by proxy advisers’ recommendations, and if so why (Bethel and Gillan, 2002;
Cai, Garner, and Walkling, 2009; Ertimur, Ferri, and Oesch, 2013; Larcker, McCall, and
Ormazabal, 2014; Iliev and Lowry, 2015; Malenko and Shen, 2016; and Li, 2018); ii) whether
social networks—a common educational background between mutual fund managers and
portfolio firms’ CEOs—can explain mutual fund voting behavior (Butler and Gurun, 2012);
iii) whether index-investors are active in corporate governance (Appel, Gormley, and Keim,
2016 and Bebchuk and Hirst, 2018); iv) whether cross-holdings in firms in the same industry
affect the management-friendly stance of mutual funds (He, Huang, and Zhao, 2017), and; v)
whether mutual funds vote in support of activist investor actions (He and Li, 2017; Brav, Jiang,
and Li, 2017; Kedia, Starks, and Wang, 2017; and Jiang, Li and Mei, 2018). In a survey of
mutual fund managers, McCahery, Sautner, and Starks (2016) find that voting against
management is an important channel through which institutional investors exert their
influence. They also find that proxy advisors’ recommendations are important to guide their
voting.   However, Listokin (2008) and Babenko, Choi, and Sen (2018) observe that
management can strategically time their proposals and avoid putting up a proposal for a vote
if it expects that the proposal could be defeated. This is evidenced by the disproportionately
high proportion of close votes that goes in favor of management. All these studies share the
common perspective that institutional investor voting is mostly concerned with corporate
governance issues and does not reflect a broader ideological premise.

The most closely related paper to ours, written simultaneously and independently of our study,
is by Bubb and Catan (2018). They also take a political approach to proxy voting. The main
methodological difference is that they undertake a principal components analysis following
Heckman and Snyder (1997), where we use W-NOMINATE (McCarty, Poole, and Rosenthal,




                                               7
1997)3, the standard scaling method in political science. Also, they treat mutual funds as the
unit of analysis, whereas we take the fund family as the relevant unit. This is more reasonable
because the overwhelming fraction of fund families coordinate the votes across their funds
(Morningstar, 2017). Using funds as the unit of analysis violates the i.i.d. assumption on errors
in both Heckman-Snyder and W-NOMINATE. More importantly, as a result of their focus
on individual mutual funds, with little overlap in their portfolios, Bubb and Catan’s matrix of
fund-vote observations is extremely sparse, with 96% of missing entries.4 In contrast, our
fund-family double-centered distance matrix only has 4.31% missing data, as fund-family
portfolios significantly overlap. Another significant difference in our approaches is that Bubb
and Catan exclude proposals that have less than 8% in minority votes, while we only exclude
proposals with less than 3% minority. This is significant because proxy votes unlike roll-call
votes in Congress, are highly lop-sided, so that even a small minority can indicate significant
opposition. Importantly, the votes with small minorities are needed to distinguish between
fund families that are simply “right” or “left” from those that are “extreme right” or “extreme
left”. As we do, Bubb and Catan rely on mutual fund voting data from ISS and voting
recommendations from Glass-Lewis, but over a longer time interval (from fiscal years 2010
through 2015), while we only consider data from the fiscal year that runs from July of 2011
through June of 2012. Bubb and Catan emphasize the political party role of proxy advisers ISS
and Glass-Lewis, whereas we highlight the ideological differences across institutional investors
revealed by their voting pattern, with socially oriented investors on the left and more money-
conscious investors on the right. Importantly, neither Bubb and Catan nor the literature we
cite above consider public pension fund votes. The reason is that, unlike mutual funds, public
pension funds are not subject to federal reporting requirements. They are, however, subject to
state public records laws. This is the channel we used to obtain their voting records and to
assemble a public pension fund voting data set.



3A later version of the NOMINATE algorithm of Poole and Rosenthal (1985).
4Bubb and Catan do the singular value decomposition (SVD) of their fund-vote matrix after filling in the missing entries
via imputation. We follow Poole’s (2005) methodology to impute a “mean” distance of 0.25 for each missing entry in our
double-centered distance matrix and then do the SVD of this matrix.


                                                           8
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data and provides
summary statistics. Section 3 explains our methodology. Section 4 discusses the results on
institutional investors ideal point. Section 5 describes the proposal midpoint characteristics
and the substantive issues separating institutional investors. Section 6 contains further analysis
on proposal midpoints, investor coalitions, and firm and director characteristics. Section 7
provide a preview of whether investor ideology evolves over time. Section 8 concludes.

2. Data and Sample

Our analysis focuses on Russell 3000 companies holding annual and special shareholder
meetings during the fiscal year 2012. The reason why this year is of special interest is that we
were able to add votes of pension funds to the votes of institutional investors. This year is of
special interest as it is the first year containing a large number of say-on-pay proposals, which
became mandatory following the implementation of Dodd-Frank. Below we provide the
details of the sample construction and describe the variables we use in our analysis.

Proposals and Proxy Voting Rules

Tables 1.A and 1.B show the distribution of the proposals in our sample by topic, by
recommendation, and by votes of mutual fund families and pension funds. The rules and
voting procedures for shareholders of publicly traded companies are complex, as Kahan and
Rock (2008) describe in detail. This is not the place to give a comprehensive treatment of all
the steps involved in identifying shareholders, communicating the proxy material, organizing
a vote, and tallying the votes. Below we mainly highlight the most relevant aspects for our
analysis.

Under Rule 14a-8 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 qualifying shareholders can submit
a proposal that will be included in the company’s proxy statement and put forward to a vote
at the shareholder meeting. To qualify a shareholder must have owned for at least one year
$2,000 or 1% of voting shares, and must submit the proposal 120 days before the annual
meeting. The proposer must also hold her shares until after the shareholder meeting.
Importantly, a proposal cannot exceed 500 words and generally must be in the form of
precatory petitions to the board of directors. In addition, proposals cannot touch on ordinary
                                                9
 business matters. Once a firm receives a shareholder proposal, it can choose to include the
 proposal in its proxy materials, work with the proposer toward a mutual agreement (which
 may include withdrawal of the proposal), or submit a No-Action request to the SEC to exclude
 the proposal from the company’s proxy statement, if the proposal is deemed to fall outside
 the rules. In effect, the proxy voting rules reflect a general delegation principle whereby
 shareholders have entrusted the management of the company to officers and directors, who
 consequently should be protected against subsequent interference and second-guessing by
 shareholders. Shareholder proposals are essentially restricted to be about broader governance
 and political issues, and exclude business operational issues. It is therefore natural to interpret
 shareholder proposals as reflecting governance and broader social concerns of shareholders.

 Table 1.A shows that shareholder proposals are concentrated in the governance and social
 categories. Governance-related proposals cover, among others, declassification of the board
 of directors, bylaw changes, cumulative voting, establishing/eliminating various committees,
 and proxy access. There are 314 such proposals in our sample, and 73.25% of them are
 sponsored by shareholders. Social proposals cover animal rights, environmental protection,
 diversity, employment and human rights, political contributions, product safety and other
 social matters. Altogether there are 177 such proposals in our sample, and all of them are
 shareholder-sponsored.

 The majority of the proposals in our sample are sponsored by management. Table 1.A shows
 that, if we exclude director elections, management proposals constitute 86% of the proposals
 in the sample. Of these, the largest category are Say on Pay proposals (53.5%), which became
 mandatory after passage of Dodd-Frank in 2010.5 These non-binding votes apply to top
 executives of a company. Binding equity-based compensation plans, such as executive
 incentive plans, usually are not voted every year (only once every 2-3 years).

 Management also sponsors the majority of capital-related, financial, and routine proposal,
 which constitute 10% of the non-director sample. Capital-related proposals include dividend

 5 Since January 2011, all U.S. firms are required by the Dodd-Frank Act to sponsor an advisory vote on executive

compensation (“Say-on-Pay” vote) at least once every three years, and an advisory vote on “golden parachutes” associated
with a merger.

                                                           10
payments/increases, share repurchases, and stock authorizations. Restructuring proposals are
about M&A transactions, asset sales, spin-offs, among others. Financial proposals are generally
about approval of financial reports, and are routine proposals. Other routine or miscellaneous
management proposals concern the adjournment of a meeting, or company name changes.

If we include in the sample director elections which, except for proxy contests, are sponsored
by the company management, the fraction of management-sponsored proposals jumps to
96.6%.

While the majority of the proposals are put on the ballot by management, Table 1.B shows
that the support rate among ISS (column 4), Glass Lewis (column 5), the mutual fund families
and public pension funds in our sample (columns 6 and 7, respectively), and all the
shareholders voting on the proposals (column 8) varies significantly across proposal type and
doesn’t always go in favor of management. On the one hand, both Say on Pay and Financial
and Investment Policy proposals receive significantly less than unanimous support on average.
On the other hand, both Governance and Social proposals, which tend to be shareholder-
sponsored and opposed by management, receive significant support from the institutional
investors in our sample, especially the public pension funds, and to a significantly lesser extent
from the shareholders overall. The average Governance proposal receives the support of
65.04% (68.6%) of the mutual (pension) funds, while the average Social proposal receives the
support of 29.48% (34.10%) of the mutual (pension) funds in our sample.

Mutual Fund Voting Data and Proxy Advisor Recommendations

Our primary data source for mutual fund voting behavior is the Mutual Fund Voting Record
database from ISS Voting Analytics, which provides voting records (For, Against, or Abstain)
by individual mutual funds based on N-PX filings that mutual fund companies are required to
file via the EDGAR website. The ISS database provides the identity of the fund and fund
family, name and country of incorporation of the company whose proposal it is voting on, a
description of the proposal, proposal number, shareholder meeting date, management
recommendation, and the fund vote. We aggregate fund level voting information at the
corresponding family level and supplement the data above with ISS recommendations, and

                                                 11
whether the sponsor is management or a shareholder. Our analysis is restricted to Russell 3000
companies that held one or more shareholder meetings during this period. The final total
number of firms in our sample is 2,856 of the Russell 3000 companies for the fiscal year 2012.6

We merge the Glass Lewis recommendations with the above dataset using company name,
ticker, meeting date, and proposal text. In addition to the actual voters, we also treat ISS and
Glass Lewis as two separate voters. These two “voters” are included primarily to illustrate the
position of funds who followed either proxy advisor’s recommendations in all their votes. Our
results are robust to excluding them.

Public Pension Fund Voting Records

To our knowledge, this is the first study that examines a large number of public pension funds’
voting records (Davis and Kim (2007) study only CalPERS’ voting records for a limited
number of proposals). In independent work Duan, Jiao, and Tam (2018) have also analyzed
proxy voting of public pension funds, relying on the data provided by Proxy Insight. We have
constructed our data directly by using state public records laws to request public pension funds
proxy voting records.7 Our sample comprises the 37 funds that responded to our request for
information.8 The data we received is similar in format to the ISS Mutual Fund Voting Record
database. It provides the identity of the company (name and CUSIP), proposal number,
description of proposal, shareholder meeting date, identity of sponsor, and vote cast. We
merge this pension fund vote data with ISS Voting Records using company name, meeting
date, and proposal number and text. We then manually checked whether the unmatched
proposals in the pension fund data exist in ISS Mutual Funds Voting Records.




6 Some companies are missing either because they were acquired or because there is no shareholder meeting for these

companies in our data for this period.
7 All 50 states in the U.S. have public records laws that allow members of the public (including non-residents) to obtain

public records from state and local government agencies.
8 Some pension funds employ multiple fund managers some of which vote quite differently. For this reason, the West

Virginia and the Indiana public pension funds were disaggregated to the fund manager level. The West Virginia votes were
disaggregated into State Street Global Advisors (WV - SSGA), Westfield (WV – Westfield), Intech (WV – Intech), CBRE
(WV – CBRE) and AJO (WV – AJO). The Indiana votes were disaggregated into the component managed in-house, the
one managed by BNY Mellon (Indiana - BNY) and the one managed by Columbus Circle (Indiana - CC).

                                                           12
Sample Construction

Our mutual fund data includes 229 fund families and 37 pension funds that voted on proxy
ballots of 2,856 companies that were in the Russell 3000 index for that year. We dropped 2
pension funds and 12 mutual fund families who failed to cast at least 50 votes. Adding in ISS,
Glass Lewis, and “Management” as additional voters, we estimate a total of 262 ideal points.
We also dropped any proposal that did not secure a minority vote of 3% of the actual voters,
and any proposals that had less than 20 voters. We were left with 15,035 proxy proposals.
Management made recommendations on all 15,035, ISS on nearly all with 14,919
recommendations, and Glass Lewis on 14,883.

The proxy voting data is sparse compared to congressional roll calls. We have 2,438,670
proposal-institution pairs, yet there are only 1,555,586 pairs where our institutions voted. (We
ignored abstentions which occurred in only 0.1% of pairs. Because abstentions are so rare,
we treat them like non-ownership as missing data, parallel to the treatment of congressional
abstention and non-membership by McCarty, Poole, and Rosenthal (1997)). There were
16.10% votes “Against” a proposal and 83.90% votes “For”.

Firm and Director Characteristics

The data on firm characteristics is reported in Table 1.C. The balance sheet and income
statement information is from COMPUSTAT; the past-year total return, the dividend yield
and the Amihud liquidity measure were constructed based on information from the Center
for Research on Security Prices (CRSP); executive compensation information was obtained
from ExecuComp, which includes base salary, bonus and stock option data for the top five
executive officers; while governance characteristics are from RiskMetrics. For our sample of
firms holding meetings, the average (median) firm has assets worth $16.4 ($1.67) billion, and
a market capitalization of $7.6 ($1.2) billion. The average return on assets is 9.3%, while the
previous-year stock return is -2.8% on average. The average firm has a book-to-market ratio
of 0.63, pays a 1.7% dividend, and has a leverage ratio of 0.35. The Amihud illiquidity measure
for the average firm is 0.07.



                                              13
We also report information on various governance variables. The median board has 9
members and comprises 81.8% independent directors. These figures are consistent with the
findings in the extant literature (e.g., Cai, Garner and Walkling, 2009; Li, 2018). On average,
in our sample the board is classified in 41% of the cases, a poison pill is in place in 13.8% of
the firms, the CEO has a golden parachute in 81.3% of the cases, the supermajority required
to approve a merger is 58.7%, and unequal voting rights are present in 4.3% of the firms. We
report two executive compensation metrics as in Hartzell, Ofek and Yermack (2004), the year-
to-year percentage change in total compensation, and cash compensation as a percentage of
total compensation. At the median company, annual growth in executive compensation is
9.4%, and the cash-to-total compensation ratio is 29.6%.

Finally, we highlight here that the mean institutional ownership is over 70%, indicating that
institutional shareholder voting is the determining factor in shareholder voting.

The data on the characteristics of directors coming up for election is drawn from the ISS
director database, covering the S&P 1500 firms. Table 1.D reports their main characteristics.
Just over 11% of directors are female, and over 92% are Caucasian. About 37% of directors
are classified as financial experts, and over 78% of directors as independent. They sit on
average on 0.89 outside boards, and control on average 1% of the firms on whose board they
sit on.



3. Methodology

Revealed Preference Theory is a standard theory in economics establishing, under some weak
rationality assumptions, that a consumer’s preferences, or utility function, can be “revealed”
from her past consumption choices. Similarly, in the Basic-Space Theory of Ideology of Poole
and Rosenthal (1985, 1987, 1991, 1997), voters’ ideologies can be revealed based on their past
votes. The meaning of “ideology” here is in the sense of Converse (1964): voting behavior is
ideological when voting across a wide set of different issues is predictable, presumably because
an underlying belief system binds voting preferences over these issues together. However,
ideology is a relative concept and cannot be determined from an individual voter’s past votes

                                              14
in isolation. It can only be inferred by comparing the past votes of multiple voters on the same
issues against each other.

Suppose that there are i = 1, …, p voters and j = 1, …, q proposals. If all p voters always vote
the same way, if there is completely unanimous agreement on all issues, then the ideology of
voters cannot be determined. All one can say is that voters are always in full agreement. But if
voters do not always vote the same way it is possible to determine which other voter(s) voter
i is closest to, or which other voters voter i agrees with most, by computing agreement scores
between any two voters, which are simply the proportion of issues on which the two voters
vote the same way.

Consider, for example, the votes of three large institutional investors in our sample, CalPERS,
Fidelity, and GAMCO. In total they have voted unanimously on 5,315 out of 6,359 proposals
on which they have voted together in fiscal year 2011-2012 (see Exhibit A below). Based on
their 1,044 non-unanimous votes, it is possible to determine whether CalPERS is closer to
Fidelity or to GAMCO. The agreement score of CalPERS and Fidelity is 0.891, the score
between CalPERS and GAMCO is 0.863, and that between Fidelity and GAMCO is 0.918.
From these scores we can infer that Fidelity and GAMCO are the closest to each other, and
that CalPERS is closer to Fidelity than GAMCO. These simple observations suggest that, in
some relevant space to be determined, Fidelity’s ideological position lies between CalPERS
and GAMCO.

                                             Exhibit A:
                 Number of Proposals       CalPERS        Fidelity   GAMCO
                          331              Against          For       For
                          190                For          Against    Against
                          218              Against        Against     For
                          130                For            For      Against
                           13               Against         For      Against
                          162                For          Against      For
                           58               Against       Against    Against
                         5,257               For            For        For
                Total Proposals=6,359

                                              15
Another observation from Exhibit A is that it is rare for CalPERS and GAMCO to vote
against a proposal when Fidelity votes in favor (this occurs only 13 times). It is also rare for
CalPERS and GAMCO to vote for a proposal when Fidelity votes against (this occurs only
162 times). Either CalPERS or Fidelity vote opposite to GAMCO much more frequently (348
times), or GAMCO and Fidelity vote opposite to CalPERS (521 times). This is another way
of seeing that among the three voters, CalPERS and GAMCO are the extremists and Fidelity
the centrist voter.

How can we determine ideologies more generally based on votes? What Poole and Rosenthal
have shown is that it is possible to represent voters’ relative ideological positions in a low-
dimensional Euclidean space (typically one or two dimensions). We use their W-NOMINATE
procedure in this paper. The key to this representation is a basic assumption, with a long
tradition in political science: That voters have symmetric single-peaked preferences, with the
ideal point at the peak (Black, 1958). A second assumption is that voters have random utility
shocks, which has a long pedigree in economics (see McFadden, 1976). Under these
assumptions, voters vote for the outcome on a particular proposal whose position is closest
to their ideal point, with errors.

The geometry of voting: Under the above assumptions the location of each voter’s ideal point can
be represented by a point in an N-dimensional Euclidean space, and the location of each issue
to be voted on by two points, each representing respectively the outcomes if the issue is
defeated and if it is passed.

In a one-dimensional space, each voter i can then be located by a point on a line, xi. The two
voting outcomes for a given proposal j can also represented by two points, respectively ojy and
ojn, where y stands for Yea, the outcome when a majority of voters is in favor of passing the
issue, and n for Nay, the outcome when a majority is against. The midpoint of the two
outcomes is zj = (ojy + ojy)/2. A voter whose ideal point is at the midpoint of a proposal is
indifferent between the two outcomes in terms of spatial preferences. This voter essentially
does a coin toss using the random shocks.


                                              16
In two dimensions, analogous to the midpoint, there is a cutting line, which is the
perpendicular bisector of the line joining the two outcomes. For a proposal, any voter whose
ideal point is on the cutting line is indifferent in terms of spatial preferences. Exhibit B
provides an illustration of the cutting line, while examples from our sample are reported in
Figure 7 and discussed in Section 6 of the paper.

                                          Exhibit B




If error is present, the problem of estimating the cutting lines is equivalent to a logit or a
probit, depending on the assumptions about the error distribution. Each fund’s utility function
has two components: a deterministic one that depends on the distance between the fund’s
ideal point and the points representing the Yea and Nay outcomes, and a stochastic
component.

                                       UijY= uijY + ijY

                                       UijN= uijN + ijN

The probabilities of voting Yea (For) and Nay (Against) can therefore be expressed as


                                              17
                  P(Fund votes Yea) = P(UijY> UijN) = P(eijN – eijY < uijY - uijN)

                  P(Fund votes Nay) = P(UijY< UijN) = P(eijN – eijY > uijY - uijN)

                  s.t. P(Yea)+P(Nay)=1

If we assume that the error difference is logit distributed we get that the probability of voting
yea is given by




Given the matrix of observed vote choices for each of the funds, W-NOMINATE estimates
the combination of parameters for fund ideal points and proposal outcomes that maximizes
the joint probability of the observed choices.




Where p is the number of funds and q the number of proposals, and s the number of
dimensions, Pijt is the probability of voting for the choice t and Cijt=1 if the fund’s actual
choice (For/Against) is .




The likelihood function to be optimized is a continuous distribution over ps+2qs+s
hyperplanes. Estimation is started by computing the agreement scores of all voters. The next
step consists in introducing a distance function by subtracting the agreement scores from 1
and squaring the difference. One then obtains a matrix of squared distances. The third step is
a normalization: Double-center the matrix of squared distances by subtracting the row and
column means of the matrix of squared distances, adding the matrix mean and dividing by -2.

                                                 18
Through this normalization one obtains a cross product matrix of voter coordinates (see
Poole, 2005). Finally, a further normalization is to take the square root of the diagonal elements
of the double-centered matrix and divide through the corresponding column of the double-
centered matrix by this square root. One then obtains voter coordinates lying between -1 and
+1. These coordinates are the starting values for the W-NOMINATE estimation.

In terms of interpreting the distances between investors, the ideology positions are scales,
which should be interpreted similarly to temperature scales. The crucial features are the
investors’ order along the relevant dimension, as well as their relative distance. Like in the
case of the Fahrenheit scale, both the ordering and the difference between two temperatures
have a specific meaning, up to a transformation: we can always take the ordering and the
distances and map them into a new scale, say the Celsius temperature scale.

The coordinates that best “fit” the underlying spatial model are then estimated iteratively by
constrained maximum likelihood. The constraint is that ideal points of each voter, xi are in the
interval [-1, +1] in one dimension and the unit circle in two. Each global iteration alternates
between estimating the proposal outcomes conditional on the voter ideal points, then the ideal
points conditional on the proposal outcomes, and finally the weighting parameters β and w.

The parametric assumptions underlying W-NOMINATE are that the distribution of the
utility difference between the Yea and Nay outcomes for voter i on proposal j is logit
distributed with a fixed variance. The parameter β weights voter spatial preferences relative to
the random shocks. For higher β, voter choices are more driven by spatial preferences. In two
dimensions, there is an additional parameter, w, that weights the dimensions.

(see Poole and Rosenthal, 1997, pages 234-238, for a complete development of the model).

There are other approaches to spatial scaling, in particular the Bayesian estimation approach
of Clinton, Jackman and Rivers (2004) (besides the difference in estimation method, Clinton
et al. also assume that voters’ utility functions are quadratic), the A-NOMINATE MCMC-
based approach of Carroll, Lewis, Lo, Poole and Rosenthal (2013), which nests both the
quadratic and Gaussian utility models, and the non-parametric Optimal Classification (OC)
approach of Poole (1997).
                                               19
None of these methods/models have clear advantages over the others. To check the
robustness of our results based on the W-NOMINATE approach, we have also run OC. We
find that the ideal point estimates and the classification accuracy of the different models are
very similar. The correlation between the W-NOMINATE and the OC estimates is 0.769

These scaling and estimation methods powerfully organize the voting data; they reflect the
common force of ideology in determining how institutional investors vote, by revealing their
relative ideological positions along one or two dimensions9. They go further than the findings
of Matvos and Ostrovsky (2010) that there are systematic differences in how institutional
investors vote and reveal the pattern of differences across institutional investors. The pattern
of these differences across investors is not obviously apparent a priori. It is therefore not
possible to capture this pattern through fixed effects along one or more dimensions that are
determined a priori.

As much as the NOMINATE scaling approach reveals voters’ ideological positions, it remains
silent on where ideology comes from. It identifies how voters’ ideal points are located relative
to each other based on their past votes, but it does not per se make any substantive
interpretation of their ideology. The choice of polarity, who lies more on the left and who
more on the right, is arbitrary, just as the color red for republicans and blue for democrats is
arbitrary. We could have flipped the polarity so that an ideal point on the left would appear
on the right, as one could easily flip the colors red and blue for republicans and democrats.

Still, the broader socio-economic context, the content of the proposals, and the nature of the
disagreements between shareholders suggest that one choice of polarity is more natural than
another. As Keith Poole (2005) succinctly put it in the introduction to Spatial Models of
Parliamentary Voting: “It is the researcher’s understanding of the theory about the picture that
gives the picture meaning. Without this understanding a person viewing the picture would see
just a bunch of dots.”



9  These scaling methods have been widely applied in many other contexts than voting. For example, they have been used
in educational testing to estimate ability (Rasch, 1961), in marketing to analyze consumer choices (Bechtel, 1985) and in
psychology and health science (see e.g. Bond and Fox, 2013).

                                                           20
Matvos and Ostrovsky (2010) find that there are not only systematic differences in how mutual
funds vote in director elections, but also that their voting behavior is strategic. They argue that
funds are generally reluctant to oppose management and therefore tend to vote with
management unless they expect other funds to vote against. They find peer effects in mutual
fund voting behavior, which they interpret as evidence of strategic voting taking the form of
“safety in numbers” in opposing management. Their findings raise the natural question of how
estimated ideal points should be interpreted if there is strategic voting. Under systematic
strategic voting of the form described by Matvos and Ostrovsky (2010) the estimated ideal
points will no longer reflect the true underlying ideal point. To the extent that mutual funds
vote more often with management for strategic reasons their ideal points will be closer to
management’s position, but the relative position of ideal points should not be affected unless
some funds are more strategic than others. Another possibility is that mutual funds may vote
strategically with the intent of signaling their ideology to asset owners. There could be mutual
funds that go out of their way to oppose management as a way of communicating their
investment philosophy to asset owners. The estimated ideal points of these funds would then
be further away from management than their true ideal point. In sum, W-NOMINATE infers
voters’ ideal points based on how they vote, whether the votes are sincere or strategic. To the
extent that there is strategic voting the estimated ideal points do not necessarily reflect intrinsic
preferences but may also reflect the ideology voters intend to communicate. This is true for
roll-call voting in Congress as well as for proxy voting by institutional investors.

Our estimation uses the publicly available R version of McCarty, Poole, and Rosenthal’s (1997)
W-NOMINATE. This and the closely related DW-NOMINATE (Poole and Rosenthal, 2007)
have been widely used in the political science literature to determine legislators’ ideal points
and the dimensions of their ideological disagreements. Note that each institution is treated as
having a single vote. Votes are not weighted by the number of shares owned. Also, when funds
in a given fund family do not vote unanimously, we take the vote of the fund family to be the
vote of the majority of the funds in the family. Note, however, that for 98.9% of the proposal-
fund observations, all the funds belonging to the same family vote the same way.



                                                 21
4. Institutional Investors Ideal Points in One- and Two- Dimensional Spaces

We begin our discussion of the substantive results by describing institutional investors
positions in one- and two- dimensional spaces.

We estimate one- and two- dimensional models. For both, we check that our results are not
unduly driven by director elections, which represent 77.7% of our sample. First, we run W-
NOMINATE in one dimension on shareholder and management proposals, excluding
director elections. Second, we estimate the two-dimensional model on the same sample. Third
and fourth, we augment the sample with director elections and run W-NOMINATE in one
and two dimensions. We find that although the one-dimensional model provides a good fit
overall to the data, the second dimension allows us to improve classification for some voters
and to highlight a second substantive dimension of disagreement among institutional investors
related to governance issues.

One-dimensional model excluding director elections. Consider first the estimation results of the one-
dimensional model, excluding director elections. This model is estimated from all the votes on
shareholder and management proposals in our sample, after filtering out institutions that voted
less than 50 times, proposals with minorities comprising less than 3% of the voters, and
proposals that had less than 20 voters. The top-left Panel of Figure 1 describes the distribution
of proposals with at least 20 voters. As can be seen, the modal proposal received more than
60 votes, and a significant number of proposals have more than 100 voters. The top-right
Panel of Figure 1 describes how the distribution of the number of voters per proposal varies
with the subject matter of the proposal. The proposals with the largest number of voters are
social proposals, which include proposals on the environment, diversity, employment and
human rights, political contributions, and product safety. This could be due to the fact that
such proposals are more common at large firms, which have a higher number of institutional
shareholders and thus voters. The reason why is that social issues might be most concerning
at large firms, or more likely, that targeting large firms is the most efficient way to achieve
social concerns with a limited budget of money and effort.10 Governance proposals,

10   We thank the referee for pointing this out.

                                                   22
represented by the orange bars, are next with a median number of voters above 100, followed
by Say on Pay proposals which have a median of around 60 voters, and financial and
investment policy proposals, which have a median of around 50 voters.

What is the ideology of institutional investors? A first set of answers to this fundamental
question is provided in Figure 2.A, which describes the distribution of ideal points along one
dimension for both mutual fund families and public pension funds. The top-left panel displays
the ideal points of all institutions, and the other three panels separately plot the ideal points of
mutual funds (white bars) and the public pension funds (blue bars). The one-dimensional W-
NOMINATE model constrains ideal points to the interval [-1, +1]. The arbitrary (and
inconsequential) polarity of the dimension was chosen such that socially oriented investors
appear on the left.

The first immediate observation from the top-left panel is that institutional investor votes are
far from reflecting shareholder unanimity. Institutional investors differ markedly in their
ideologies, with funds like Domini Social Investments and Calvert on the left of our one-
dimensional spectrum and Needham Investment Management on the far right. Consistent
with its voting, Domini describes its investment philosophy as follows: “We believe that all
investments have social and environmental implications. We apply social, environmental and
governance standards to all of our investments, believing they help identify opportunities to
provide strong financial rewards to our fund shareholders while also helping to create a more
just and sustainable economic system.” Calvert states on its website “With roots in responsible
investing back to 1982, the firm seeks to generate favorable investment returns for clients by
allocation capital consistent with environmental, social and governance best practices […]”.
In contrast Needham Investment Management, LLC, describes its investment philosophy as
focusing on investments with “an emphasis on tax-efficient capital appreciation and
preservation”. Another far-right fund, Leuthold Weeden Capital Management, describes its
investment philosophy as “quantitative measures of value combined with recognition of
fundamental and technical trends, [and that it pursues] A policy of disciplined, unemotional,
and strategic investing, backed by solid and comprehensive research.” Panel A of Table 3
contains a more detailed list of extremists both on the right and left end of the ideology
                                                23
spectrum. Neither Needham Investment Management nor any of the other far right funds
listed in Table 3 mention anything about ethical, environmental, or social concerns.

The second main observation is that the distribution of ideal points is close to unimodal, quite
distinct from the bimodal distribution in Congress where political party polarizes members.11
There is a caveat to unimodality. Fifty-one funds have nearly the same ideal point as ISS while
forty investors have ideal points similar to that of Glass Lewis. These similarities correspond
to the distinct peaks in the panels of Figure 2A. On the one hand, the proxy advisors might
be actively coordinating the votes of investors. On the other, some institutional investors may
make their voting choices in a cursory fashion and use the recommendations of the advisors
to fulfill their fiduciary responsibilities. Interestingly, ISS’s ideology is left of Glass Lewis. A
significant fraction of both mutual funds and public pension funds are in between ISS and
Glass Lewis, an indication that they sometimes side with one or the other proxy adviser when
the two advisers’ recommendations differ.

The third observation is that the two largest passive asset managers, Blackrock and Vanguard,
have different ideal points than the two proxy advisers. Both asset managers have
communicated that while they rely on the recommendations of ISS and Glass Lewis to guide
their votes, they do not slavishly follow these recommendations.12 This voting policy is
reflected in their different ideal points. Interestingly, their ideal points are to the right of the
proxy advisers, which suggests that they were both less concerned about environmental and
social issues.

Finally, a fund that almost always voted with management would be located on the far-right.
The peak at the far right distribution of the panels shows the extent to which there are pro-
management investors. Note from the remaining three panels of Figure 2A that none of these
investors are pension funds.


11 The peaks on the left and right ends arise partly through the [-1,+1] constraint in W-NOMINATE.
12 In its Proxy Voting and Shareholder Engagement FAQ document Blackrock states “We subscribe to a number of
different research products which we take into consideration when deciding how to vote at U.S. company meetings. We
do not follow the recommendations of any one provider but make our voting decision based on what we consider to be
in the best long-term economic interests of fund investors.” https://www.blackrock.com/corporate/en-lu/literature/fact-
sheet/blk-responsible-investment-faq-global.pdf

                                                          24
Indeed, it is to be expected a priori that public pension funds have different ideologies from
mutual funds because they may have a duty to vote in line with their members’ preferences.
This difference in ideologies is reflected in the last three panels of Figure 2.A. The blue portion
of each bar pertains to public pension funds, the white to the other investors. As the top- and
bottom- right panels show, public pension funds are more to the left than mutual funds. In
particular, all public pension funds, with the exception of Indiana Teachers, are to the left of
Blackrock. CalPERS is between ISS and Glass Lewis, and the most far left public pension
funds are the AFSCME Employee Pension Plan, the Colorado Police & Fire Pension Fund,
labeled in the panel, and the State Universities Retirement System of Illinois (SURS), which
are listed in Table 3. This pattern is more accentuated if we exclude those pension funds that
let their investment managers decide how to vote. The bottom-right panel in Fig. 2.A shows,
among others, the breakdown of the West Virginia pension funds based on their investment
managers and indicates that the ideal points vary from the far left for the votes cast by Intech
to the far right for the votes cast by State Street Global Advisors (SSGA). Indeed, while Intech
is not among the funds in our sample, the ideal points of West Virginia SSGA fund and SSGA
are very close to each other, at 0.34 and 0.38, respectively.13

In sum, the ideal-point results show a clear spatial structure. The left represents relatively
socially-oriented investors, while the right represents more money-oriented investors.

The bottom two panels of Figure 2.A provide further information on the position of ideal
points of the largest and most prominent mutual fund families and public pension funds. It is
worth noting that the pension fund of the AFSCME, the largest public services employee
union, is far to the left of CalSTRS or CalPERS, two of the largest public pension plans, whose
ideal points are center right.14 Most of the large institutions, such as J.P. Morgan, Goldman
Sachs, Fidelity, Prudential (not reported) tend to be center-right, with the exception of
PIMCO, Nuveen, which are center-left and follow ISS recommendations in most of their


13 The two-dimension estimates are even closer: 0.31 and 0.33 for the first dimension, and -0.04 and -0.08 for the second

dimension, respectively.
14 The more moderate position of CalPERS could reflect the more moderate political preferences and a higher focus on

financial returns of public employees in California (see John Myers “CalPERS board president is ousted in election, losing
to Corona police officer” LA Times October 4, 2018).

                                                           25
votes. Consistent with the reputations of their CEOs, Grantham, Mayo and Van Otterloo,
LLC is on the left, while GAMCO is furthest to the right of all the prominent fund families,
as can be seen in the bottom-left panel. Among the smaller funds, Wisdomtree Asset
Management and Pax World Management appear to be on the far-left as well, further
confirming our interpretation of the dimension as socially- vs. money- oriented investment
philosophies.

Results of the two-dimensional model without director elections. Consider next the estimation results of
the two-dimensional model, excluding director elections. Note first that a second dimension
appears to be relevant from the way in which the ideal points spread out along the vertical axis
in the three panels of Figure 2.B. While the location of the ideal points of investors along the
first dimension is similar to their locations in the one-dimensional model, their locations also
spread out along the second dimension.

What does this second dimension reflect? It seems to capture differences about corporate
governance, with the funds at the bottom taking a more management-friendly stance and those
at the top being more management-disciplinarians. Note in particular that the second
dimension pits Glass-Lewis and its followers against ISS’ more management friendly stance
on non-director proposals.

Results of the one-dimensional model when director elections are added. Consider next the estimation
results of the one-dimensional model when director elections are included. Most proposals
represent director elections. Moreover, the director elections have many more investors
voting, as can be seen from the bottom-left panel of Figure 1.

How is the estimated ideal point of institutional investors changed by the addition of director
elections? A comparison of the top-right panels of Figure 2.A and Figure 2.C reveals that for
a large fraction of the institutions the ideal points changed to some extent, and for some of
them they do so substantially. The main change is the shift of the ideal point of Glass Lewis
to the far right and an associated increase in classification error, suggesting that the one-
dimensional model performs less well when director elections are added.



                                                  26
Results of the two-dimensional model with director elections. Consider next the estimation results of the
two-dimensional model depicted in Figure 2.D. The fact that the position of Glass Lewis shifts
from the center right to the far right in the one-dimensional model when we add director
elections is a hint that Glass Lewis voting recommendations, and maybe the ideal points of
some investors, may be better represented with a two-dimensional model. This is indeed what
we find when we estimate the two-dimensional W-NOMINATE model.

The panels only label the positions of some of the pension funds. It is interesting to see that
pension funds tend to be both the more socially minded and more management
disciplinarians. Indeed, the top-left panel shows that the blue dots (pension fund positions)
are nearly all bunched in the upper-left corner. In contrast, for mutual fund families, labeled
in the top-right panel, their differences are such that the more socially responsible among the
large funds, like Nuveen, PIMCO, DFA, and Grantham, Mayo, are more management-
friendly, while Blackrock, Vanguard and GAMCO are more profit-oriented and more
management-disciplinarian, although, with the exclusion on Blackrock and Capital Research,
not by a large extent. Among the smaller mutual funds on the far-left, Calvert, Domini and
Pax World Management, appear, like the pension funds, to be socially-oriented and
management-disciplinarian, while Wisdom Tree Investments and a few others reported in
Panel B of Table 3, while socially-oriented, appear to be very management-friendly.

The addition of director elections reduces the differences of investors along the second
dimension, as can be seen by comparing the three panels in Figure 2.B and 2.D. In effect,
Glass Lewis’ ideology is extremely management-disciplinarian on governance issues, as its
voting recommendations on directors indicate. As for pension funds, the addition of director
elections moves them further in a management-disciplinarian direction. Interestingly, the
position of ISS and the funds following it also moves toward a more management-
disciplinarian direction once we add director elections, confirming that negative votes on
directors are one of the main forms in which institutional shareholders express their dissent
with management and board decisions.




                                                   27
The differences in ideal points between the four models we estimate can be summarized more
succinctly by looking at the correlations in the positions of the ideal points across the four
models. The correlation coefficients are reported in Panel A of Table 2. Note first that the
correlation between the institutional investors’ first dimension positions in the one and two-
dimension model with no director elections is extremely high, at 0.9933, confirming that while
adding a second dimension highlights another important driver of institutional investor voting
it does not change the positions with respect to the first such driver. Second, the addition of
director elections substantially modifies the ideal points estimated with the one-dimensional
model. The correlation coefficient of ideal points estimated without director elections and
with director elections in the one-dimensional model is only 0.6291. However, when we add
a second dimension in the data that includes director elections, the correlation between the
ideal points in the one-dimensional model excluding director elections and the ideal points in
the two-dimensional model including director elections is 0.8792! This confirms both the
robustness of the one-dimensional model, excluding director elections, and the importance of
a second dimension that reflects corporate governance differences when we add the most
important governance decision shareholders face in practice, the election of directors on the
board.

Finally, measures of fit for the models above are reported in Panel B of Table 2. The overall
fit of the W-NOMINATE estimation is given by four measures, the percentage of correctly
classified votes, the aggregate proportional reduction in error (APRE), the geometric mean
probability (GMP), and the signal-to-noise ratio β. An observed vote is a classification error
if its predicted probability is less than 0.5. The classification percentage is calculated as
100*(Correct Votes)/All Votes). Panel B of Table 2 shows that percentage of correctly
classified votes is quite high across all for models, i.e. whether we include or exclude director
elections, we correctly classify over 88% of the votes, the highest being the one from the two
dimensions WNOMINATE with director elections, which is equal to 92.28%. The APRE is
defined as: 1 – (Total Classification Errors)/(Total Votes on Minority Side). This measure
allows us to see how much W-NOMINATE improves on minority voting as a benchmark.
The intuition is the following: suppose the actual vote on a given proposal was 80% Yea and

                                               28
20% Nay. Without any further information we can always classify every voter as a Yea and be
right 80% of the times. If there is useful information in the spatial model, we expect it to
classify with less than 20% errors on this specific proposal. The APRE aggregates the
proportional reduction in error (PRE) across proposals, or group of proposals. For each vote,
this measure is 1 if there are no classification errors, it is 0 if the number of spatial model
errors equals the minority vote, and it is less than 0 if the model does worse than assigning
everyone the majority choice. In our estimation, the APREs of 0.339 and 0.262 (for the one-
dimensional model) are less than those for congressional roll calls, largely because votes are
more one-sided. That is, minorities are smaller, particularly on director votes. They increase
to 0.463 and 0.406, respectively, when we add a second dimension. The geometric mean
probability (GMP) is the exponential of the average log-likelihood, i.e. GMP=exp[log-
likelihood of all observed choices/N]. Since the likelihood of an observed choice is the
probability the model assigns to that choice and all choices are assumed to be independent,
the likelihood of all the choices is the product of all likelihood. The GMP penalizes models
that assign low probabilities to observed choices. Thus, the model doesn’t simply minimize
the number of funds incorrectly classified, but rather, roughly speaking, it minimizes the errors
weighted by the distance to the midpoint for any given proposal, since a classification error
for an extremist is more serious than one for a fund that is close to the midpoint and thus
close to indifferent between the two outcomes it is voting on. The GMPs for our four models
are reported in the fifth column of Panel B of Table 2. While all the values are relatively high,
the best fit according to this measure is the two-dimensional model with director elections for
which the GMP is 0.819. Finally, the signal to noise ratio, β, measures the relative importance
of the spatial component and is proportional to the variance of the error distribution. In
contrast to the APREs, β, ranging between 18.1 to 19, is larger than those found for Congress.
The large βs show that the ideological component of voting is large relative to the random
error components.

In the remainder of this section we further validate our interpretation of the first and second
spatial dimensions by looking at the identities of the extremist funds.



                                               29
Extremist Investors. The identity of the extremists shown in Table 3 allows us to make a first
simple exploration on whether their voting records, summarized by the estimated ideal points,
correspond to the advertised investment philosophies of these funds. As noted above, this is
by and large the case. Table 3 reports the identity of left and right extremists, when ideal points
are mapped onto a single dimension, and also the identity of extremists along each dimension,
when ideal points are mapped onto a two-dimensional space. There are then four groups of
extremists, with the second dimension capturing those investors that are extremely
management friendly on director elections at one end and those that are extreme management
disciplinarians at the other end. The left-positioned funds on the first dimension are pension
funds and many mutual fund families with ESG objectives in their investment philosophies,
with the exception of Wisdomtree Asset Management, which focuses on ETFs. The right-
positioned ones tend to be funds focusing on tax management and capital appreciation. The
management-disciplinarians are Glass Lewis followed by some of the large pension funds and
some small mutual fund families, while the management-friendly funds are Wisdomtree Asset
Management and other small fund families.

Besides the ideal points of extremists, Table 3 also reports standard errors, and correct
classifications for the selected extremist investors. Standard errors come from running 100
parametric bootstraps in W-NOMINATE15. Those in Table 3 range from 0.02 to 0.15,
showing that the ideological locations are estimated relatively precisely (more generally,
standard errors decrease with extremism but increase with the number of votes cast by the
institution). Note the difference in classification between the left and right extremists. One
possible reason for this difference could be the fact that right extremists are small funds that
vote less often and are therefore less precisely estimated. An alternative, albeit more
speculative, explanation is that while the funds on the left invest with purpose and there is less
debate on what that means, the funds on the right are exclusively focused on return
maximization, and there is more disagreement on what that entails.



15Robustness analysis with 50, 100, 500 and 1,000 bootstrap iterations indicated that there were only very marginal gains
in increasing the number of iterations beyond 100.

                                                           30
The Influence of Proxy Adviser Recommendations. Which funds tend to mostly follow the
recommendations of one of the two proxy advisers? We report the identity of these investors
in Table 4. In the one-dimensional model, ISS and the investors close to it all classify nearly
perfectly. In contrast, Glass Lewis itself and investors close to it classify less well. However,
in the two-dimensional model, Glass Lewis and its followers classify nearly as well as ISS and
its followers. It is worth noting that in the two-dimensional model all the ISS followers are
mutual funds, while three of the ten closest followers of Glass Lewis are pension funds.

5. Proposal Midpoints and Substantive Issues dividing Institutional Investors

In this section, we turn to the analysis of the substance of proposals dividing the institutional
investors, and the locations of the midpoints separating those that vote “Yes” and “No” on
any given proposal. We begin by reporting the midpoints along the first dimension and then
turn to the midpoints on the second dimension and the angles of the cutting lines, which
indicate whether a proposal separates voters mainly along the first or second dimension, and
the extent to which shareholders trade off issues along the two dimensions.

Figure 3 reports the distribution of proposal midpoints along the first dimension, for all
proposals and by proposal type. Recall that at the midpoint, the probabilities of voting “For”
and “Against” are both 0.5. The midpoint is the position on the line that separates the
predicted “For” from the predicted “Against” the proposal.

Unlike Congress, where the midpoints are frequently in the center, many midpoints here are
at the extremes, especially on the left. Many proposals bump up against the constraint of
having an ideal point at the edges of the space, and they are not informative, as they only tell
us that all funds are predicted to vote identically on the given proposal. An unconstrained
midpoint is on the left if, for that proposal, the investors on the left are predicted to vote
against the center and the right, and vice-versa for proposal midpoints at the right end. For
management proposals and proposals which management recommends a vote “for”, a
midpoint close to -1 means that nearly all shareholders support the proposal, while a midpoint
close to +1 means that nearly all oppose it. The opposite is true for proposals opposed by
management. The top-left graph in Figure 3 indeed shows that the fraction of proposals at -1

                                               31
is much higher than that at +1, and that the overwhelming majority of proposals have
midpoints on the left. As the top-right graph in Figure 3 reveals, there is however substantial
opposition to management on governance proposals. The opposition to Say on Pay and other
compensation proposals on the other hand is concentrated in a few proposals, as the bottom-
left and right graphs highlight. Figure 3 also shows that there is considerable shareholder
support in the election of directors. Of course, even a small fraction of votes against a director
can be interpreted as a rebuke. The mid-points for social proposals have a bi-modal
distribution, indicating that some social proposals face strong opposition. The mid-points for
Financial and Investment Policy proposals are also bimodal with nearly half the proposals
being essentially unopposed.16

Figure 4 shows the distribution of midpoints broken down by sponsor type. Not surprisingly,
management proposals have mid-points mostly to the left reflecting the fact that on average
management proposals are supported by lop-sided majorities. Still, there are a few
management proposals that garner substantial opposition. As for shareholder proposals, it is
noteworthy the mid-point distribution is bi-modal, indicating that a significant fraction of
shareholder proposals garner substantial support.

We turn next to the distribution of midpoints along the second dimension displayed in Figures
5 and 6. Note first that +1 refers to an extreme management disciplinarian and -1 to the
opposite, a management-friendly stance. Interestingly, along the second-dimension midpoints
are all in the interior with a mode in the middle, reflecting that shareholders are more divided
along the second dimension. In other words, the midpoint distribution along the second
dimension resembles more the distributions seen in Congress for roll call votes. Notable
exceptions are the Say on Pay votes, where in a significant fraction of cases the midpoints are
below zero, meaning that for those proposals the center voted with Glass Lewis and the
management-disciplinarians, and the Social proposals where on the contrary Glass Lewis and




16The unopposed proposals in this category mostly comprise the proposals on routine matters, such as
adjourning the meeting.

                                                32
the management-disciplinarians are isolated against the center and the management-friendly
funds.

Finally, the angle of the cutting lines in two dimensions. Recall that the cutting line is the two-
dimensional generalization of the midpoint in one dimension. The angle the line makes with
the first dimension reflects how voters trade off the two dimensions on each proposal. The
angles vary between -90 degrees to +90 degrees. An angle of 0 or close to 0 is entirely a second-
dimension issue, and angles of -90 or +90 degrees are entirely first dimension issues. Figure 7
provides a few examples of proposals cutting lines. The top-left graph plots the ideal points
of all the funds voting on the Citigroup Say on Pay vote held on April 17th 2012 and shows
the cutting line separating the funds predicted to vote “for” and “against”, while the top-right
one plots the funds that were incorrectly classified. This advisory vote on executive
compensation was very controversial at the time. Both Glass Lewis and ISS recommended to
vote against the $15 million pay package for CEO Vikram Pandit. Indeed, 55% of the
shareholders indeed voted against the package. Pandit’s pay was reduced, and he resigned in
October 2012.17 The top-left pane of Figure 7 shows investors’ ideal points based on all their
votes in the sample and the cutting line for this specific proposal, separating those that based
on their ideology are predicted to vote for from those predicted to vote against. The slope of
the cutting line is 76 degree, indicating that funds separated mainly along the first dimension
on this specific issue. The top-right pane of Figure 7 shows those investors that voted
differently than predicted by the model. Most of them are close to the cutting line, and they
would be close to indifferent between voting “for” and “against”. Among them are Vanguard,
Blackrock and the West Virginia - SSGA fund, which are predicted to lean toward voting
“against”, but actually voted in favor of the package. Notable exception is the Massachusetts
pension fund. Although the fund is quite distant from the cutting line, it voted in support of
the proposal when an against vote was predicted by the model.



17See Jessica Silver Greenberg and Nelson. D. Schwartz, “Citigroup’s Chief Rebuffed on Pay by Shareholders”, New York
Times,, April 19, 2012, p. A1,and Donald Griffin and Bradley Keenan, “Citigroup Board Said to Oust Pandit After Multiple
Setbacks,, Oct. 16, 2012. http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2012-10-16/citigroup-board-said-to-oust-vikram-pandit-
over-poor-execution.html.

                                                          33
The next two panes in Figure 7 illustrate another mainly first-dimensional vote, Amazon
“Shareholder proposal regarding report on climate change”, held on May 24th 2012. In this
case Glass Lewis recommends against while ISS recommends for. Among the misclassified
investors are Vanguard and CalPERS, which vote for the proposal despite their ideal points
prediciting they wouldn’t, and CalSTRS for which the opposite is true. With few exceptions,
also in this case the incorrectly classified funds are close to the cutting line.

Finally, the last two panes in Figure 7 illustrate a mainly second-dimension vote, the election
of J. Michael Losch to the board of AON, held on May 18th 2012, for which Glass Lewis
recommended against and ISS recommended for. In this case the cutting line angle is 7
degrees, and, unlike the previous two votes, the funds separate along the second dimension
and the management disciplinarian funds both on the left and the right vote against the
management friendly ones. One notable exception is Blackrock, which voted in a more
management disciplinarian way than predicted by the model.

Figure 8 reports the distribution of the cutting line angles for all proposals. The graphs show
that most of the proposals are either purely first dimension issues or a mix of the two
dimensions, but with a greater weight on the first dimension, which confirms our other
findings that the first dimension is primal for investor ideology. Interestingly, the few
proposals that give more weight to the second dimension tend to be in the Governance and
Say on Pay categories, although a good number of director proposals also have a strong second
dimension.

6. Proposal Midpoints, Cutting Line Angles, and Firm and Director Characteristics

In this section we explore how the midpoints and the cutting line angles vary with firm,
director, and sponsor characteristics. This provides additional insights on the substantive
issues that divide shareholders, which characteristics of the proposals lead to an extreme left
with other voters split, and which characteristics split shareholders in the middle.

Midpoints and Firm Characteristics



                                                 34
Consider first firm characteristics. In Table 5 we report OLS regressions of midpoints along
the first and second dimensions respectively as a function of the following main firm
characteristics: size, market capitalization, book-to-market ratio, leverage, ROA, past year total
return, dividend yield, Amihud liquidity measure, institutional ownership, various corporate
governance characteristics, sponsor characteristics, and proposal characteristics. As for the
midpoint distributions shown in Figures 3 to 6, a negative coefficient means that all else equal
the midpoint shifts to the left and reflects a broader center right coalition versus a smaller left
coalition of voters. For example, in column (1) the coefficient on past year total returns is -
0.0319 and statistically significant at the 5% level, reflecting the fact that higher past returns
result in smaller and more extreme left coalitions. Alternatively, if returns are lower this may
increase shareholder dissatisfaction and lead to larger coalitions opposed to management.

Other variables with similar robust qualitative effect are governance variables such as board
size and the fraction of independent directors, whereas poison pills and unequal voting rights
have the opposite effect, suggesting that firms with stronger minority shareholder rights tend
to be firms with a broader shareholder support of management.

Consistent with Figures 4 and 6, the coefficient on Shareholder-Sponsored Proposal is positive
and highly significant, meaning that voting on shareholder proposals is less lop-sided and less
favorable to management. Similarly, the coefficients on director election, governance, social,
and compensation proposals in column (5) are positive, whereas shareholder sponsored
governance proposals have a negative coefficient. Columns (6) to (10) report regressions of
the second-dimension midpoints on firm, sponsor and proposal characteristics. Here the most
striking new observation is the effect of ROA, with higher ROA associated with greater
support for the management-disciplinarian funds. Similarly, the presence of a golden
parachute, a poison pill, a classified board, a higher fraction of independent directors, a smaller
board and higher institutional ownership, are associated with more negative midpoints, and a
larger support for the management-disciplinarian approach.

Midpoints and Director Characteristics



                                                35
How do midpoints on director elections vary with director characteristics? Table 6 reports
OLS regressions of respectively first and second dimension midpoints as a function of the
following main director characteristics: gender, age, independent director, number of meetings
attended, financial expertise, number of outside public boards, and percent of controlling
voting power. Remarkably, along the first dimension, female directors tend to garner broader
support (the left coalition is smaller), whereas absentee directors (those that attended <75%
of meetings) and inside directors, with a higher controlling voting power, are opposed by the
center and left voters. Further, directors classified as independent or employee directors have
midpoints shifted to the left and garner more support than other directors with otherwise
similar characteristics. By contrast, age, financial expertise, and number of outside boards the
director sits on are not statistically significantly related to first-dimension midpoint positions.

Finally, the results of second-dimension midpoint OLS regressions on director characteristics,
reported in the last two columns of Table 6, show that, all else equal, higher age, financial
expertise and lack of independence shift the midpoint up isolating the management
disciplinarians from the rest of the funds. The number of outside boards the director sits on
also seems to shift the midpoint up, although the effect vanishes once firm characteristics are
included in the regression.

Cutting Line Angles and Firm and Director Characteristics

Table 7 links the angle of the cutting lines more systematically to company, sponsor and
proposal characteristics. The regressions in Table 7 take the cutting line angle as the dependent
variable. Recall that a -45 degree angle separates the voter coalition on the North-East
(management disciplinarians and more profit-oriented investors) against the South-West
(governance-lax and more socially-oriented investors), and a +45 degree angle, separates a
North-West coalition (management disciplinarians with socially oriented investors) against a
South-East coalition (governance-lax and profit-oriented investors). The constant coefficient
is large and positive, indicating that the North-West, South-East coalitions are the most
common. It is interesting to note, however, that Shareholder-Sponsored Proposals tend to pit
management disciplinarians and socially oriented investors against governance-lax and profit-


                                                  36
oriented investors. In contrast, shareholder coalitions in companies with a high fraction of
independent directors tend to put management disciplinarians on the same side as profit-
oriented investors. The same is true for Say on Pay proposals, director elections and social
proposals.

Columns (6) to (10) take the absolute value of the cutting line angle as the dependent variable.
This is the relevant variable to determine which of the two dimensions is most important.
Again, the constant coefficient is positive and large, indicating that the first dimension is
dominant.

7. Investor Ideology over Time

We have estimated investor ideology based on the votes they cast over one fiscal year. A
natural question is whether ideologies are stable over time. This is, of course, a central question
in political science and is the focus of the study by Poole and Rosenthal (2007) on the history
of roll call voting in Congress. A systematic analysis of investor ideology over time is beyond
the scope of this paper, but we are able to report one preliminary finding from ongoing
research on this question. Figure 9 reports results based on mutual fund votes only, and
compares the estimated ideal points in fiscal year 2016 with the ideal points in 2012. The 2012
ideal points are in orange, while those for 2016 are in blue. A first general observation is that
there has been relatively large turnover and consolidation in the asset management industry
over this period, with only 166 out of a total of 397 institutions present in both fiscal years.
There were 53 institutions in 2012 that had disappeared by 2016, and 178 new institutions are
in our data in 2016 that were not in our list of 2012 mutual fund families. A second general
observation is that for a large fraction of institutions ideal points have not moved much from
2012 to 2016, providing a preliminary indication that ideology is stable over time.

Another analysis we conducted looks at ideal points over all years from fiscal year 2004 to
2016. Again, there is a fair amount of turnover, so that we only have 219 mutual fund families
covering all these years. We found a high degree of stability along the first dimension, with a
correlation coefficient between the estimates for the fiscal year 2012 and those for all years
pooled of .8996, but more instability along the second dimension, as reflected in the lower

                                                37
correlation coefficient of .6265. This is not entirely surprising and is consistent with the greater
instability of the second dimension for roll call votes in Congress. We also performed a
Procrustean analysis, which is reported in Panel B of Figure 9. As the figure reveals the ideal
points for 2012 are in the middle of the distribution of ideal points for all years, and are highly
correlated with them.

8. Conclusion

What is the ideology of institutional investors? In this paper we have applied the standard
spatial model to analyze institutional shareholder voting. We found that institutional investors’
ideologies can be represented along a left-right spectrum just like legislators’ ideologies. As
with Congress, a second dimension of disagreement is also relevant for institutional investors.
This second dimension captures the different corporate governance stances of investors, with
the management-friendly investors at one end of the spectrum and the management
disciplinarians at the other end.

To be sure, there are important differences between the corporate governance settings and
legislatures. The way proposals come to a vote is different, the effect of passing a shareholder
proposal is different, the composition of institutional investors varies from firm to firm and
over time. Yet, we have found that the W-NOMINATE scaling method and the spatial
representation of investor ideal points succeeds.

We have found a first dimension encompassing voting on a variety of issues, just as the main
dimension in congressional voting encompasses voting on taxes, reproductive rights, gun
control, and other issues. The left on our dimension is distinguished not just by its votes on
“Social” proposals but also by being a minority on many “Say-to-Pay” proposals on executive
compensation. Even though compensation proposals are major fraction of our data, other
proposals map nicely onto the dimension. A second dimension captures institutions’ stance
on governance-related matters as expressed through votes on director elections. It sees Glass-
Lewis and a few public pension funds taking a tough stand on director elections on one side,
and most of the large mutual fund families on the other. Our results differ somewhat from



                                                38
the proxy voting literature in that we do not find that large institutions follow the proxy
advisers closely.

In sum, the ideological representation of institutional investor heterogeneity that we uncover
provides an alternative view of investor heterogeneity than, say, differences in risk preferences
or information. The interpretation of the dimensions we found is, of course, open to
discussion, much as is the meaning of liberal and conservative in politics. The sorting on “Say-
to-Pay” may reflect different beliefs about how much executive compensation contributes to
shareholder returns. Alternatively, there could be agreement about what compensation
maximizes shareholder returns, but the left may be more open to lowering shareholder returns
in ways that promote environmental and other social objectives.

As encouraging as our results are, the analysis we have conducted here is in many ways
exploratory, and many open questions remain. We have only analyzed the proxy votes for
fiscal year 2012, and we are extending the analysis to multiple years in a separate paper. In
future work we plan to further analyze the characteristics of the companies. This will allow us,
in particular, to better understand how stable the ideological differences of institutional
investors are.




                                               39
                                                 References

Appel, Ian, Todd A. Gormley, and Donald B. Keim, 2016. Passive investors, not passive owners,
Journal of Financial Economics 121: 111-141.

Armstrong, David A. II, Ryan Bakker, Royce Carroll, Christopher Hare, Keith T. Poole, and Howard
Rosenthal. 2014. Analyzing Spatial Models of Choice and Judgment with R. Boca Raton, Fl. CRC Press.

Arrow, Kenneth J., 1984. Collected Papers of Kenneth J. Arrow, Volume 1: Social Choice and Justice, Belknap
Press

Ashraf, Rasha, Narayanan Jayaraman, and Harley E. Ryan Jr., 2012. Do Pension-Related Business Ties
Influence Mutual Fund Proxy Voting? Evidence from Shareholder Proposals on Executive
Compensation. The Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 47(3): 567–588.

Babenko, Ilona, Goeun Choi, and Rik Sen, 2018. “Management (of) Proposals”, manuscript, Arizona
State University.

Bethel, Jennifer E., and Stuart L. Gillan. 2002. The Impact of the Institutional and Regulatory
Environment on Shareholder Voting. Financial Management 31(4): 29-54.

Black, Duncan, 1948. On the Rationale of Group Decision-Making. Journal of Political Economy, 56(1): 23–34.

Brav, Alon, Wei Jiang, and Tao Li, 2017. Picking Friends Before Picking (Proxy) Fights: How Does
Mutual Fund Voting Shape Proxy Contests, Working paper, Columbia University, Duke University,
and University of Florida.

Bubb, Ryan and Emiliano Catan, 2018. The Party Structure of Mutual Funds, Working paper, New
York University

Butler, Alexander W. and Umit G. Gurun, 2012. Educational networks, mutual fund voting patterns,
and CEO compensation, Review of Financial Studies, 25, 2533-2562.

Cai, Jie, Jacqueline L. Garner, and Ralph A. Walkling, 2009. Electing Directors. The Journal of
Finance 64(5): 2389-421.

Chou, Julia and Ng, Lilian K. and Wang, Qinghai, 2011. Are Better Governed Funds Better Monitors?
Journal of Corporate Finance, 17(5): 1254-1271


                                                       40
Cremers, Martijn and Roberta Romano, 2011. Institutional Investors and Proxy Voting on
Compensation Plans: The Impact of the 2003 Mutual Fund Voting Disclosure Rule. American Law and
Economics Review, 13(1): 220–268.

Cvijanovic, Dragana, Amil Dasgupta, and Konstantinos E. Zachariadis, 2016. Tie that bind: How
business connections affect mutual fund activism, Journal of Finance, 71(6): 2933-2966.

Davis, Gerard F. and E. Han Kim, 2007. Business ties and proxy voting by mutual funds, Journal of
Financial Economics, 85: 552-570.

Duan, Ying, Yawen Jiao, and Kinsun Tam, 2018. The Role of Public Pension Funds in
Corporate Governance: Evidence from Proxy Voting, Working Paper.

Ertimur, Yonca, Fabrizio Ferri, and David Oesch, 2013, Shareholder Votes and Proxy Advisors:
Evidence from Say on Pay, Journal of Accounting Research, 51(5): 951-996.

Ferri, Fabrizio, 2012. 'Low-cost' shareholder activism: A review of the evidence. In Research Handbook
on the Economics of Corporate Law by Claire A. Hill, James L. Krusemark, Brett H. McDonnell, and Solly
Robbins (eds.), Edward Elgar Publishing, London

Friedman, Milton, 1970. The Social Responsibility of Business is to Increase Its Profits, New York
Times Magazine, September 13, 1970, 32.

Gillan, Stuart, and Laura Starks, 2000. Corporate governance proposals and shareholder activism: The
role of institutional investors, Journal of Financial Economics 57, 275–305.

Grossman, Sanford J., and Oliver D. Hart, 1979. A Theory of Competitive Equilibrium in Stock
Market Economies. Econometrica, 47(2): 293–329.

Grossman, Sanford J., and Oliver D. Hart, 1980. Takeover Bids, The Free-Rider Problem, and the
Theory of the Corporation. The Bell Journal of Economics, 11(1): 42–64.

Grossman, Sanford J., and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1977. On Value Maximization and Alternative
Objectives of the Firm. The Journal of Finance, 32(2): 389–402.

Hart, Oliver and Zingales, Luigi, 2017. Companies Should Maximize Shareholder Welfare Not Market
Value, ECGI - Finance Working Paper No. 521/2017.



                                                     41
He, Ellen Yazhou, and Tao Li (2017): The benefits of hedge fund activism, Working paper, University
of Oxford and University of Florida.

He, Jie, Jiekun Huang, and Shan Zhao (2017): Internalizing Governance Externalities: The Role of
Institutional Cross-ownership, Working paper, University of Georgia.

Jiang, Wei, Tao Li, and Danqing Mei, 2018. Influencing Control: Jawboning in Risk Arbitrage. Journal
of Finance, forthcoming

Kedia, Simi, Laura Starks, and Xianjue Wang, 2017, Institutional Investors and Hedge Fund Activism,
Working paper, Rutgers University and University of Texas, Austin.

Iliev, Peter and Michelle Lowry, 2015. Are mutual funds active voters? Review of Financial Studies, 28:
446-485.

Larcker, David F. and McCall, Allan L. and Ormazabal, Gaizka, 2014. Outsourcing Shareholder
Voting to Proxy Advisory Firms. Journal of Law and Economics, 58(1): 173-204.

Li, Sophia Zhengzi and Miriam Schwartz-Ziv, 2018. How are shareholder votes and trades related?
Working paper, Rutgers University and Michigan State University.

Li, Tao, 2018, Outsourcing corporate governance: Conflicts of interest within the proxy advisory
industry, Management Science, forthcoming.

Listokin, Yair, 2008, Management Always Wins the Close Ones, American Law and Economics Review,
10(2):159-184.

Malenko, Nadya and Yao Shen, 2016. The role of proxy advisory firms: Evidence from a regression-
discontinuity design, Review of Financial Studies, 29(12): 3394-3427.

Matvos, Gregor and Michael Ostrovsky, 2010. Heterogeneity and peer effects in mutual fund proxy
voting Journal of Financial Economics, 98(1): 90-112

McCahery, Joseph, Zacharias Sautner, and Laura Starks, 2016.Behind the scenes: The corporate
governance preferences of institutional investors, Journal of Finance, 71(6): 2905-2932.

McCarty, Nolan, Keith T. Poole, and Howard Rosenthal. 1997. Income Redistribution and the Realignment
of American Politics. Washington, DC: American Enterprise Institute.



                                                       42
McFadden, Daniel L. 1976. Quantal Choice Analysis: A Survey,Annals of Economic and Social
Measurement, 5(4):363-390.

Morgan, Angela, Annette Poulsen, Jack Wolf, and Tian Yang, 2011. Mutual funds as monitors:
Evidence from mutual fund voting. Journal of Corporate Finance, 17: 914-928.

Morningstar, 2017. Passive Fund Providers Take an Active Approach to Investment Stewardship.
http://www.morningstar.com/lp/passive-providers-active-approach

Poole, Keith T. and Howard Rosenthal, 1985. A Spatial Model for Legislative Roll Call Analysis.
American Journal of Political Science, 29(2):357-384.

Poole, Keith T. and Howard Rosenthal, 1991. Patterns of Congressional Voting. American Journal of
Political Science 35(1):228-278.

Poole, Keith T. 2000. “Non-parametric unfolding of binary choice data.” Political Analysis 8(3) 211-
237.

Poole, Keith T. 2005. Spatial Models of Parliamentary Voting. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Poole, Keith T. and Howard Rosenthal. 2007. Ideology and Congress. (2nd edition of Congress: A Political
Economic History of Roll Call Voting, 1997.) New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Press.

Rothberg, Burton and Steven Lilien, 2006. Mutual Funds and Proxy Voting: New Evidence on
Corporate Governance. Journal of Business & Technology Law, 1: 157-184

Taub, Jennifer, 2009. Able But Not Willing: The Failure of Mutual Fund Advisers to Advocate for
Shareholders' Rights, Journal of Corporation Law, 34(3):103-151.

Vanguard Investment Stewardship 2017 Annual Report. https://about.vanguard.com/investment-
stewardship/




                                                        43
Figure 1: Distribution of Number of Voters on Proposals, Fiscal Year 2012.
This Figure shows the distribution of the number of institutions voting on a given proposal. The top-left panel covers all proposals, except for director
elections, while the top- right panel plots the Governance, Say on Pay Compensation proposals, the Social proposals, and the Financial and Investment
Policy proposals separately. The bottom-left panel covers all proposals, including director elections, while the bottom-right panel plots the distribution of
the number of voters on director elections alone. The samples comprise proposals voted on in the fiscal year 2012 for the Russell 3000 companies in our
sample, and have been filtered to exclude institutions voting on less than 50 proposals, proposals with less than 20 voters, and lop-sided proposals with
the minority comprising less than 3% of the voters.
            .015




                                                                                          .02       .015
                                                                                  Fraction of Proposals
  Fraction of Proposals
                   .01




                                                                                .005       .01
 .005




                                                                                          0
                                                                                                           0          50                100               150               200
                                                                                                                                 Total # of Voters
            0




                            0   50           100            150     200                                        Governance & Comp                 Social Proposals
                                      Total # of Voters                                                        Compensation - Say on Pay         Financials and Investment Policy
               .015




                                                                                                .015
    Fraction of Proposals




                                                                                  Fraction of Proposals
                    .01




                                                                                                 .01
  .005




                                                                                .005
               0




                                                                                                0




                            0    50            100            150         200
                                        Total # of Voters                                                  0            50                100               150                200
                                                                                                                                   Total # of Voters


                                                                                                               44
Figure 2.A: Ideal Points, One Dimension W-NOMINATE, excluding Director Elections
This Figure plots the distribution of institutions ideal points estimated with the W-NOMINATE scaling method. The estimation sample covers all
proposals for the fiscal year 2012, except for director elections. The sample excludes institutions voting on less than 50 proposals, proposals with less
than 20 voters, and lop-sided proposals with the minority comprising less than 3% of the voters. The top-left Panel reports the distribution of the ideal
points for all voters. The other three Panels separate the distribution of mutual fund families’ ideal points, depicted by the white bars, and of public
pension funds, depicted in blue. They are identical except for labelling. The one-dimensional W-NOMINATE model constrains ideal points to the interval
[-1, +1]. The arbitrary (and inconsequential) polarity of the estimation was chosen such that socially oriented investors appear on the left.



                                                                                                                                                 <- Glass-Lewis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  <- ISS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                40
           50




                                                                                                              <- ISS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  <- Glass-Lewis
                                                                                                                                          <- CalSTRS
           40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    <- CalPERS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Number of Funds
  Number of Funds




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             <- Vanguard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             <- Domini Social Investments
                        <- Domini Social Investments




                                                                                                                                 <- CalPERS
            30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 <- Needham
                                                                                                                                                                                    <- Vanguard




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     <- Blackrock
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <- Needham




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <- CO Fire and Police




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              <- CalSTRS
                                                         <- CO Fire and Police




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 <- Blackrock
   20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              <- Calvert
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10
                                                                                  <- Calvert
           10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
           0




                        -1                                                        -.5                       0                                                                                                                   .5                           1                              -1                                                                -.5                             0                                                                                                                     .5                                        1
                                                                                               Idelogy - 1st Dimension                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Idelogy - 1st Dimension

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              40
           40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           <- NYS Teachers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     30
                                                                                                              <- Grantham Mayo


                                                                                                                                                      <- JPMorgan
                  30




                                                                                                                                                                                              <- Goldman Sachs




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Number of Funds
  Number of Funds




                                                                                                                 <- PIMCO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   <- Indiana Teachers - CC




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     <- Indiana Teachers - BNY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           <- Christian Brothers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   <- Ohio SERS
       20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       <- WA State




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     <- Indiana Teachers
                                                                                                                                                                      <- Fidelity




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             <- CO Fire & Police
                                                                                                                                                          <- Capital Research
                                                                                                      <- Nuveen
                                                       <- Pax World Mgmt




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             <- WV - Intech




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <- WV - SSGA
                                                       <- Wisdom Tree




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <- AFSCME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     <- GAMCO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10
                                                                                                   <- DFA
           10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -1                                                                -.5                             0                                                                                                                     .5                                        1
                       -1                                                        -.5                       0                                                                                                                    .5                               1                                                                                                                Idelogy - 1st Dimension
                                                                                               Idelogy - 1st Dimension

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            45
Figure 2.B: Ideal Points, Two Dimension W-NOMINATE, excluding Director Elections
This Figure plots the distribution of institutions ideal points estimated with the W-NOMINATE scaling method. The estimation sample covers all
proposals for the fiscal year 2012, excluding director elections. The sample excludes institutions voting on less than 50 proposals, proposals with less than
20 voters, and lop-sided proposals with the minority comprising less than 3% of the voters. All Panels reports the distribution of the ideal points for all
voters, although they each highlight different institutions. The mutual fund families’ ideal points are depicted in orange, while the public pension fund
ones are depicted in blue. The two-dimensional W-NOMINATE model constrains ideal points to the interval [-1, +1]. The arbitrary (and inconsequential)
polarity of the estimation was chosen such that socially oriented investors appear on the left, and the tough on governance investors to appear on top
part of the graph.

                                                                                                   <- Glass-Lewis                                                                                                                    <- Glass-Lewis




                                                                                                                                                                                    1
               1




                                                                                                                                                                         coord2D_2DimNoDirNew_w
                                                                                      <- CalSTRS
   coord2D_2DimNoDirNew_w




                                                                                                                                                                                             .5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         <- Capital Research
                       .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <- GAMCO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           <- Needham
                                          <- Domini




                                                                                                                                                   <- Needham
                                                                                                   <- CalPERS




                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                           <- Calvert
              0

                             Colorado Fire and Police ->




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       <- Fidelity
                                                                                                            Vanguard ->

                                                                                                                          Blackrock ->




                                                                                                                                                                          -.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                               <- PIMCO
    -.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <- JPM         <- Goldman




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            DFA ->
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Nuveen -> <- ISS
                                                                            <- ISS




                                                                                                                                                                                    -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    <- Grantham, Mayo
               -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                  -1     -.5                        0                      .5                           1
                            -1                                      -.5               0                                                       .5                1                                                         coord1D_2DimNoDirNew
                                                                            coord1D_2DimNoDirNew



                                                                                             <- NY State Teachers
              1




                                                                                     WA State ->
   coord2D_2DimNoDirNew_w
                       .5




                                           <- AFSCME

                             <- WV - Intech
              0




                                                                                                                         <- Indiana Teachers
                                                                                                                  <- WV - SSGA
                                                                   <- Christian Brothers

                                                                          <- Ohio SERS
    -.5




                                                                               <- Indiana Teachers - CC


                                                                                Indiana Teachers - BNY ->
                                                                                                                                                                    46
              -1




                            -1                                     -.5               0                                                   .5        1
                                                                           coord1D_2DimNoDirNew
Figure 2.C: Ideal Points, One Dimension W-NOMINATE, including Director Elections
This Figure plots the distribution of institutions ideal points estimated with the W-NOMINATE scaling method. The estimation sample covers all
proposals for the fiscal year 2012, including director elections. The sample excludes institutions voting on less than 50 proposals, proposals with less than
20 voters, and lop-sided proposals with the minority comprising less than 3% of the voters. The top-left Panel reports the distribution of the ideal points
for all voters. The other three Panels separate the distribution of mutual fund families’ ideal points, depicted by the white bars, and of public pension
funds, depicted in blue. They are identical except for labelling. The one-dimensional W-NOMINATE model constrains ideal points to the interval [-1,
+1]. The arbitrary (and inconsequential) polarity of the estimation was chosen such that socially oriented investors appear on the left.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       <- ISS
              50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  <- CO Fire and Police <- Domini Social Investments
                                                                                                                                      <- ISS
                                             <- CO Fire and Police<- Domini Social Investments




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        <- Blackrock
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      40
                                                                                                                                                                                            <- Blackrock
                                                                                                                                                                   <- CalPERS <- Vanguard




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               <- CalPERS<- Vanguard
              40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Number of Funds
     Number of Funds




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             <- Glass-Lewis
                30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               <- Glass-Lewis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           <- Needham
      20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                <- Needham




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <- CalSTRS
                                                                                                       <- CalSTRS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        <- Calvert
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      10
                                <- Calvert
              10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
              0




                            -1                                                                    -.5                            0                                                                         .5                1                                      -1                                                                                             -.5                                   0                                                                                                                .5                                                                    1
                                                                                                                    Idelogy - 1st Dimension                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Idelogy - 1st Dimension
                                                                                                                                                                   <- Capital Research
            40




                                                                                                                                                                                                    <- GAMCO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           <- WV - Westfield<- Indiana Teachers - CC
                                                                                                                                                              <- Grantham Mayo
                                                                                                                                                            <- Goldman Sachs




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       <- Indiana Teachers <- WV - CBRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   30
                  30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Number of Funds
    Number of Funds




                                                                                                                                              <- JPMorgan
                                                                                                                                             <- Fidelity




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <- NYS Teachers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               <- Indiana Teachers - BNY
                                                                                                                            <- Nuveen<- DFA<- PIMCO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               <- Christian Brothers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20
       20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    <- Ohio Police & Fire
                        <- Pax World Mgmt




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              <- CO Fire & Police




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           <- WV - SSGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              <- Ohio SERS
                                                <- Wisdom Tree




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             <- WV - Intech




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        <- WA State
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       <- AFSCME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             10
            10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
            0




                       -1                                                                        -.5                            0                                                                          .5                1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              47                             -1                                                                                     -.5                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Idelogy - 1st Dimension
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .5                                                          1

                                                                                                                    Idelogy - 1st Dimension
Figure 2.D: Ideal Points, Two Dimension W-NOMINATE, including Director Elections
This Figure plots the distribution of institutions ideal points estimated with the W-NOMINATE scaling method. The estimation sample covers all
proposals for the fiscal year 2012, including director elections. The sample excludes institutions voting on less than 50 proposals, proposals with less than
20 voters, and lop-sided proposals with the minority comprising less than 3% of the voters. All Panels reports the distribution of the ideal points for all
voters, although they each highlight different institutions. The mutual fund families’ ideal points are depicted in orange, while the public pension fund
ones are depicted in blue. The two-dimensional W-NOMINATE model constrains ideal points to the interval [-1, +1]. The arbitrary (and inconsequential)
polarity of the estimation was chosen such that socially oriented investors appear on the left, and the tough on governance investors to appear on top
part of the graph.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       <- Pax World Mgmt
                                                                                                  <- Glass-Lewis                                                                                                                                                                          <- Glass-Lewis




                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                 1




                                                       <- CalSTRS




                                                                                     <- CalPERS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <- Capital Research
                                                <- Colorado Fire and Police




                                                                                                                                                                                           coord2D_2DimDirNew_w
       coord2D_2DimDirNew_w




                                                                                                                                                                                                             .5
                         .5




                                                                                                                                                                   <- Needham




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           <- Needham
                                                <- Domini




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <- Fidelity
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 <- PIMCO
                                                                                                                           <- Blackrock
                                   <- Calvert
                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                       <- Vanguard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <- Grantham, Mayo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          <- GAMCO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <- JPM                    <- Goldman
                                                                            <- ISS                                                                                                                                                                     Nuveen -> <- ISS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DFA ->
    -.5




                                                                                                                                                                                        -.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           <- Wisdom Tree
                 -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                    -1
                              -1                     -.5                     0                                              .5                                       1                                            -1                           -.5                0                                                   .5     1
                                                                 Idelogy - 1st Dimension                                                                                                                                                              Idelogy - 1st Dimension
               1




                                          <- WV - Intech                                                                 <- WA State
      coord2D_2DimDirNew_w




                                                   <- AFSCME
                        .5




                                                                                          <- WV - CBRE
                                                                        <- Christian Brothers
                                   <- Ohio SERS
                                                                                                                            <- Indiana Teachers                                 <- NY State Teachers
               0




                                                                                                                      <- WV - SSGA
                                                           <- Ohio Police and Fire
                                                                                                                                       Indiana Teachers - BNY ->




                                                                                                            <- Indiana Teachers - CC
                                                                                                  WV - Westfield ->
   -.5




                                                                         <- KY Teachers
               -1




                              -1                     -.5                    0                                              .5                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                             48
                                                                Idelogy - 1st Dimension
Figure 3: Distribution of Midpoints by Proposal Type, Two Dimensions W-NOMINATE, 1st Dimension.
This Figure plots the distribution of 1st Dimension proposal midpoints estimated with the W-NOMINATE scaling method. The midpoint is the position
on the line that separates the predicted “For” from the predicted “Against” the proposal. The estimation sample covers all proposals for the fiscal year
2012, including director elections. The sample excludes institutions voting on less than 50 proposals, proposals with less than 20 voters, and lop-sided
proposals with the minority comprising less than 3% of the voters. The top-left Panel reports the distribution of the midpoints for all proposals, while
the other Panels report the distribution of the Governance, Say on Pay and Other Compensation proposals, Director Elections, Social Proposals, and the
Financial and Investment Policy proposals, respectively.


                                                                All                                          Governance
                     Percentage of Proposals
                                         30




                                                                                            30
                                                                                         Percent
                                 20




                                                                                             20
                          10




                                                                                            10
                                 0




                                                                                            0
                                               -1     -.5         0        .5   1                  -1   -.5         0        .5   1
                                                      Mid-Point 1st Dimension                           Mid-Point 1st Dimension


                                                    Compensation - Say on Pay                           Compensation - Other
                                 30




                                                                                            30
                     Percent




                                                                                         Percent
                         20




                                                                                             20
                                 10




                                                                                            10
                                 0




                                                                                            0




                                               -1     -.5         0        .5   1                  -1   -.5         0        .5   1
                                                      Mid-Point 1st Dimension                           Mid-Point 1st Dimension



                                                                                    49
               Director Elections                                                         Social




                                                   Percentage of Proposals
40




                                                                       40
30




                                                                  30
20




                                                           20
10




                                                      10
0




                                                               0
     -1      -.5         0         .5     1                                  -1    -.5        0        .5   1
             Mid-Point 1st Dimension                                              Mid-Point 1st Dimension


          Financial & Investment Policy
40
30
20
10
0




     -1      -.5         0         .5     1
             Mid-Point 1st Dimension




                                              50
Figure 4: Distribution of Midpoints by Sponsor Type, Two Dimensions W-NOMINATE, 1st Dimension.
This Figure plots the distribution of 1st Dimension proposal midpoints estimated with the W-NOMINATE scaling method. The midpoint is the position
on the line that separates the predicted “For” from the predicted “Against” the proposal. The estimation sample covers all proposals for the fiscal year
2012, including director elections. The sample excludes institutions voting on less than 50 proposals, proposals with less than 20 voters, and lop-sided
proposals with the minority comprising less than 3% of the voters. The top-left Panel reports the distribution of the midpoints for all proposals, while
the other two Panels report the distribution of the Shareholder- and Management-Sponsored proposals, respectively.


                        15
                                                 All                                           Shareholder-Sponsored




                                                                                   15
                          10




                                                                                     10
                     Percent




                                                                                Percent
                        5




                                                                                   5
                        0




                                                                                   0
                               -1     -.5         0        .5          1                  -1   -.5         0        .5           1
                                      Mid-Point 1st Dimension                                  Mid-Point 1st Dimension


                                     Management-Sponsored
                        1510
                     Percent
                        5
                        0




                               -1     -.5         0        .5          1
                                      Mid-Point 1st Dimension




                                                                           51
Figure 5: Distribution of Midpoints by Proposal Type, Two Dimensions W-NOMINATE, 2nd Dimension.
This Figure plots the distribution of 2nd Dimension proposal midpoints estimated with the W-NOMINATE scaling method. The midpoint is the position
on the line that separates the predicted “For” from the predicted “Against” the proposal. The estimation sample covers all proposals for the fiscal year
2012, including director elections. The sample excludes institutions voting on less than 50 proposals, proposals with less than 20 voters, and lop-sided
proposals with the minority comprising less than 3% of the voters. The top-left Panel reports the distribution of the midpoints for all proposals, while
the other Panels report the distribution of the Governance, Say on Pay and Other Compensation proposals, Director Elections, Social Proposals, and the
Financial and Investment Policy proposals, respectively.


                                                                 All                                           Governance
                        10 20 30 40 50




                                                                                              50
                      Percentage of Proposals




                                                                                          20 30 40
                                                                                           Percent
                                                                                              10
                                  0




                                                                                              0
                                                -1     -.5         0        .5   1                   -1   -.5         0        .5   1
                                                       Mid-Point 2nd Dimension                            Mid-Point 2nd Dimension


                                                     Compensation - Say on Pay                            Compensation - Other
                                  50




                                                                                              50
                      20 30 40




                                                                                          20 30 40
                       Percent




                                                                                           Percent
                                  10




                                                                                              10
                                  0




                                                                                              0




                                                -1     -.5         0        .5   1                   -1   -.5         0        .5   1
                                                       Mid-Point 2nd Dimension                            Mid-Point 2nd Dimension




                                                                                     52
               Director Elections                                                         Social




60




                                                                        60
                                                   Percentage of Proposals
40




                                                                 40
20




                                                        20
0




                                                               0
     -1      -.5         0        .5      1                                  -1   -.5         0        .5   1
             Mid-Point 2nd Dimension                                              Mid-Point 2nd Dimension


          Financial & Investment Policy
60
40
20
0




     -1      -.5         0        .5      1
             Mid-Point 2nd Dimension




                                              53
Figure 6: Distribution of Midpoints by Sponsor Type, Two Dimensions W-NOMINATE, 2nd Dimension.
This Figure plots the distribution of 2nd Dimension proposal midpoints estimated with the W-NOMINATE scaling method. The midpoint is the position
on the line that separates the predicted “For” from the predicted “Against” the proposal. The estimation sample covers all proposals for the fiscal year
2012, including director elections. The sample excludes institutions voting on less than 50 proposals, proposals with less than 20 voters, and lop-sided
proposals with the minority comprising less than 3% of the voters. The top-left Panel reports the distribution of the midpoints for all proposals, while
the other two Panels report the distribution of the Shareholder- and Management-Sponsored proposals, respectively.


                                                All                                             Shareholder-Sponsored
                        40




                                                                                    40
                          30




                                                                                      30
                    Percent




                                                                                Percent
                     20




                                                                                 20
                        10




                                                                                    10
                        0




                                                                                    0
                               -1    -.5         0        .5           1                   -1   -.5         0        .5           1
                                     Mid-Point 2nd Dimension                                    Mid-Point 2nd Dimension


                                    Management-Sponsored
                        4030
                    Percent
                     20 10
                        0




                               -1    -.5         0        .5           1
                                     Mid-Point 2nd Dimension



                                                                           54
Figure 7: Cutting Lines for Specific Proposals, Two Dimension W-NOMINATE
This Figure plots the cutting line for three proxy votes in our data: the Citi Say on Pay proposal of April 17th 2012, a proposal on Environmental issues
at Amazon, and the election of Michael Losch to the board of AON. For each proposal, the left panel shows all voters; the right voters that represent
model errors. The mutual fund families’ ideal points are depicted in orange, while the public pension fund ones are depicted in blue. The two-dimensional
W-NOMINATE model constrains ideal points to the interval [-1, +1]. The cutting line is the two-dimensional generalization of the midpoint in one
dimension. The angle the line makes with the first dimension reflects how voters trade off the two dimensions on each proposal. The angles vary between
-90 degrees to +90 degrees. An angle of 0 or close to 0 is entirely a second-dimension issue, and angles of -90 or +90 degrees are entirely first dimension
issues.

Panel A: Say on Pay Vote at Citigroup – April 17th 2012.

                                                                            <- Glass-Lewis




                                                                                                            1
    1




                                     <- CalSTRS
                                                               <- CalPERS



                              <- Colorado Fire and Police




                                                                                                            .5
    .5




                                                                                                                                                                        <- Blackrock
                                                                                        <- Blackrock
                <- Calvert                                                                                                             <- Mass




                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                 WV - SSGA ->
    0




                                                                                                                                                                     <- Vanguard
                                                                                    <- Vanguard

                                                       <- ISS




                                                                                                            -.5
    -.5




                                                                                                            -1
    -1




                                                                                                                             -.5                  0                      .5            1
           -1                      -.5                 0                                .5              1




Panel B: Environmental Report at Amazon– May 24th 2012.

                                                                                <- Glass-Lewis
                                                                                                             1
     1




                                         <- CalSTRS                                                                                <- CalSTRS




                                                                                                                                                        <- CalPERS
                                                                   <- CalPERS




                               <- Colorado Fire and Police
                                                                                                             .5
     .5




                                                                                         <- Blackrock
                 <- Calvert
                                                                                                             0
     0




                                                                                     <- Vanguard                                                                     <- Vanguard

                                                           <- ISS
                                                                                                             -.5
     -.5




                                                                                                                        55
                                                                                                             -1
     -1




                                                                                                                   -1         -.5                  0                     .5
            -1                      -.5                 0                                .5             1
Panel C: Election of J. Michael Losch to the Board of AON – May 18th 2012.




                                                                                     .6
                                                         <- Glass-Lewis
   1




                     <- CalSTRS




                                            <- CalPERS
              <- Colorado Fire and Police




                                                                                     .4
   .5




                                                                                     .2
                                                                  <- Blackrock                            <- Blackrock
   0




                                                              <- Vanguard




                                                                                     0
                                       <- ISS
   -.5




                                                                                     -.2
         -1        -.5                 0                          .5             1         -1   -.5   0   .5             1




                                                                                     56
Figure 8: Distribution of Cutting Line Angles, Two Dimensions W-NOMINATE.
This Figure plots the distribution of the cutting line angles for each proposal, estimated with the W-NOMINATE scaling method. The cutting line is the
line that separates the predicted “For” from the predicted “Against” the proposal in the two-dimensional space. The estimation sample covers all proposals
for the fiscal year 2012, including director elections. The sample excludes institutions voting on less than 50 proposals, proposals with less than 20 voters,
and lop-sided proposals with the minority comprising less than 3% of the voters. The left Panel reports the distribution of the cutting line angles for all
proposals, while the right Panel reports the distribution of the cutting line angles for Say on Pay, Director Elections, Governance, and Social proposals,
respectively.


                                                                                                   Compensation - Say on Pay                                Director Elections




                                                                                    40




                                                                                                                                           40
                                       All
       20




                                                                                       30




                                                                                                                                              30
                                                                               Percent




                                                                                                                                      Percent
                                                                                20




                                                                                                                                       20
       15




                                                                                    10




                                                                                                                                           10
                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                            -100     -50         0         50   100                -100   -50         0         50   100
    Percent




                                                                                                        Cutting Line Angles                                  Cutting Line Angles
     10




                                                                                                          Governance                                              Social




                                                                                    40




                                                                                                                                           40
                                                                                       30




                                                                                                                                              30
       5




                                                                               Percent




                                                                                                                                      Percent
                                                                                20




                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                    10




                                                                                                                                           10
       0




              -100     -50              0            50           100



                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                           0
                               Cutting Line Angles
                                                                                            -100     -50         0         50   100                -100   -50         0         50   100
                                                                                                        Cutting Line Angles                                  Cutting Line Angles




                                                                             57
Figure 9: Evolution of the Ideal Points Over Time
In the left pane, we compare the estimated ideal points in fiscal year 2016 (blue ideal points) with those in fiscal year 2012 (orange ideal points). In both
2012 and 2016, 166 out of 397 institutions were present in the data. There were 53 institutions in 2012 that had disappeared by 2016, while 178 new
institutions are now in the data. In the right pane, we perform a Procrustean rotation analysis for ideal points in 2012 and all years between 2004 and
2016. Due to some institutions disappearing over the years and some other being added, there are 219 extra mutual fund families in the sample covering
2014-2016. A Procrustean rotation transforms a source X to be as close as possible to a target Y. The permitted transformations are any combination of
dilation (uniform scaling), rotation and reflection (that is, orthogonal or oblique transformations), and translation.




                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                    .5
                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                    -.5
                                                                                                    -1
                                                                                                          -1    -.5         0          .5     1

                                                                                                                All Years       FY 20112012




                                                                             58
Table 1.A: Frequency of proposals by proposal type
This Table reports the number of total and shareholder-sponsored proposals in our sample by type and
category. The sample covers all proposals from the fiscal year 2012, including director elections, and excludes
institutions voting on less than 50 proposals, proposals with less than 20 voters, and lop-sided proposals with
the minority comprising less than 3% of the voters.
                                                                                                 %
                                                                               # of
               Proposal Type                      Proposal Category                         Shareholder-
                                                                             Proposals
                                                                                             Sponsored
    Compensation                            Compensation - Other                    985             6.60%
                                            Compensation - Say on Pay              1,546               0%
                                                                    Total         2,531                3%
    Director Elections                      Director elections                    11,675            0.25%
                                            Capital, Investment Policy and
    Financials and Investment Policy        Restructuring                           144             6.94%
                                            Other                                   194                0%
                                                                    Total           338                3%
    Governance                              Governance                              314            73.25%
    Social                                  Animal rights                            14              100%
                                            Diversity                                13              100%
                                            Employment and human
                                            rights                                   14              100%
                                            Environmental                            47              100%
                                            Political                                78              100%
                                            Product safety                            3              100%
                                            Social - other                            8              100%
                                                                    Total           177              100%
    Total - Excluding Director Elections                                          3,360               14%
    TOTAL                                                                         15,035            3.40%




                                                        59
Table 1.B: Frequency of proposals by proposal type
This Table reports the number of total and shareholder-sponsored proposals in our sample by category and support rate by management, ISS, Glass
Lewis, the mutual fund families and public pension funds in our sample, and all shareholders, respectively. The sample covers all proposals from the fiscal
year 2012, including director elections, and excludes institutions voting on less than 50 proposals, proposals with less than 20 voters, and lop-sided
proposals with the minority comprising less than 3% of the voters.
                                                                                                                     Fraction of
                                                            Management            ISS             Glass Lewis                           Fraction of
                                                                                                                    Mutual Fund                               Support
      Proposal Type              Proposal Category          Recommends        Recommends         Recommends                            Pension Funds
                                                                                                                   Families Voting                             Rate
                                                                For               For                 For                                Voting For
                                                                                                                         For
 Compensation                Compensation - Other              89.29%            84.39%             68.05%             79.49%              76.62%             80.17%

                                                               99.82%            80.71%             69.71%              83.06%             80.86%             86.06%
                             Compensation - Say on Pay
                                                    Total     95.66%             82.16%             69.08%              81.65%             79.19%             83.74%
 Director Elections          Director elections               100.00%            90.98%             79.85%              89.72%             87.27%             93.40%
 Financials and
 Investment Policy           Capital, Investment Policy        86.12%            64.82%             63.28%              69.00%             67.15%             67.92%
                             and Restructuring
                             Other                            100.00%            63.21%             83.02%              66.66%             60.72%             77.38%
                                                    Total      93.75%            63.94%             77.46%              67.71%             63.60%             69.32%
 Governance                  Governance                        15.58%            82.82%             71.68%              65.04%             68.60%             48.70%
 Social                      Animal rights                     0.00%              0.00%             29.26%              12.89%             16.40%             4.01%
                             Diversity                         0.00%             72.69%                                 44.04%             48.15%             25.27%
                             Employment and human
                                                               0.00%             40.07%                                 25.95%             29.49%             14.79%
                             rights
                             Environment                       0.00%             55.22%              0.00%              32.37%             36.77%             18.46%
                             Political                         0.00%             51.02%             25.82%              31.09%             36.30%             17.82%
                             Product safety                    0.00%              0.00%                                  6.74%             12.08%             3.75%
                             Social - other                    0.00%             15.20%             100.00%             16.59%             19.53%             10.96%
                                         Total                 0.00%             46.47%             24.06%              29.48%             34.10%             16.67%
 TOTAL                                                         94.67%            87.84%             77.24%              85.89%             83.77%             88.62%




                                                                            60
    Table 1.C: Firm Characteristics
This Table reports the characteristics of the firms in our sample. The sample comprises the Russell 3000 firms covered
in the ISS Mutual Fund Voting Records in the period between July 1st 2011 and June 30th 2012. Our data sources are
Compustat, CRSP, Thomson Reuters, ExecuComp, and RiskMetrics (ISS). ROA is return on assets, defined as
EBITDA/assets. Dividend Yield equals (common dividend + preferred dividend)/(market value of common stock +
book value of preferred). Leverage is defined as the ratio of debt to the sum of debt and equity, all in book values. Prior-
year Total Return is the buy-and-hold stock return during the 12 months prior to the meeting. Amihud Liquidity Measure
is the yearly average (using daily data ending quarter t-1 from CRSP) of 1000!|ret|/dollar trading volume. Size
represents assets in billions of dollars. Market Capitalization is in billions of dollars. Book-to-Market Ratio is defined as
(book value of equity)/(market value of equity). Institutional ownership, is the fraction of shares held by institutional
investors, as reported by the Thomson Reuters Ownership Database. Exec. Cash/Total Pay is the ratio of salary and cash
bonus to total compensation. Increase in Average Exec. Pay is the percentage change in total executive compensation year-
on-year. Board Size is the number of board members. Ratio of Independent Directors is the number of independent directors
divided by the total number of directors at the firm. Classified Board and Poison Pill are dummy variables equal to 1 if the
company has a classified board and a poison pill, respectively, and 0 otherwise. A classified board (or “staggered” board)
is one in which the directors are placed into different classes and serve overlapping terms. A poison pill provides
shareholders with special rights in the case of a triggering event such as a hostile takeover bid. Unequal Voting Rights is
an indicator equal to 1 if certain share classes of the stock have more voting power than the rest, and 0 otherwise. Vote
% Required to Amend Bylaws is the percentage of consent votes required to amend company bylaws. Supermajority mergers
is the percentage vote threshold for mergers requiring approval from more than 50% of the outstanding stock.
                                            Std       10th          25th                    75th         90th
                                   Mean                                          Median                                Obs
                                            Dev       pctile        pctile                  pctile       pctile
ROA                                0.093    0.237     0.000         0.049        0.111      0.165        0.229         3,004
Dividend Yield                     0.017    0.033     0.000         0.000        0.004      0.025        0.043         3,131
Leverage                           0.346    0.744     0.000         0.022        0.272      0.499        0.731         2,791
Past-year Total Return             -0.028   0.349     -0.414        -0.218       -0.032     0.135        0.345         3,119
Amihud Liquidity Measure           0.074    0.084     0.009         0.018        0.042      0.099        0.185         3,136
Size                               16.375   107.628   0.181         0.473        1.671      5.979        22.839        3,138
Market Capitalization              7.599    26.529    0.171         0.358        1.176      3.973        15.188        3,135
Book-to-Market Ratio               0.627    0.693     0.128         0.285        0.529      0.856        1.216         3,133
Institutional Ownership            0.709    0.223     0.387         0.575        0.752      0.872        0.949         2,635
Exec. Cash/Total Pay               0.339    0.190     0.154         0.203        0.296      0.422        0.606         2,061

Increase in Average Exec. Pay      0.213    0.675     -0.246        -0.067       0.094      0.318        0.659         2,056

Golden Parachute                   0.813    0.390     0.000         1.000        1.000      1.000        1.000         1,671
Board Size                         9.503    2.416     7.000         8.000        9.000      11.000       12.000        1,607
Ratio of Independent
                                   0.795    0.108     0.625         0.714        0.818      0.889        0.909         1,607
Directors
Classified Board                   0.410    0.492     0.000         0.000        0.000      1.000        1.000         1,671
Poison Pill                        0.138    0.345     0.000         0.000        0.000      0.000        1.000         1,671
Unequal Voting Rights              0.043    0.203     0.000         0.000        0.000      0.000        0.000         1,671

Vote % Required to Amend           46.756   29.408    0.000         0.000        51.000     66.670       80.000        1,491
Bylaws
Supermajority Mergers (%)          58.710   11.150    51.000        51.000       51.000     66.670       80.000        1,571



                                                               61
      Table 1.D: Director Characteristics
      This Table reports the characteristics of directors up for election in our sample. The sample comprises the
      Russell 3000 firms covered in the ISS Mutual Fund Voting Records in the period between July 1st 2011 and
      June 30th 2012. Our data source is RiskMetrics (ISS). Female is a dummy variable equal to 1 if a director nominee
      is female, and 0 otherwise. Age is the director’s age in years. Employee Director are dummy variables equal to 1 if
      the director is an employee of the company or one of its affiliates, and 0 otherwise. Independent Director is a
      dummy variable equal to 1 if the director has no material connection to the company other than a board seat,
      and 0 otherwise. Linked Director equals 1 for affiliated outside directors, including former executives and their
      family members, individuals providing transactional, professional, financial, and charitable services, and
      individuals with other material relationships with the firm, and 0 otherwise. Attended <75% of Meetings equals 1
      if the director attends fewer than 75% of the board meetings in a year. African-American, Asian, Caucasian, and
      Hispanic are dummy variables equal to 1 if the director is African-American, Asian, Caucasian, and Hispanic,
      respectively, and 0 otherwise. Financial Expert equals 1 if the director has financial expertise, and 0 otherwise.
      # of Outside Public Boards is the number of other U.S. boards that the director serves on at the time of the
      meeting. Number of Shares is the number of company shares the director holds. % Controlling Voting Power is the
      percent of the company's voting power controlled by the director.

                                                             10th         25th                   75th         90th
                                   Mean       Std Dev                              Median                               Obs
                                                            pctile       pctile                 pctile       Pctile
Female                           0.118       0.322        0.000        0.000       0.000      0.000        1.000        5,972
Age                              63.538      8.473        53.000       58.000      64.000     69.000       73.000       5,937
Employee Director                0.154       0.361        0.000        0.000       0.000      0.000        1.000        5,900
Independent Director             0.785       0.411        0.000        1.000       1.000      1.000        1.000        5,900
Linked Director                  0.061       0.239        0.000        0.000       0.000      0.000        0.000        5,900
Attended <75% of Meetings        0.007       0.086        0.000        0.000       0.000      0.000        0.000        5,972
African-American                 0.035       0.183        0.000        0.000       0.000      0.000        0.000        5,884
Asian                            0.028       0.164        0.000        0.000       0.000      0.000        0.000        5,884
Caucasian                        0.924       0.265        1.000        1.000       1.000      1.000        1.000        5,884
Hispanic                         0.014       0.117        0.000        0.000       0.000      0.000        0.000        5,884
Financial Expert                 0.374       0.484        0.000        0.000       0.000      1.000        1.000        5,972
# of Outside Public Boards       0.889       1.100        0.000        0.000       1.000      2.000        2.000        5,968
Number of Shares                 1,658,505   32,332,522   5,000        17,298      45,201     153,295      1,057,488    5,900
% Controlling Voting Power       1.008       5.560        0.000        0.000       0.000      0.000        1.100        5,972




                                                             62
Table 2: Results of W-NOMINATE Estimation
Panel A reports the correlations between 1st dimension ideal points across the four models. Panel B reports the number of
institutions and proposals, and some diagnostics from the four versions of the W-NOMINATE model we estimate in the
paper. The third column reports the percent of votes correctly classified. This statistics is calculated as
(CorrectYea+CorrectNay)/(CorrectYea+Wrong Yea +CorrectNay + WrongNay). The fourth column reports the Aggregate
Proportion Reduction in Error (APRE) for the 1st and 2nd dimension, respectively. The APRE is equal to the sum over all
votes of the minority vote minus the number of the W-NOMINATE classification errors, divided by the sum of the minority
vote over all votes. For each vote, this measure is 1 if there are no classification errors and 0 if the number of spatial model
errors equals the minority vote. The fifth column reports the signal to noise ratio, Beta. The first two rows report the results
from the one-dimensional model estimated on the sample without and with director elections, respectively. The last two rows
report the results from the two-dimensional model estimated on the sample without and with director elections, respectively.


      Panel A: Correlations between 1st Dimension Ideal Points

                              Ideology 1st Dim,    Ideology 1st Dim,      Ideology 1st Dim,   Ideology 1st Dim,
                              1Dim No Dir          1Dim w. Dir            2Dim No Dir         2Dim w. Dir
       Ideology 1st Dim,
       1Dim No Dir            1
       Ideology 1st Dim,
       1Dim w. Dir            0.6291               1
       Ideology 1st Dim,
       2Dim No Dir            0.9933               0.6110                 1
       Ideology 1st Dim,
       2Dim w. Dir            0.8792               0.7520                 0.8870              1


      Panel B: W-NOMINATE Diagnostics and Measures of Goodness of Fit

                                   Number of      Number of        % Correctly
                                                                                    APRE          GMP       Beta
                                   Institutions   Proposals         Classified


          1 Dim No Director
          Elections                    248          3,360            88.24%         0.339         0.734     18.1

          1 Dim w. Director
          Elections                    262         15,035            90.41%         0.262         0.784      19

          2 Dim No Director
          Elections                    248          3,360            90.44%         0.463         0.776     18.2

          2 Dim w. Director
          Elections                    262         15,035            92.28%         0.406         0.819     18.8




                                                              63
Table 3: Extremist Investors
Panel A reports the identity, ideal point, standard errors, and fraction of votes correctly classified of the 12
leftmost and rightmost institutions, based on the One-Dimensional W-NOMINATE model estimated on the
sample of all proposals for the fiscal year 2012, excluding director elections. Panel B reports the identity, ideal
points and standard errors of the 8 leftmost and rightmost institutions, based on the Two-Dimensional W-
NOMINATE model estimated on the sample of all proposals for the fiscal year 2012, including director
elections. In both cases the sample excludes institutions voting on less than 50 proposals, proposals with less
than 20 voters, and lop-sided proposals with the minority comprising less than 3% of the voters.
Panel A: One-Dimensional W-NOMINATE Scaling, excluding Director Elections

                                                                                             Fraction Correctly
 Institution Name                                               Ideology        Std. Error
                                                                                                 Classified
 Socially and Environmentally oriented
 State Universities Retirement System of Illinois (SURS)                   -1    0.0246941            0.8706824
 AFSCME Employee Pension Plan                                              -1     0.046613            0.9033372
 Domini Social Investments LLC                                             -1    0.0569083            0.8785714
 Empiric Advisors, Inc                                               -0.9028     0.0710603                0.7625
 West Virginia Intech                                            -0.7649896      0.1170532            0.8904494
 Colorado Fire & Police                                          -0.7271071      0.1172575            0.8658009
 Wisdomtree Asset Management                                     -0.7101426      0.1168684             0.761171
 Pax World Management Corp                                        -0.660415      0.1167497            0.6666667
 Jackson National Asset Management, LLC                          -0.5723136      0.1164388            0.7368584
 UTC Fund Services, Inc                                          -0.5340148      0.1333109            0.7475728
 Calvert Group, Ltd.                                             -0.5135871      0.1175321            0.7889994
 Connecticut                                                     -0.4855127       0.115888            0.8358759
 Profit Oriented
 Calamos Asset Management, I                                               1     0.0982558             0.993576
 Bridges Investment Management, Inc                                        1     0.1029372                     1
 Reynolds Capital Management                                               1     0.1072991            0.9938758
 Leuthold Weeden Capital Management                                        1     0.1163659            0.9766839
 Jensen Investment Management, Inc.                                        1     0.1197756                     1
 Cooke & Bieler, L.P.                                                      1     0.1215193                     1

 Volumetric Advisers, Inc                                                  1     0.1245999                     1
 Trustmark Investment Advisors, Inc.,                             0.9694349      0.1164379            0.9873418
 Rydex Investments                                                0.9628192        0.15123            0.9931014
 Friess Associates, LLC                                           0.9498785      0.1153346                     1
 Needham Investment Management L.L.C.                             0.9386053       0.141203            0.9903846
 Marsico Capital Management LLC                                    0.900437      0.1117658            0.9741935




                                                           64
Panel B: Two-Dimensional W-NOMINATE Scaling, including Director Elections
                                                                                                         Fraction
                                                   Ideology       Ideology     Std. Error   Std. Error
Institution Name                                                                                         Correctly
                                                   1st Dim        2nd Dim      1st Dim      2nd Dim
                                                                                                         Classified
                                         Extremists on the 1st Dimension
Socially and Environmentally oriented
Ohio School Employees Retirement System (SERS)       -0.9794312    0.2017783   0.0059716    0.1548129    0.8057575
Calvert Group, Ltd.                                  -0.9740931    0.0672688    0.009829    0.0362469    0.8445629
Bridgeway Capital Management                         -0.9598652    0.0615927   0.0102534    0.0463394    0.8912296
Pax World Management                                 -0.9397177    0.3419515   0.0143747    0.2599173    0.7132184
West Virginia (Intech)                               -0.7648223    0.6391013   0.0238325    0.4224344     0.783106
Domini Social Investments LLC                        -0.6999083     0.235248    0.034954    0.1573855     0.672619
Colorado Fire & Police                               -0.6910703    0.6239996   0.0262851    0.4537459    0.7583955
Wisdomtree Asset Management                          -0.6699384   -0.7424167   0.0240919    0.5262731    0.8166725
Profit Oriented
Reynolds Capital Management                          0.8930598    -0.2077068   0.1106239    0.1033906    0.9975074
RiverPark Advisors, LLC                              0.9009526     -0.270956   0.1199641    0.1598995    0.9977477
Rydex Investments                                    0.9038805    -0.1418547    0.116094    0.0469405    0.9958423
Friess Associates, LLC                               0.9366541    -0.1960456   0.1121389    0.1356575             1
Jensen Investment Management, Inc.                   0.9640822    -0.2656041   0.0856454    0.2081163             1
Bridges Investment Management, Inc                    0.967861    -0.2514858   0.0660105    0.2143854             1
Cooke & Bieler, L.P.,                                0.9769343    -0.2135402   0.0891152    0.2132129             1
Needham Investment Management L.L.C.                  0.9902057 -0.1396157     0.1042554    0.1140052    0.9972299
                                         Extremist on the 2nd Dimension
Pro-Management's Director Proposals
Jackson National Asset Management, LLC                -0.491948   -0.8706245    0.035947    0.6293962    0.8288027
Wisdomtree Asset Management                          -0.6699384   -0.7424167   0.0240919    0.5262731    0.8166725
Duff & Phelps Investment                             0.2416496    -0.7238215   0.0916823    0.5219357    0.9227273
Kentucky Teachers' Retirement System                 -0.0770544   -0.6025433   0.1246738    0.4859573    0.9833333
Northeast Investors Trust                            0.5650132    -0.5069668   0.1157098    0.3804131    0.9256506
Hotchkis & Wiley Capital Management LLC              0.7274953    -0.4706386   0.1090603    0.2699386    0.9714286
Prospector Partners Asset Management, LLC            0.1694364    -0.4395572      0.08645   0.3404779    0.9601838
Curian                                                0.178545    -0.4135816   0.0851937    0.3873381    0.8292683
Tough on Management's Director Proposals
Van Eck Associates Corp.                             0.2004524     0.9797035   0.0868457    0.6505696    0.9406114
Glass Lewis                                          0.1975743     0.9802879   0.0865324    0.6541182    0.9384533
Oregon Pension                                       0.1892099     0.9819367    0.086339    0.6401411     0.937228
Claymore Advisors, LLC                                0.189205     0.9819376   0.0874413    0.6572208    0.9415513
MMA Capital Management                               0.1496552     0.9887383   0.0856178    0.6624821    0.9237508
New Covenant Funds                                   0.1318883     0.9912647   0.0850135    0.6663935    0.9078559
NYS Teachers                                         0.1024537     0.9947378   0.0836144    0.6564674    0.8996188
Maine Pension Fund                                   0.0753654      0.997156   0.0811838    0.6715055    0.9130718

                                                    65
Table 4: Investors almost always following ISS or Glass-Lewis
This Table reports the identity, ideal point and standard errors, and fraction of votes correctly classified of the
ten institutions voting most similarly to ISS and Glass-Lewis, respectively. Panel A is based on the One-
Dimensional W-NOMINATE model estimated on the sample of all proposals for the fiscal year 2012,
excluding director elections. Panel B is based on the Two-Dimensional W-NOMINATE model estimated on
the sample of all proposals for the fiscal year 2012, including director elections. It estimates the distance from
ISS and Glass-Lewis using the Euclidean distance measure. In both cases the sample excludes institutions voting
on less than 50 proposals, proposals with less than 20 voters, and lop-sided proposals with the minority
comprising less than 3% of the voters.
Panel A: One-Dimensional W-NOMINATE Scaling, excluding Director Elections

                                                                                        Fraction Correctly
       Institution Name                                Ideology           Std. Error
                                                                                            Classified

       Funds closest to ISS
       Touchstone Funds                                      -0.1451423    0.1033062             0.8178528
       West Virginia AJO                                     -0.1443506     0.122538                      1
       Nicholas Company, Inc.                                -0.1422135    0.1120603             0.9919679
       SEI Investments Management Corporation                -0.1414644    0.1065608             0.9965844
       Driehaus Capital Management                           -0.1408656    0.1191726                      1
       ISS                                                   -0.1386434     0.108727             0.9945372
       Denver Investment Advisors LLC                         -0.138535    0.1133344                      1
       ProFund Advisors LLC                                  -0.1374074    0.1051159             0.9948949
       Nuveen Asset Management                               -0.1374068    0.1079643             0.9950815
       Scout Investment Advisors, Inc.                       -0.1273246    0.1039985             0.9713376
       Norges Bank                                           -0.1265874    0.1055464             0.9775986
       Funds closest to Glass-Lewis
       BB&T Asset Management, Inc.                             0.076801    0.0978741             0.8377483
       Oregon                                                 0.0772134    0.0946853              0.828874
       Claymore Advisors, LLC                                 0.0788968     0.094258             0.8145964
       NYS Teachers                                           0.0836503    0.0926781              0.770947
       Russell Investment Group                               0.0837826    0.0943745             0.8180505
       Glass Lewis                                            0.0868774    0.0957206             0.8156863
       BAMCO, Inc.                                            0.0875538    0.1078178             0.7303371
       Loomis, Sayles & Co. LP                                0.0902987    0.0936167             0.8460076
       Payden & Rygel                                         0.0916916    0.0990156             0.8040201
       Van Eck Associates Corporat                            0.0918904    0.0884077             0.8333333
       OrbiMed Advisors, LLC                                  0.0934328    0.1059979              0.852459




                                                       66
Panel B: Two-Dimensional W-NOMINATE Scaling, including Director Elections

                                                                                           Fraction                    Distance
                                       Ideology     Ideology     Std. Error   Std. Error                 Distance
           Institution Name                                                                Correctly                 from Glass-
                                       1st Dim      2nd Dim       1st Dim     2nd Dim                    from ISS
                                                                                           Classified                   Lewis

Funds closest to ISS
ISS                                    -0.0070479   -0.2622374    0.0718574    0.2335948     0.9954292          0        1.259261
Rafferty Asset Management, LLC         -0.0076909   -0.2571572    0.0718995    0.2230805     0.9974076   0.0051207       1.254354
First Trust Advisors L.P.              -0.0028155   -0.2555193    0.0697905    0.2212726     0.9975527   0.0079402       1.251949
Nuveen Asset Management                -0.0018568   -0.2716306    0.0733461    0.2372712     0.9959661   0.0107321       1.267704
SEI Investments Management
Corporation                            -0.0007301   -0.2713887    0.0716214    0.2352213      0.996726   0.0111203       1.267288
Optique Capital Management, Inc.       -0.0095376   -0.2509124    0.0747275    0.2228893     0.9967115   0.0115955       1.248499
Boyar Asset Management, Inc            -0.0113924    -0.250994    0.0858455    0.2290785      0.993311   0.0120536       1.248888
ProFund Advisors LLC                    -0.006784   -0.2745781    0.0725374    0.2418119     0.9962403   0.0123435       1.271397
William Blair Capital Management LLC   -0.0194491   -0.2633933    0.0723455    0.2248723      0.996709   0.0124549       1.262475
Auxier Asset Management, LLC           -0.0185993   -0.2669357    0.0724381    0.2311232     0.9927798   0.0124703       1.265819
Oak Associates, ltd                     -0.019752   -0.2676375    0.0781459    0.2216477     0.9944994   0.0138042       1.266708
Funds closest to Glass-Lewis
Glass Lewis                            0.1975743    0.9802879     0.0865324    0.6541182     0.9384533    1.259261                 0
Van Eck Associates Corp.               0.2004524    0.9797035     0.0868457    0.6505696     0.9406114    1.259156      0.0029368
Oregon                                 0.1892099    0.9819367      0.086339    0.6401411      0.937228    1.259558      0.0085253
Claymore Advisors, LLC                  0.189205    0.9819376     0.0874413    0.6572208     0.9415513    1.259558      0.0085303
Penn PSERS                             0.2243347    0.9745122     0.0909302    0.6378966     0.9345719    1.258208      0.0273766
MMA Capital Management                 0.1496552    0.9887383     0.0856178    0.6624821     0.9237508    1.260752      0.0486585
New Covenant Funds                     0.1318883    0.9912647     0.0850135    0.6663935     0.9078559    1.261178      0.0665969
Alberta                                0.2676701    0.9635107     0.0924514    0.6084981     0.9500832    1.256156      0.0720756
ICON Advisers, Inc                     0.2718845      0.96233     0.0933801    0.6347451     0.9352518    1.255933      0.0764493
Charles Schwab Investment M            0.2792336    0.9602232      0.090817    0.6352763     0.9288886    1.255535      0.0840883
Destra Capital Advisors LLC            0.2893983    0.9572088     0.0865301    0.6461535     0.9545455    1.254962      0.0946799

                                                                       67
       Table 5 – Proposal Midpoints and Firm Characteristics
       This Table reports OLS regressions of midpoints along the first and second dimensions respectively as a function of firm, governance, sponsor, and
       proposal characteristics. Firm and governance characteristics are as defined in Table 1.C. ∗, ∗∗ and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and
       1% levels, respectively.

                                         (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)           (7)            (8)        (9)          (10)
                                                                                                                                              Ideal
                                     Ideal Point    Ideal Point    Ideal Point    Ideal Point    Ideal Point   Ideal Point   Ideal Point   Point 2nd   Ideal Point   Ideal Point
                                         1st D          1st D           1st D          1st D         1st D         2nd D        2nd D            D        2nd D         2nd D
Shareholder-Sponsored Proposal         0.701***      0.782***        0.788***       0.515***      0.474***        -0.0133      -0.0139       -0.0136     0.00787        0.0423
                                        [29.54]        [31.77]         [30.95]        [16.26]       [12.22]       [-0.762]     [-0.771]     [-0.759]      [0.345]       [1.505]
ROA                                     -0.0182        0.0463        -0.00941        -0.0321       -0.0120      -0.0890***    -0.204***    -0.204***    -0.214***     -0.209***
                                       [-0.636]        [0.653]        [-0.119]       [-0.416]      [-0.157]       [-4.243]     [-3.943]     [-3.671]     [-3.860]      [-3.779]
Dividend Yield                           0.117         -0.184           0.115          0.168         0.162        0.460***      0.0787        0.119        0.126         0.126
                                        [0.823]       [-0.883]         [0.536]        [0.801]       [0.780]        [4.413]      [0.517]      [0.783]      [0.835]       [0.834]
Leverage                               0.0140**       -0.0150          0.0121       0.00752        0.00720        0.00688       0.0209       0.0205       0.0210        0.0221
                                        [2.235]       [-0.641]         [0.475]        [0.304]       [0.293]        [1.498]      [1.224]      [1.146]      [1.180]       [1.241]
Past-year Total Return                -0.0319**       -0.0324       -0.0583**      -0.0575**     -0.0635***       0.00787       0.0164       0.0209       0.0187        0.0168
                                       [-2.368]       [-1.453]        [-2.405]       [-2.437]      [-2.712]        [0.796]      [1.008]      [1.226]      [1.103]       [0.994]
Amihud Liquidity Measure               0.456***      0.847***        0.583***       0.485***       0.426**       -0.226***    -1.031***    -0.603***    -0.593***     -0.617***
                                        [7.483]        [5.011]         [3.051]        [2.613]       [2.306]       [-5.046]     [-8.347]     [-4.497]     [-4.437]      [-4.613]
Size                                 -0.00012**      -5.62e-05      -6.96e-05      -7.53e-05      -7.72e-05      -2.18e-06    -5.59e-05     4.91e-06     3.88e-06      3.70e-06
                                       [-2.296]       [-1.081]        [-1.305]       [-1.452]      [-1.494]      [-0.0566]     [-1.471]      [0.131]      [0.104]      [0.0990]
Market Capitalization                -0.0012***    -0.00094***    -0.00058***    -0.00052***    -0.00054***    0.000500***   0.000256**    0.000235*   0.000247**    0.000229*
                                       [-7.208]       [-5.627]        [-3.310]       [-3.059]      [-3.158]        [4.195]      [2.094]      [1.902]      [2.012]       [1.859]
Book-to-Market                        0.000911        -0.0209         -0.0186        -0.0168       -0.0164       0.000143      0.00215       -0.0121     -0.0128       -0.0129
                                        [0.118]       [-1.602]        [-1.359]       [-1.265]      [-1.241]       [0.0254]      [0.226]     [-1.266]     [-1.343]      [-1.352]
Institutional Ownership               -0.227***        0.0110         -0.0175        -0.0399       -0.0419       -0.127***    -0.120***      -0.0284     -0.0230       -0.0216
                                       [-10.03]        [0.271]        [-0.365]       [-0.856]      [-0.904]       [-7.649]     [-4.078]     [-0.841]     [-0.685]      [-0.642]
Exec. Cash Pay/Total                                 0.121***        -0.00727       -0.00527       0.00404                      0.0242       -0.0185     -0.0212       -0.0182
                                                       [3.458]        [-0.176]       [-0.131]       [0.101]                     [0.944]     [-0.636]     [-0.732]      [-0.631]
Increase in Average Exec. Pay (%)                     0.0229*          0.0116         0.0127        0.0141                      0.0129      0.0176**    0.0181**      0.0185**
                                                       [1.933]         [0.914]        [1.032]       [1.157]                     [1.492]      [1.977]      [2.045]       [2.088]


                                                                                      68
Golden Parachute                               -0.0551***      -0.0243       -0.0252       -0.0293*               -0.0469***    -0.00451      -0.00141      -0.00211
                                                 [-3.897]      [-1.517]      [-1.615]       [-1.892]                [-4.531]     [-0.400]      [-0.126]      [-0.188]
Board Size                                                   -0.0140***    -0.0144***    -0.0142***                            0.0121***    0.0119***      0.0118***
                                                               [-4.664]      [-4.933]       [-4.910]                              [5.752]       [5.660]       [5.631]
Fraction of Indep. Dirs                                       -0.394***     -0.397***     -0.404***                            -0.269***     -0.259***     -0.263***
                                                               [-6.430]      [-6.657]       [-6.819]                             [-6.246]      [-6.038]      [-6.132]
Classified Board                                              0.0338**        0.0119         0.0115                            -0.0254**      -0.0181*      -0.0187*
                                                                [2.387]       [0.860]        [0.837]                             [-2.557]      [-1.809]      [-1.871]
Poison Pill                                                  0.0653***     0.0675***     0.0726***                             -0.112***     -0.114***     -0.112***
                                                                [4.070]       [4.324]        [4.680]                             [-9.906]      [-10.15]      [-10.02]
Unequal Voting Rights                                          0.140***      0.137***      0.141***                             -0.00186      -0.00469      -0.00330
                                                                [5.224]       [5.267]        [5.456]                            [-0.0990]      [-0.250]      [-0.176]
Vote % Required to Amend Bylaws                               -8.93e-05     -8.70e-05     -3.95e-05                            0.000267*    0.000286*     0.000293**
                                                               [-0.424]      [-0.425]       [-0.194]                              [1.806]       [1.943]       [1.990]
Supermajority Mergers (%)                                   -0.00202***   -0.00228***   -0.00244***                            -0.000605     -0.000646    -0.000692*
                                                               [-3.423]      [-3.983]       [-4.292]                             [-1.461]      [-1.566]      [-1.679]
Director Election Proposal                                                 0.0850***     0.0884***                                          -0.0833***    -0.0821***
                                                                              [4.647]        [4.867]                                           [-6.333]      [-6.246]
Governance Proposal                                                          0.590***      0.648***                                            0.106**       0.119**
                                                                              [9.055]        [9.345]                                            [2.267]       [2.375]
Social Proposal                                                              0.578***      1.099***                                          -0.0685**        0.131*
                                                                              [14.03]        [11.37]                                           [-2.313]       [1.875]
Compensation Proposal Sh Sponsrd                                                           0.399***                                                          -0.0322
                                                                                             [5.682]                                                         [-0.633]
Financial Policy Proposal Sh
Sponsrd                                                                                    -0.381*                                                          -0.126
                                                                                           [-1.957]                                                        [-0.891]
Governance Proposal Sh Sponsrd                                                           -0.537***                                                        -0.255***
                                                                                           [-4.943]                                                        [-3.245]
Constant                           -0.396***   -0.620***     -0.0463       -0.0125        -0.00428     0.117***   0.190***     0.233***      0.232***      0.236***
                                    [-19.26]    [-15.07]     [-0.586]      [-0.162]      [-0.0561]      [7.760]    [6.320]      [4.196]       [4.199]       [4.266]
Observations                         10,331       5,610        4,857         4,857           4,857      10,331      5,610        4,857         4,857         4,857
Adjusted R-squared                    0.102       0.157        0.185         0.230           0.241       0.014      0.030        0.065         0.075         0.076


                                                                              69
Table 6 – Director Elections Proposal Midpoints and Director Characteristics
This Table reports OLS regressions of midpoints along the first and second dimensions respectively as a
function of director characteristics for director elections. Firm and director characteristics are as defined in
Tables 1.C and 1.D. ∗, ∗∗ and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

                                             (1)              (2)                (3)                 (4)
                                      Midpoint 1st D   Midpoint 1st D    Midpoint 2nd D      Midpoint 2nd D
 Female                                -0.0428***        -0.0379**            0.0251*              0.0191
                                          [-2.954]         [-2.086]            [1.921]             [1.197]
 Age                                    0.000115          0.000362         0.00240***          0.00232***
                                           [0.205]          [0.517]            [4.744]             [3.783]
 Employee Director                      -0.133***        -0.109***           -0.00366              0.0189
                                          [-5.991]         [-3.773]           [-0.182]             [0.743]
 Independent Director                  -0.0987***        -0.0637**          -0.177***           -0.117***
                                          [-5.055]         [-2.414]           [-10.02]            [-5.039]
 Attended <75% of meetings               0.638***         0.624***            0.119**             0.115**
                                           [11.87]          [9.554]            [2.460]             [2.002]
 Financial Expert                       -0.000792         0.00622           0.0231**            0.0304***
                                         [-0.0797]          [0.502]            [2.570]             [2.794]
 # of Outside Public Boards              -0.00672         0.00961*         0.0127***             -0.00229
                                          [-1.549]          [1.729]            [3.251]            [-0.469]
 % Controlling Voting Power            0.00450***         0.00202*          0.000182            0.000145
                                           [5.256]          [1.892]            [0.236]             [0.155]
 ROA                                                       -0.0280                              -0.180***
                                                           [-0.368]                               [-2.697]
 Dividend Yield                                              0.587                                  0.182
                                                            [1.514]                                [0.535]
 Leverage                                                  -0.0393                                 0.0229
                                                           [-1.564]                                [1.040]
 Past-year Total Return                                    -0.0183                                 0.0196
                                                           [-0.784]                                [0.956]
 Amihud Liquidity Measure                                 0.688***                              -0.683***
                                                            [3.761]                               [-4.263]
 Size                                                    -2.28e-05                              -1.48e-05
                                                           [-0.406]                               [-0.301]
 Market Capitalization                                  -0.000505**                            0.000377**
                                                           [-2.555]                                [2.178]
 Book-to-Market                                            -0.0186                              0.000620
                                                           [-1.448]                              [0.0550]
 Institutional Ownership (%)                               -0.0326                                -0.0159
                                                           [-0.688]                               [-0.382]
 Exec. Cash Pay/Total                                       0.0141                                 0.0169
                                                            [0.357]                                [0.488]
 Increase in Average Exec. Pay (%)                        0.00954                               0.0295***
                                                            [0.793]                                [2.798]
 Golden Parachute                                          -0.0153                               -0.00288

                                                        70
                                           [-0.981]                [-0.211]
Board Size                               -0.0113***              0.0133***
                                           [-3.816]                 [5.095]
Fraction of Indep. Dirs                   -0.341***              -0.195***
                                           [-5.532]                [-3.611]
Classified Board                            0.0136                -0.0231*
                                            [0.953]                [-1.838]
Poison Pill                              0.0894***               -0.136***
                                            [5.880]                [-10.24]
Unequal Voting Rights                      0.109***               0.00516
                                            [4.354]                 [0.234]
Vote % Required to Amend
Bylaws                                   -9.63e-05                0.000326*
                                          [-0.474]                  [1.829]
Supermajority Mergers (%)               -0.00225***              -0.00148***
                                          [-3.875]                 [-2.912]
Constant                    -0.518***     -0.0763     -0.0266        0.110
                             [-12.69]     [-0.831]    [-0.721]      [1.363]
Observations                   5,871        3,590       5,871        3,590
Adjusted R-squared             0.037        0.093       0.045        0.106




                                        71
Table 7 – Cutting Line Angles and Firm Characteristics
This Table reports OLS regressions of the cutting line angle as a function of firm, governance, sponsor, and proposal characteristics. Firm and governance
characteristics are as defined in Table 1.C. In columns (1)-(5), we use the cutting line angle as the dependent variable, while in columns (6)-(10), we replace
it with the absolute value of the cutting line angle. ∗, ∗∗ and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.
                                           (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)         (8)          (9)        (10)
                                         Angle        Angle       Angle      Angle      Angle     |Angle|    |Angle|     |Angle|      |Angle|     |Angle|
 Shareholder-Sponsored Proposal         23.95***     29.83***    30.83***    11.28      48.16     -1.896*     -1.506      -1.625      7.333***     -6.445
                                         [6.046]      [6.858]    [7.046]    [1.223]    [1.436]    [-1.661]   [-1.185]     [-1.242]     [2.637]    [-0.637]
 ROA                                      0.350       -2.804      -6.627     -11.33     -12.75     -0.809    7.762**      8.901**     8.774**     8.424**
                                        [0.0734]     [-0.224]    [-0.486]   [-0.843]   [-0.949]   [-0.589]    [2.120]     [2.186]      [2.164]     [2.077]
 Dividend Yield                          -27.19      -87.31**     -59.81     -50.53     -51.03     9.116      -13.83      -13.46       -12.32      -12.51
                                         [-1.146]    [-2.373]    [-1.615]   [-1.382]   [-1.397]   [1.334]    [-1.287]     [-1.216]    [-1.117]    [-1.135]
 Leverage                                -0.871       0.183       4.137      3.811      3.794     -0.654**   2.482**      2.914**     2.792**     2.808**
                                         [-0.834]    [0.0443]    [0.946]    [0.883]    [0.880]    [-2.175]    [2.055]     [2.229]      [2.144]     [2.158]
 Past-year Total Return                   1.768       4.728       4.847      3.868      4.330      0.535      -1.893      -1.477       -1.532      -1.462
                                         [0.787]      [1.200]    [1.162]    [0.940]    [1.053]    [0.827]    [-1.645]     [-1.185]    [-1.235]    [-1.178]
 Amihud Liquidity Measure                 8.162       -0.761      24.46      20.91      25.83     -5.025*    -28.12***   -48.87***    -46.85***   -45.62***
                                         [0.803]     [-0.0255]   [0.745]    [0.645]    [0.797]    [-1.716]   [-3.221]     [-4.981]    [-4.793]    [-4.664]
 Size                                  -0.0290***   -0.0297***   -0.0140    -0.0127    -0.0128    0.00131    0.000742    0.000362     0.000721    0.00109
                                         [-3.302]    [-3.229]    [-1.524]   [-1.398]   [-1.413]   [0.518]     [0.276]     [0.132]      [0.264]     [0.398]
 Market Capitalization                  -0.0477*    -0.0629**    -0.0507*   -0.0433    -0.0407    0.00467    -0.00161    -3.22e-05    0.000806    0.000865
                                         [-1.760]    [-2.128]    [-1.678]   [-1.451]   [-1.365]   [0.598]    [-0.186]    [-0.00357]   [0.0895]    [0.0961]
 Book-to-Market                         5.962***      4.022*      0.835      0.634      0.607     -0.821**    -0.340       0.298       0.262       0.264
                                         [4.641]      [1.743]    [0.356]    [0.274]    [0.263]    [-2.220]   [-0.504]     [0.425]      [0.375]     [0.378]
 Institutional Ownership (%)            -21.97***   -27.66***    -16.89**   -16.09**   -16.20**   3.979***   7.266***      2.047       2.486       2.446
                                         [-5.813]    [-3.873]    [-2.047]   [-1.976]   [-1.992]   [3.657]     [3.482]     [0.830]      [1.012]     [0.996]
 Exec. Cash Pay/Total                                12.30**      -2.647     -3.568     -4.197               -3.723**     -0.979       -1.287      -1.424
                                                      [1.983]    [-0.372]   [-0.509]   [-0.599]              [-2.055]     [-0.461]    [-0.608]    [-0.673]
 Increase in Average Exec. Pay (%)                    1.456       0.863      1.106      0.999                 -0.815      -1.161*      -1.174*     -1.177*
                                                      [0.696]    [0.397]    [0.516]    [0.466]               [-1.334]     [-1.786]    [-1.815]    [-1.820]
 Golden Parachute                                    -5.024**    6.679**    7.787***   8.090***               -0.388      -1.257       -1.144      -1.112
                                                     [-2.008]    [2.421]    [2.860]    [2.973]               [-0.531]     [-1.525]    [-1.393]    [-1.354]
 Board Size                                                       0.322      0.138      0.134                            -0.650***    -0.664***   -0.658***

                                                                              72
                                                           [0.626]     [0.272]     [0.264]                           [-4.225]    [-4.329]    [-4.296]
Fraction of Indep. Dirs                                   -91.90***   -86.32***   -85.92***                          6.675**     7.871**     8.007**
                                                          [-8.717]    [-8.288]    [-8.257]                           [2.119]     [2.505]     [2.549]
Classified Board                                           -4.151*     -1.850      -1.951                             1.093     1.955***    1.932***
                                                          [-1.707]    [-0.760]    [-0.802]                           [1.503]     [2.663]     [2.632]
Poison Pill                                               -28.91***   -29.97***   -30.26***                           1.252       0.931       0.916
                                                          [-10.48]    [-10.99]    [-11.10]                           [1.519]     [1.131]     [1.113]
Unequal Voting Rights                                      -4.337      -5.374      -5.763                           -2.775**    -2.881**    -2.844**
                                                          [-0.941]    [-1.182]    [-1.268]                           [-2.016]    [-2.101]    [-2.074]
Vote % Required to Amend Bylaws                           -0.00808    -0.00180    -0.00469                          0.00120     0.00152     0.00124
                                                          [-0.223]    [-0.0504]   [-0.132]                           [0.111]     [0.141]     [0.115]
Supermajority Mergers (%)                                 -0.243**    -0.278***   -0.265***                         0.0786***   0.0800***   0.0821***
                                                          [-2.395]    [-2.779]    [-2.652]                           [2.596]     [2.651]     [2.720]
Other Compensation Proposal                                           -51.46***   -43.99***                                       4.627       3.202
                                                                      [-4.336]    [-3.463]                                       [1.292]     [0.835]
Say on Pay Proposal                                                   -77.76***   -73.01***                                       2.804       0.997
                                                                      [-6.623]    [-5.860]                                       [0.792]     [0.265]
Director Election Proposal                                            -44.96***   -40.19***                                      8.336**     6.527*
                                                                      [-3.933]    [-3.302]                                       [2.417]     [1.777]
Governance Proposal                                                    -13.63     -51.53**                                       -3.209     -15.84**
                                                                      [-0.950]    [-2.478]                                       [-0.742]    [-2.525]
Social Proposal                                                       -43.47***   -75.69**                                       -2.185       9.753
                                                                      [-2.847]    [-2.372]                                       [-0.474]    [1.013]
Other Compensation Proposal*Sh. Sp.                                                -59.60*                                                    10.56
                                                                                  [-1.688]                                                   [0.991]
Governance Proposal* Sh. Sp.                                                       10.65                                                     25.84**
                                                                                   [0.281]                                                   [2.257]
Constant                              4.704     10.31     86.29***    133.4***    128.0***    67.94***   65.79***   65.73***    56.97***    58.57***
                                      [1.370]   [1.418]    [6.352]     [7.518]     [7.031]    [68.71]    [30.96]     [16.19]     [10.64]     [10.66]
Observations                          10,331    5,610      4,857       4,857       4,857      10,331      5,610       4,857       4,857       4,857
Adjusted R-squared                    0.011     0.014      0.056       0.082       0.084       0.004      0.011       0.017       0.026       0.028




                                                                        73
Table 8 – Director Election Proposals Cutting Line Angles and Director Characteristics
This Table reports OLS regressions of midpoints along the first and second dimensions respectively as a function of director characteristics for director
elections. In columns (1) and (2), we use the cutting line angle as the dependent variable, while in columns (3) and (4), we replace it with the absolute
value of the cutting line angle. Firm and director characteristics are as defined in Tables 1.C and 1.D. ∗, ∗∗ and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the
10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.
                                           (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)
                                          Angle            Angle           |Angle|          |Angle|
 Female                                  -4.629           -1.943          -1.519*            -0.521
                                        [-1.544]         [-0.517]         [-1.763]         [-0.480]
 Age                                     0.205*            0.128          -0.0438          -0.0189
                                         [1.771]          [0.883]         [-1.314]         [-0.453]
 Employee Director                     13.93***         16.67***         10.85***         8.280***
                                         [3.028]          [2.786]         [8.210]           [4.783]
 Independent Director                 -16.88***           -4.228         8.839***         5.662***
                                        [-4.176]         [-0.776]         [7.610]           [3.594]
 Attended <75% of meetings             48.85***         40.04***         -8.126**        -14.68***
                                         [4.394]          [2.969]         [-2.544]         [-3.762]
 Financial Expert                       4.230**          5.822**            -0.679         -1.351*
                                         [2.056]          [2.276]         [-1.149]         [-1.825]
 # of Outside Public Boards               1.226         3.175***            -0.139           -0.319
                                         [1.365]          [2.767]         [-0.539]         [-0.961]
 % Controlling Voting Power              -0.125          -0.386*         -0.00887          -0.0410
                                        [-0.705]         [-1.755]         [-0.174]         [-0.645]
 ROA                                                      -8.063                            7.803*
                                                         [-0.514]                           [1.718]
 Dividend Yield                                           -95.02                          -55.48**
                                                         [-1.187]                          [-2.396]
 Leverage                                                  5.263                           3.686**
                                                          [1.016]                           [2.459]
 Past-year Total Return                                   8.950*                             -1.236
                                                          [1.854]                          [-0.885]
 Amihud Liquidity Measure                                  18.53                         -30.80***
                                                          [0.491]                          [-2.822]

                                                                              74
Size                                       -0.0171                0.00328
                                           [-1.474]                [0.977]
Market Capitalization                      -0.0250                0.00284
                                           [-0.613]                [0.241]
Book-to-Market                               3.241                  -0.424
                                            [1.220]               [-0.551]
Institutional Ownership (%)                 -15.07                   3.534
                                           [-1.540]                [1.248]
Exec. Cash Pay/Total                         6.919                  -1.371
                                            [0.847]               [-0.580]
Increase in Average Exec. Pay
(%)                                           2.400                 -1.238*
                                             [0.966]                [-1.723]
Golden Parachute                            7.641**                   -0.921
                                             [2.376]                [-0.989]
Board Size                                    0.265               -0.695***
                                             [0.432]                [-3.914]
Fraction of Indep. Dirs                    -96.31***                 6.541*
                                            [-7.559]                 [1.774]
Classified Board                             -4.705                 2.125**
                                            [-1.594]                 [2.488]
Poison Pill                                -37.47***                   0.629
                                            [-11.94]                 [0.693]
Unequal Voting Rights                       -9.383*                -3.857**
                                            [-1.810]                [-2.572]
Vote % Required to Amend
ByLaws                                      -0.0116                -0.0104
                                            [-0.277]              [-0.860]
Supermajority Mergers (%)                   -0.214*               0.0879**
                                            [-1.785]               [2.539]
Constant                         -10.96    75.91***    65.37***   62.52***
                                [-1.297]     [4.006]    [26.92]    [11.40]
Observations                      5,871       3,590      5,871      3,590
Adjusted R-squared                0.024       0.083      0.014      0.032

                                                           75
