                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      CAPITAL CONTROLS AS MACRO-PRUDENTIAL POLICY IN A LARGE OPEN
                              ECONOMY

                                         J. Scott Davis
                                      Michael B. Devereux

                                      Working Paper 25710
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25710


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2019




The views in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research. We thank participants in the 3rd International Macro Conference in Keio
University, March 2018, and the FRB Dallas - University of Houston - Bank of Mexico
Conference on International Economics, October 2018. In addition, we thank Martin Bodenstein,
Guido Lorenzoni, Mark Aguiar, and Emmanuel Fahri for comments. Devereux gratefully
acknowledges financial support from the Social Science and Humanities Research Council of
Canada.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by J. Scott Davis and Michael B. Devereux. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Capital Controls as Macro-prudential Policy in a Large Open Economy
J. Scott Davis and Michael B. Devereux
NBER Working Paper No. 25710
March 2019
JEL No. F40

                                          ABSTRACT

The use of international capital flow controls has become increasingly popular in academic and
policy circles. But almost all the recent literature studies the case of a small economy, ignoring
the spillover effects of capital controls to the rest of the world. This paper re-examines the case
for capital controls in a large open economy, where domestic financial constraints may bind
following a large negative shock. We consider both ex-ante capital controls (prudential) and ex-
post controls (crisis management). In a large open economy, there is a tension between the desire
to tax capital inflows to manipulate the terms-of-trade and tax capital outflows for either
prudential or crisis management purposes. When capital controls are chosen non-cooperatively,
we show that ex-post capital controls are unsuccessful in alleviating financial constraints in a
crisis, and ex-ante capital controls are unsuccessful at reducing financial instability before the
crisis. Non-cooperative capital controls leave the crisis-hit country even worse off than in an
environment with unrestricted capital flows. In addition, a non-cooperative equilibrium with
capital controls actually increases the likelihood of a financial crisis occurring. By contrast,
capital controls can be effective under international cooperation and can significantly ease
financial constraints when applied ex-post for crisis management and reduce the likelihood of a
crisis when used ex-ante for prudential purposes.


J. Scott Davis
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas
Research Department
2200 North Pearl Street
Dallas, TX 75201
Scott.Davis@dal.frb.org

Michael B. Devereux
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1
CANADA
and NBER
mbdevereux@gmail.com
1         Introduction

The use of capital controls has a long history in international economic policy (see e.g.
Edwards (1999) and Magud, Reinhart, and Rogo¤ (2018) for empirical surveys), but the
recent experience of …nancial crises has led to a substantial reevaluation of the bene…ts of
controls.1 A growing theoretical literature has argued for the use of capital controls as second
best policy to correct ine¢ ciencies in international …nancial markets.2
        One common example often cited is the presence of pecuniary externalities associated
with …nancial constraints facing borrowers (see e.g. Lorenzoni (2008)). In an open economy,
exogenous changes in capital in‡ows from abroad can lead to changes in asset prices and
the price of collateral and heighten this pecuniary externality. In open economy models,
some papers take a positive approach and model the way that this pecuniary externality
can replicate the behavior of …nancial crises in many emerging market economies (see e.g.
Mendoza (2010)). Others take a normative approach and show that by taxing capital ‡ows,
governments may be able to correct these externalities, which otherwise would lead to ine¢ -
cient levels of borrowing. Policy can potentially be employed ex-post to ease a crisis already
occurring (crisis management) or ex-ante to increase …nancial stability (crisis prevention)
(see e.g. Jeanne and Korinek (2010), Bianchi (2011), Benigno, Chen, Otrok, Rebucci, and
Young (2013), Korinek and Sandri (2016), Korinek (2018), Bianchi and Mendoza (2018)).3
        Most of the literature analyzing the e¢ cacy of capital ‡ow controls focuses on the case of a
small economy which takes the availability of capital from the outside world as given. But this
perspective ignores a number of important features of international …nancial markets which
may be important in the evaluation of optimal capital controls. First, for large countries, the
patterns of borrowing and lending undertaken in response to macro shocks are likely to have
spillover impacts on the rest of the world. Unlike a small economy, capital controls policy in
    1
     In particular, the change in the position of the IMF on use of capital controls after the …nancial crisis
has been well documented (see e.g. International Monetary Fund (2012))
   2
     See Ma and Rebucci (2019) for a recent survey.
   3
     Our focus is on capital taxes to correct pecuniary externalities in an open economy, but the same logic
can equally be used in a closed economy, see e.g. Jeanne and Korinek (2013) and Jeanne and Korinek (2018).


                                                      3
a large economy can a¤ect the world interest rate. Depending on the country’s net external
asset position, policy makers would have the incentive to impose capital in‡ow controls
or capital out‡ow controls to manipulate the cost of foreign borrowing (see e.g. Costinot,
Lorenzoni, and Werning (2014), De Paoli and Lipinska (2013), and Heathcote and Perri
(2016)). This may have implications for the importance of domestic …nancial constraints
over the economic cycle. Second, in a large country context, capital taxes have international
strategic implications, and the response of the foreign country to capital controls policy in the
home country must be considered. This leads to a critical question as to whether corrective
taxes are chosen at a global level (cooperative) or a national level (Nash). If individual
countries choose taxes, then it is not clear that a world equilibrium will be characterized by
an e¢ cient correction of the pecuniary externalities implicit in the …nancial constraint facing
households in debt markets. These two features of the large open economy mean that the
lessons about macro-prudential capital controls that are learned in a small open economy
setting may not apply to large emerging market countries like China, Brazil, or India.
       This paper explores the determination of capital controls in a two-country general equilib-
rium model where borrowers in one country may be subject to a binding collateral constraint
for a large enough negative shock. Benigno, Chen, Otrok, Rebucci, and Young (2016) discuss
optimal capital controls to correct a pecuniary externality, but in the context of a small open
economy.4 We instead consider optimal ex-ante and ex-post capital controls policy in a large
open economy, which allows us to analyze the interaction between optimal capital controls
to correct pecuniary externalities, and the external e¤ects of capital controls which give rise
to terms-of-trade manipulation and strategic interactions in global capital markets. As de-
scribed above, within this framework we can enrich the standard analysis of capital controls
to take account of the di¤erent and sometimes con‡icting motivations that a policymaker
has for imposing capital controls, the spillover e¤ects on other countries, and the welfare
   4
   In this paper we focus on real models, but other papers have considered capital controls models with
nominal rigidities, see e.g. Farhi and Werning (2014), Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2016) and Devereux, Young,
and Yu (2018). Similarly, Farhi and Werning (2016) and Korinek and Simsek (2016) consider the role of
macroprudential policy in a closed economy model with nominal rigidities.


                                                    4
implications of non-cooperative versus cooperative determination of capital controls.5
       The model is made deliberately simple to take advantage of key insights into the di¤erent
mechanisms involved in the determination of the gains and losses to capital controls. There
are two countries (home and foreign) and three periods. In the home country there exist
borrowers and lenders. Borrowers have pre-existing debt, and borrow in order to smooth
consumption. Borrowers face an occasionally binding borrowing constraint, where total debt
cannot exceed the market value of their endowment. One key feature is that the value of
collateral is endogenous. By imposing capital out‡ow taxes the policymaker can raise the
value of collateral and thus loosen a binding borrowing constraint.
       In this stylized model, a negative shock to home country endowments occurs in the
middle period. Thus there is a pre-shock period, a shock period, and a post-shock period.
We consider optimal capital controls policy in both the shock period (crisis management
capital controls) and the pre-shock period (prudential capital controls). Our results are
focused around the experiment of a temporary negative shock to the home country. We fully
characterize both the optimal capital control response, the nature of cross country spillovers
from this policy, and the equilibrium where both the home and foreign countries react to the
home country shock by choosing optimal capital ‡ow taxes.
       We begin with capital controls capital controls set after the realization of the shock. In
the case of a small shock, where the borrowing constraint does not bind, the home country
will borrow on international capital markets, and the optimal capital control response is to
impose a capital in‡ow tax. This will reduce the current account de…cit, reduce the world
interest rate, and thus improve the country’s terms-of-trade. By the same token, this imposes
a negative spillover impact on the foreign country. In a Nash equilibrium, the foreign country
will respond with a capital out‡ow tax, which in turn imposes a negative welfare spillover
on the home country.
   5
    The fact that through capital controls policy the large economy can manipulate the world interest rate
provides the violation of Korinek’s "…rst welfare theorem for open economies" and makes international policy
coordination bene…cial (see Korinek (2017)).



                                                     5
   But if the negative shock in the home country is su¢ ciently large, the borrowing con-
straint will bind. In that case, the home country faces con‡icting incentives in setting capital
taxes. A capital in‡ow tax will reduce the world interest rate and improve the home country’s
terms-of-trade. But this will reduce net capital in‡ows, and thus cause a fall in the value of
domestic collateral, tightening the borrowing constraint. By contrast, a capital out‡ow tax
raises the value of collateral. Due to this trade-o¤, the home country’s initial in‡ow tax will
reverse direction, and for a large enough shock, the in‡ow tax becomes an out‡ow tax, and
the policymaker’s primary motivation switches from terms-of-trade manipulation to crisis
management.
   The e¤ectiveness of capital controls for crisis management is reduced because the poli-
cymaker must choose between these two con‡icting motivations. Because policymakers are
trying to also manipulate the terms-of-trade, the capital out‡ow tax is less than it would be
if the only concern was to relax the borrowing constraint.
   This tension between terms-of-trade manipulation and crisis-management is present even
when the home country policymaker sets taxes unilaterally, that is, with no response from
the foreign country. When the the foreign policymaker also responds, the outcome is worse.
Foreign policymakers manipulate their terms-of-trade by taxing out‡ows, which leads to a
fall in net in‡ows into the home country, further tightening the home country borrowing
constraint. In a non-cooperative (Nash) equilibrium, welfare spillovers become asymmetric,
the home out‡ow tax set to loosen the borrowing constraint bene…ts the foreign country,
while the foreign out‡ow tax to manipulate the terms-of-trade lowers home country welfare.
   Thus, in a Nash equilibrium the home country, and the world as a whole, will be worse
o¤ than in an environment where neither country imposes capital controls. The asymmetric
nature of spillovers therefore means that in the absence of policy cooperation, a country
which su¤ers a …nancial crisis is e¤ectively unable to successfully use capital controls for
crisis management purposes.
   By contrast, when the two countries choose capital taxes cooperatively, the cooperative


                                               6
policy maker ignores the terms-of-trade motive for capital controls, and focuses on crisis
management. In this case, the home country alone will impose a capital out‡ow tax when
the borrowing constraint binds, and both countries can gain from e¤ective use of capital
controls.
       This same tension between the competing motives for capital controls is equally present
when controls are chosen before the realization of the shock. In anticipation of a negative
shock and binding borrowing constraints in the future, home country agents will engage
in precautionary saving (as in Mendoza (2010)). This leads the home country to be a
net creditor. As a result, when setting ex-ante capital controls, the home policymaker will
manipulate the terms-of-trade by imposing capital out‡ow controls to raise the world interest
rate. But these capital out‡ow controls will reduce these precautionary savings, making the
country more vulnerable to a binding collateral constraint when the shock occurs. Thus
while the ex-ante capital controls are meant to be prudential, the tension between terms-
of-trade manipulation and the prudential motive leads to more debt and less precautionary
savings than would occur if ex-ante capital controls were purely prudential.
       When we put both of results together, we conclude that whether from prudential motives,
or crisis management motives, a country that is vulnerable to …nancial crises cannot gain
from the use of capital controls in the absence of e¤ective international policy cooperation.
But in addition to that, we …nd that non-cooperative (or unilateral) determination of capital
controls itself actually increases the frequency of …nancial crises. When capital controls are
set to balance among the competing strategic and prudential or crisis management motives,
…nancial crises occur more frequently than in a Laissez Faire environment where no capital
controls are used at all.6
       This paper will proceed as follows. The next section presents the model. The model
is a deliberately simple two country, three period model. We characterize optimal capital
   6
    When studying the e¤ect of time consistent macro-prudential policies, Bianchi and Mendoza (2018) also
…nd that the probability of a crisis is endogenous to the type of policy chosen. As shown by Davila and
Korinek (2017), crises can still happen even under an e¢ cient allocation, but they do tend to be less frequent
and less severe.


                                                      7
tax policy in section 3 under a variety of strategic scenarios for policy-making. The results
in this section can be shown analytically. In section 4 we present numerical results where
we solve this model for the equilibrium allocations under di¤erent capital tax scenarios and
quantify the welfare e¤ects and spillovers of di¤erent capital control regimes. The …nal
section concludes.



2     Model

We develop a three-period, two-country (‘home’and ‘foreign’) model. Agents derive utility
from the consumption of a tradable good X0 in period 0, a tradable good X1 and a non-
tradable good Y in period 1, and a tradable good X2 in period 2. The countries are not
symmetric. While both are endowed with initial stocks of goods X0 ; X1 ; Y; X2 , in period 1,
the home country’s endowments of X1 and Y are subject to a country speci…c shock, realized
at the beginning of period 1.
    In addition, the home country’s population is divided between borrowers and savers.
Borrowers begin period 0 with an initial stock of debt, held by savers in the same country
(so initially, countries have balanced external accounts). Borrowers also face a constraint
limiting their new debt issue to a fraction of the market value of their endowment in a given
period. We choose parameters and endowments so that this constraint may bind only in
period 1 following a su¢ ciently large negative shock.
    Since our focus is on spillovers of macro-prudential capital controls from one country, we
assume that the foreign country is populated by a representative household that never faces
a binding borrowing constraint.
    The three types of agents, home country savers, home country borrowers, and foreigners
are indexed by i = s; b; .
    Agents maximize utility, described as follows:




                                              8
                                                                    2
                               U i = u ci0 + E          u ci1 +         u ci2

                 c1
where u (c) =    1
                      , and E is the expectations operator, taken over the distribution of the
endowment shock in period 1. Consumption in period 1 is a Cobb-Douglas combination of a
tradable good X and a non-tradable good Y . Period 0 and period 2 consumption is simply
consumption of the tradable good X:




                             ci0 = ci0;X
                                                1                           1
                             ci1 =                  1       ci1;X   ci1;Y
                                           (1       )
                             ci2   =   ci2;X


      The only source of uncertainty is a country-speci…c shock, A, to home country endow-
ments in the period 1. Foreign endowments are doubled to re‡ect the fact that there are two
(normalized) home country agents but only one foreign country agent.
      The endowments are described by:


                 xi0 = X0 and xi1 = AX1 , y1i = AY and xi2 = X2 for i = s; b

                 xi0 = 2X0 and xi1 = 2X1 , y1i = 2Y and xi2 = 2X2 for i =


where the country-speci…c shock in the …rst period, A, is equal to 1            ", where " follows an
exponential distribution with rate parameter 0:02.7
      The period 0; 1; 2 budget constraints for home country savers are given by the following:
  7
    This distribution is chosen simply to ensure that in our benchmark calibration, the probability of a
binding constraint is 10%.




                                                        9
                                   B0s               F0
                           cs0;X +     + (1 +     0)     +    0   = xs0 + B s
                                   R0                R0W
                                   Bs                F1
                 cs1;X + pcs1;Y   + 1 + (1 +      1)     +    1   = xs1 + py1s + B0s + F0
                                   R1                R1W
                                                            cs2;X = xs2 + B1s + F1      T


where Bt represents domestic bonds (held by borrowers and savers in the home country) and
Ft represents foreign bonds (held by home country savers and foreign households) in period
            8
t = 0; 1.
       Rt is the interest rate on domestic bonds and RtW is the interest rate on international
bonds. The tax rate        t   is a policy variable and represents taxes on international borrowing
                                    Ft
and lending, and       t   =      t RW   is the lump sum rebate of that tax revenue. The price p is
                                     t

the relative price of the non-traded good Y in the home country.
       The variable T represents a lump sum transfer from savers to borrowers in the home
country. This second period transfer from savers to borrowers is adjusted to ensure that the
policymaker has no incentive to use the policy instrument                for redistribution from savers
to borrowers.9 Further details about this transfer are presented in the next section.
       The budget constraints for home country borrowers are given by:
   8
     We assume that borrowers do not have direct access to international capital markets, and instead sell
bonds to domestic savers. This makes the exposition of the results somewhat easier. Since savers have
the option of holding foreign assets or borrower’s bonds, the two assets must have the same (after tax)
rate of return for domestic agents. Hence the interest rate paid by borrowers in domestic transactions with
savers equals that paid or received by savers in international borrowing or lending. We could instead assume
that borrowers directly sell bonds to international or domestic savers. If borrowers faced the same capital
‡ow taxes as savers, and in addition the borrowing constraint re‡ected the borrowers adjusted (for capital
controls) cost of debt, then all our results would be unchanged.
   9
     Since borrowers begin with a stock of debt, they have a lower wealth level and a higher marginal utility
of consumption. Thus, absent transfers, the policy maker would have an incentive to use to redistribute
from savers to borrowers.




                                                       10
                                               B0b
                                      cb0;X +      = xb0 + B b
                                               R0
                                               Bb
                             cb1;X + pcb1;Y   + 1 = xb1 + py1b + B0b
                                               R1
                                                cb2;X = xb2 + B1b + T


   The budget constraints for foreign country households are given by:



                              B0                   F0
                       c0;X +    + (1 +         0)     +    0   = x0
                              R0                   R0W
                              B                    F1
             c1;X + p c1;Y   + 1 + (1 +         1)     +    1   = x1 + p y1 + B0 + F0
                              R1                   R1W
                                                          c2;X = x2 + B1 + F1


   Bond market clearing conditions are given by:


             B s + B b = 0; Bts + Btb = 0; Bt = 0; and Ft + Ft = 0 for t = 0; 1

   The only di¤erence between home country borrowers and savers is that borrowers begin
period 0 with a stock of debt held by home country savers, B s > 0.
   Due to limited enforcement of debt contracts, home country borrowers face a borrowing
constraint given by:


                                          B1b
                                                      xb1 + py1b
                                          R1

   The multiplier on the borrowing constraint is given by .
   Finally, market clearing conditions are given by:




                                                     11
                                 X                   X
                                         cit;X =           xit for t = 0; 1; 2
                                     i                i
                             cs1;Y   +   cb1;Y   =    s
                                                     y1   + y1b

                                         c1;Y    = y1



2.1    Capital controls versus domestic subsidies

Our analysis is focused on the optimality of capital controls in large economies with …nancial
frictions. Capital controls place a wedge between domestic borrowers or lenders and the
world interest rate. As noted above, the impact of capital controls would be the same if
home country borrowers were to directly access world capital markets. But an alternative
possibility for macro-prudential policy would be to directly impose a tax on borrowing by
the home country borrowers. This would drive a wedge between the returns to home country
borrowers and savers. We choose to focus on the implications of a tax imposed on external
rather than internal borrowing for a number of reasons. First, it implies that all home
country agents face the same returns, which avoids having to deal with the heterogeneous
impact of taxes on home welfare. In fact, a tax or subsidy on home country borrowers
would have most of the same e¤ects, (through terms of trade and pecuniary externalities)
as the capital controls explored in this paper, while additionally a¤ecting borrowers and
savers di¤erentially. But more importantly, the motivation of our paper is to explore the
case for capital controls, which are by de…nition a tax or subsidy on external borrowing.
In the absence of …nancial frictions, capital controls can be useful only for terms of trade
manipulation. The main focus of the analysis is to explore how this rationale for capital
controls interacts and con‡icts with their usage for alleviating …nancial frictions.




                                                     12
3       Analytical results

We …rst provide an analytical characterization of the choice of capital controls under al-
ternative strategic settings. Without international cooperation, the central bank imposes
the capital tax         t   on the purchase of foreign bonds Ft so as to maximize the sum of saver
and borrower utility, taking as given the capital tax imposed by the foreign central bank,

 t.   Period 0 capital taxes                0   are chosen based on a forecast of the capital taxes chosen by
the period 1 authorities. All period 0,1, and 2 variables except for the capital taxes                                               are
determined in competitive equilibrium. The description of the competitive equilibrium is
set out in the appendix. In the appendix we also characterize the planner’s problem for the
optimal period 0 and period 1 capital taxes .


3.1       Period 1 Capital Controls: Crisis management

We begin by describing the setting of capital controls in period 1, after the realization of the
home country productivity shock, conditional on the outstanding stock of net foreign assets
F0 and the initial level of within-home country borrowers debt                                       B0 .
      The home country planner will set                       1   to maximize W ( 1 ;            1 ; A; V0 )   = U b( 1;   1 ; A; V0 ) +

U s( 1;   1 ; A; V0 )   and the foreign country planner will set                          1   to maximize W ( 1 ;          1 ; A; V0 )   =
U ( 1;    1 ; A; V0 ),      where V0 is a vector of all period 0 variables. The …rst order condition of
the home policymaker’s maximization problem is (where we have already made the substi-
tution B1 = B1b =             B1s ) :

                              dW                          b                          s                   dp
                                        =       R1        2       cb1;Y        y1b   2   cs1;Y     y1s                               (1)
                              d 1                                                                        d 1
                                                      b           B1 dR1
                                                                  s
                                                +     2           2
                                                                  R1 d 1
                                                         s 1         s  dF1               s    F1 dR1w
                                                +        1 w +       2        +           1
                                                          R1             d 1                  (R1w )2 d 1
                                                                             dp
                                                +    y1b     cb1;Y y1b
                                                                           d 1


                                                                          13
         i
where    t   is the marginal utility of consumption for agent type i in period t.
   This expression highlights the policymaker’s three motives for setting capital taxes                     1:



  1. Domestic redistribution: borrowers are poorer than savers since they begin with an
      initial level of debt, thus the marginal utility of borrowers is greater than the marginal
      utility of savers.

  2. Manipulate the terms-of-trade: making imports cheaper and exports more expensive,
      which in this model, with one traded good, implies a desire for a net creditor (when
      F1h > 0) to raise the world interest rate R1w and for a net debtor to reduce the world
      interest rate.

  3. Crisis management: using capital controls to a¤ect the relative price of non-traded
      goods and thus the tightness of the borrowing constraint.

   The …rst two lines in (1) represent the planner’s use of               1   for domestic redistribution.
This can take place through two channels. The …rst involves changing p, and thus a¤ecting
saver and borrower welfare due to di¤erences in consumption and endowments of the non-
traded good, cb1;Y      y1b and cs1;Y   y1s . The second channel is through changes in R1 , thus
a¤ecting saver and borrower welfare, given that borrowers have outstanding debt B1 < 0.
The use of the transfer T is designed to eliminate the planner’s motive to use                 for domestic
redistribution. As we discuss in the appendix, this transfer in the second period is chosen to
                                                                                                    b        s
equate saver and borrower marginal utilities of consumption in the second period,                   2   =    2.

Thus the transfer will eliminate the …rst two lines of this derivative.
   The third line in (1) captures the planner’s use of             1   for terms-of-trade manipulation.
It depends on the level of home country net exports, F1 , and the ability of               1   to a¤ect the
                                                      dR1w
world interest rate (the price of net exports),       d 1
                                                             . If F1 = 0, then, based on this channel
alone, the optimal capital tax would be zero.
   Finally, the fourth line in equation (1) represents the crisis management motive for the
use of   1.    This channel is relevant only when the constraint is binding and thus                    > 0.

                                                 14
By increasing      1    the planner will reduce exports of the traded good in the …rst period
and thus (by increasing period 1 consumption) increase the relative price of the non-traded
         dp
good,   d 1
              > 0. A higher price of the non-traded good loosens the home country borrowing
constraint by increasing the value of the borrower’s collateral, y1b . But at the same time
the increase in p will either tighten or loosen the borrowing constraint depending on whether
the borrower consumes more or less of the non-traded good than their endowment, cb1;Y                     y1b .
   Since the …rst two lines in (1) cancel out due to the transfer, the maximization condition
                                                                            R1w
reduces to (after factoring in the equilibrium conditions R1 =             1+ 1
                                                                                   and the saver’s …rst order
condition with respect to F1 ):

                       s
                 dW                dF1   F1 dR1w                                      dp
                     = 1w        1     +             +   y1b       cb1;Y     y1b          =0
                 d 1  R1           d 1 R1w d 1                                        d 1

3.1.1    Optimal capital taxes when the borrowing constraint is not binding

When the borrowing constraint is slack, the optimal capital tax for the home country becomes
a standard example of a monopoly ’optimal tari¤ problem’. The …rst order condition for the
home government may be reduced to the following:

                                       s
                                 dW               dF1   F1 dR1w
                                     = 1w       1     +                =0                                (2)
                                 d 1  R1          d 1 R1w d 1

   The …rst term captures the …rst order e¤ect of a home capital tax on savers utility
through its e¤ect on net foreign assets F , the second term captures the welfare e¤ect of the
tax through its e¤ect on the world interest rate. We can rewrite (2) as:


                                                    F1 dR1w
                                            1   =                                                        (3)
                                                    R1w dF1
                                                               f
   We …rst consider the unilateral case, that is where             = 0.
                 dR1w
   Note that     dF1
                        < 0, since a decrease in home country net savings F1 leads to an increase
in the world interest rate R1w . When the home country receives a substantial negative shock


                                                    15
in period 1, we have F1 < 0. Thus, the home government will levy a capital in‡ow tax (set

 1   < 0) when the home country receives a negative shock and the borrowing constraint does
not bind.
     Now assume that the foreign country planner also sets an optimal capital tax. The foreign
optimal tax may be expressed as


                                                       F1 dR1w
                                            1   =                                                   (4)
                                                       R1w dF1
             dR1w
     Since   dF1
                    < 0, and F1 > 0 when the home country receives a negative shock in the …rst
period, condition (4) indicates that the foreign country will set a capital out‡ow tax, which
is designed to raise the world interest rate and improve the foreign terms-of-trade.
     Without a binding borrowing constraint, therefore, we have the conventional result that
borrowers tax in‡ows while lenders tax out‡ows.


Result 1 In a non-cooperative equilibrium without a binding borrowing constraint, when
       the home country receives a negative shock the home country taxes in‡ows and the
       foreign country taxes out‡ows.       1   < 0;    1   > 0.


Welfare Spillovers From the welfare functions above, we can also compute the welfare
spillovers of capital taxes across countries. From the appendix we obtain:

                                         s
                                   dW                 dF1   F1 dR1w
                                       = 1w         1     +                                         (5)
                                   d 1  R1            d 1 R1w d 1
                                          dF1
     The …rst term is negative, since     d 1
                                                > 0 - when         1   < 0, home country capital in‡ows
are ine¢ ciently low to begin with - and an increase in the foreign capital out‡ow tax will
exacerbate this ine¢ ciency. The second term is also negative, since the capital out‡ow tax
imposed by the foreign country drives up world interest rates and imposes a negative wealth
e¤ect on the home economy when F1 < 0.
     It can equally be shown that the welfare spillovers from home capital in‡ow taxes to the


                                                       16
foreign country are negative. When the home country receives a negative shock, it imposes
a capital in‡ow tax. This reduces the world interest rate, and reduces the foreign country’s
demand for bonds. Both factors reduce foreign welfare.
      This brings us to our second generalized result:


Result 2 In a non-cooperative equilibrium where the home country receives the bad shock,
         and the borrowing constraint is slack, welfare spillovers of home and foreign capital
         taxes are negative in both directions.


Best Response Functions Conditions (3) and (4) can be used to derive best response
functions. From condition (3), we have the optimal                1   as a function of    1



                                                             F1 dR1w
                                            1   ( 1) =                                                         (6)
                                                             R1w dF1

                                                    d2 R1w
      Assuming that the second derivative,         dF1 d 1
                                                             is second order and small, the derivative of

 1   ( 1 ) is:

                                                dF1
                                                                       !
                                d   1           d 1       F1 dR1w          dR1w
                                        =
                                d   1           R1w      (R1w )2 d 1       dF1

                                                                                    dF1               d
      If the home country receives a negative shock then F1 < 0 and                 d 1
                                                                                          > 0, then   d
                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                              > 0.
                                                                                                          1

That is, the home country best response function is upward sloping.
      Following the same logic, the foreign country best response function is written as

                                                dF1
                                                                       !
                               d    1           d 1       F1 dR1w          dR1w
                                        =
                               d    1           R1w      (R1w )2 d 1       dF1

      The …rst term inside the parenthesis is positive, while the second term is negative, since
F1 is positive when the home country receives the bad shock. Thus, it is not possible to
unambiguously determine the slope of the foreign country best response function from this
expression. In practice however, as described more fully in section 4 below, we …nd that the


                                                      17
foreign best response function is always upward sloping.


3.1.2     Optimal capital taxes when the borrowing constraint binds

Now we move on to analyze the case where the bad shock is su¢ ciently large that the
borrowing constraint binds in the home country. In this case condition (2) becomes:

                       s
                 dW                    dF1   F1 dR1w                                             dp
                     = 1w            1     +               +    y1b          cb1;Y   y1b             =0                   (7)
                 d 1  R1               d 1 R1w d 1                                               d 1

which becomes


                                       F1 dR1w                                              dp
                             1   =                R1w     y1b    cb1;Y         y1b    s                                   (8)
                                       R1w dF1                                        1    dF1
                                                                                                                                     dp
   When the constraint binds,             > 0, and we have an additional term,                   R1w   y1b        cb1;Y   y1b   s
                                                                                                                                    dF1
                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                1

in the expression for the optimal           1.

   An increase in       1   will lead to increased imports and increased consumption of the traded
                                 dF1
good in the …rst period,         d 1
                                       < 0. Increased consumption of the traded good will raise the
                                                  dp
relative price of the non-traded good,           dF1
                                                       > 0. This implies that this additional term in the
                  h
expression for        is positive, as long as borrowers’consumption of the non-traded good is not
more than a multiple of their endowment, (1 + ) y1b > cb1;Y . As a result, a binding borrowing
constraint will shift the incentive for the home to set                  1   < 0 towards setting             1   > 0. With
a binding borrowing constraint, the terms-of-trade motive for to set an in‡ow tax as a net
external borrower is in con‡ict with the crisis-management motive to tax capital out‡ows so
as to increase the value of domestic collateral.


Result 3 When the home country receives a negative shock, and the borrowing constraint
        binds, in a non-cooperative equilibrium, the home country will set a capital ‡ow tax
        that balances the incentive to improve the terms-of-trade (an in‡ow tax) against the
        incentive to relax the domestic borrowing constraint (an out‡ow tax). The foreign
        country will continue to set an out‡ow tax to improve its terms-of-trade.

                                                         18
   Result 3 also implies that welfare spillovers of capital taxes may be very di¤erent in
the case of binding domestic borrowing constraints. We have shown above that a capital
out‡ow tax,     1   > 0, in the home country will have a positive welfare spillover on the foreign
country, since a rise in           1   raises the world interest rate, and the foreign country is a net
external creditor in the case where the home country receives a negative shock. Thus, with a
su¢ ciently large negative shock that leads to a binding home country borrowing constraint,
the home country’s capital tax is bene…cial for foreign welfare. On the other hand, the
welfare spillover from the foreign to the home country continues to be negative. In the case
of a binding home borrowing constraint, the spillovers from a foreign capital tax to the home
country become

                          s
                    dW                       dF1   F1 dR1w                                      dp
                        = 1w               1     +                +   y1b    cb1;Y   y1b                         (9)
                    d 1  R1                  d 1 R1w d 1                                        d 1
           s                       w
                 dF1         F1 dR1
   The     1
          R1w   1d       +   R1w d 1
                                          is negative, as before. But now there is an additional negative
                     1

                                        dp
term,     y1b   cb1;Y        y1b       d 1
                                           .   This captures the e¤ect of a rise in the foreign capital tax in
tightening the home country borrowing constraint. An increase in                           1,   by raising the world
interest rates, reduces consumption of the traded good in the home country, leading to a fall
                                                             dp
in the relative price of the non-traded good,               d 1
                                                                  < 0. This lowers the value of collateral and
thus tightens the borrowing constraint.
   From this we may establish the following:


Result 3 In a non-cooperative equilibrium, with a binding borrowing constraint in the home
        country and a su¢ ciently negative shock, welfare spillovers are asymmetric. The home
        country’s capital out‡ow tax bene…ts the foreign country, while the foreign country’s
        out‡ow tax reduces home country welfare.




                                                            19
3.1.3      Capital Taxes with International Cooperation

How does the possibility of international policy cooperation alter these results? In optimal
cooperative policy the policymaker sets                   1   to maximize the sum of home and foreign country
welfare while keeping           1   = 0.
     We de…ne the objective function for the cooperative equilibrium as


                                                        Ww = W + W                                               (10)


     Using (10), we may derive the …rst order condition in the case without binding borrowing
constraints as

                                s
                         dW w                   dF1   F1 dR1w                          F1 dR1w
                              = 1w            1     +                       +    1
                                                                                                 =0              (11)
                          d 1  R1               d 1 R1w d 1                     R1w    R1w d 1

which reduces to:


                                                                        1   F1 dR1w
                                               1   =          1         s                                        (12)
                                                                        1   R1w dF1

     Notice that this is the optimal               1   that would maximize home country welfare from equa-
tion (6) the last section multiplied by 1                     1
                                                              s   . When the two countries are symmetric and the
                                                              1

marginal utility in the foreign country is equal to the marginal utility in the home country,
the optimal cooperative             1    = 0. When the home country receives a negative shock and thus
 s
 1   >    1,   the optimal cooperative             1   < 0, as optimal cooperative policy tries to manipulate
the terms-of-trade in favor of the country that received the negative shock. But the optimal
cooperative       1   is far smaller in absolute value than the                  1   that would maximize home country
welfare alone. In fact, as we will see in the numerical results in the next section, when the
borrowing constraint does not bind, the optimal cooperative                               1   0. Thus we have:


Result 4 In the absence of binding borrowing constraints, the cooperative choice of capital
         taxes will set     1       0.

                                                                   20
Cooperation with binding borrowing constraints When the borrowing constraint in
the home country is binding, condition (11) is becomes



         s
  dW w                 dF1   F1 dR1w                                                  dp                    F1 dR1w
       = 1w          1     +                 +   y1b        cb1;Y     y1b                + 1                          = 0 (13)
   d 1  R1             d 1 R1w d 1                                                    d 1 R1w               R1w d 1

   which reduces to:


                                        1   F1 dR1w                                                          dp
                     1   =         1    s                  R1w      y1b             cb1;Y   y1b         s                 (14)
                                        1   R1w dF1                                                     1   dF1

   The …rst term in this expression, describing the incentive to manipulate the terms-of-trade
in optimal cooperative policy, is approximately zero, as described above. So the optimal
cooperative    1   is positive due to the negative second term in this expression. We note that
the optimal    1   will be higher under cooperative policy than when                              1   is set non-cooperatively.
When acting alone, the policymaker balances the competing motives towards lowering                                        1   for
terms-of-trade manipulation and raising            1   for crisis management reasons. But since terms-
of-trade manipulation is e¤ectively zero under cooperation, the cooperative policymaker will
set a higher   1   which is focused on crisis management policy in the home country.
   Another way to state this is to recall that there are positive welfare spillovers to the foreign
country from raising          1.   The same policy of setting               1   > 0 bene…ts the home country for
crisis management reasons and bene…ts the foreign country for terms-of-trade reasons. When
maximizing home country welfare alone the home country policymaker does not internalize
this spillover e¤ect. This leads us to our last generalized result:


Result 5 When the home country receives the bad shock and its borrowing constraint binds,
      the cooperative equilibrium will set             1   > 0. The             1   set in the cooperative equilibrium
      exceeds the        1   in the non-cooperative equilibrium.




                                                           21
3.2    Period 0 Capital Controls: Prudential

We now focus on the events in period 0, before the realization of the shock. In period 0,
home country agents make consumption plans taking into account the possibility that the
borrowing constraint in period 1 will bind for home country borrowers.
   The home country government may also impose in‡ow or out‡ow taxes in period 0.
Period 0 capital taxes           0   are set before the realization of the shock in period 1. In period 0
the home country planner will set                0   to maximize W ( 0 ;       0)   = U b( 0;     0)   + U s( 0;    0)   and
the foreign country planner will set                 0   to maximize W ( 0 ;        0)   = U ( 0;      0 ).   Capital taxes
in period 0 are chosen taking as given the distribution of endowment shocks in period 1,
as well as the endogenous response of period 1 capital taxes, depending on the degree of
cooperation in capital tax choice that will pertain in period 1.
   In the appendix we derive the optimal period 0 capital tax,                              0,   chosen by the home
country planner in a non-cooperative period 0 equilibrium. It may be expressed as:

                                                                 s
                                     F0 dR0w              R0w    1      dF1   F1 dR1w
                       0    =                    E           s        1     +                                            (15)
                                     R0w dF0                 0 R1
                                                                 w
                                                                        dF0 R1w dF0
                                                                       dp           B0 dR0
                                     E     y1b       cb1;Y      y1b           E
                                                                      dF0           R0 dF0

   Equation (15) has four expressions on the right hand side. The …rst expression describes
the pure terms of trade manipulation channel, since it represents the negative of the elasticity
of the world interest rate in period 0 with respect to the home country net asset position in
                      w
                F0 dR0
period 0,       R0w dF0
                        .   This is the same term that appeared in the expression for the optimal
period 1 capital tax            1,   except here it re‡ects the elasticity of the period 0 interest rate
rather than the period 1 interest rate.
   In period 1, after the shock, the home country becomes a net debtor, F1 < 0, and the
optimal     1   for terms-of-trade manipulation is negative. However in the period 0, before the
shock, home country agents engage in precautionary saving (as shown in the quantitative
section below), and thus F0 > 0. Thus the optimal                        0   for period 0 terms-of-trade manip-


                                                                22
ulation is positive. A positive       restricts the degree of precautionary saving by the private
sector, driving up the world interest rate in time period 0, thus bene…ting home savers.
   The second expression in equation (15) captures the e¤ect of a time period 0 tax on welfare
in time period 1 through its impact on the world interest rate, and through its indirect e¤ect
on net external assets F1 in time period 1. This expression is comprised of two parts. The
               dF1
…rst part,   1 dF0   captures the fact that time 1 capital controls, ceteris paribus, impose an
ine¢ ciency in private sector external borrowing, and it may be desirable to manipulate F0 in
order to correct this. When      1   < 0,(   1   > 0) there is an ine¢ ciently high (low) ex-post time
1 saving by the private sector ceteris paribus, and the time zero planner has an incentive
to set   >0(     0   < 0 ) to reduce (raise) F0 , and thus F1 , to correct this. The second term
captures the strategic incentive of the home country to manipulate the terms of trade terms
in period 1. This could be done by generating a change in initial net foreign assets F0 to
a¤ect the time 1 saving rate, and hence F0 . But since countries have identical preferences,
period 1 savings rates di¤er only due to capital controls, so the distribution of wealth across
countries will have only minor e¤ects on the world interest rate, and so this term will be
small.
   The third expression in (15) captures the pure macro-prudential role of time 0 capital
controls. When        > 0 in period 1, a higher price of non-traded goods relaxes the borrowing
constraint, as we noted above. By setting           0   < 0, the home planner can raise F0 , thus raising
consumption in period 1, and pushing up the price of non-traded goods. This highlights
a key contrast between macro-prudential capital taxes and capital taxes chosen for crisis
management. In period 1, if the borrowing constraint binds, the planner wishes to boost
demand by taxing capital out‡ows, increasing the price of non-traded goods. But in period
0, ex-ante, anticipating a binding constraint, ceteris paribus, the planner wishes to restrict
demand, setting a capital in‡ow tax for macro-prudential purposes, thus raising initial period
1 net external assets and generating a higher price of non-traded goods.
                                             B0 dR0
   The …nal expression in (15), E            R0 dF0
                                                    ,   arises due to distributional factors. When the


                                                        23
transfer is set to equalize the marginal utility of wealth of home borrowers and lenders in
period 2, and the expected value of          is positive, home borrowers have a higher marginal
utility of wealth in period 1, and given B0 < 0, the planner wishes to have lower borrowing
costs for home borrowers in period 0, giving an incentive to set     0   > 0.
     The summary of all the forces driving period 0 capital taxes for the home country repre-
sents a con‡ict between terms of trade manipulation, macro-prudential motives, and distri-
butional motives. In the quantitative analysis below, we show that the critical determinant
of the strength of these various motives is the degree of international cooperation in setting
capital controls.
     In the non-cooperative equilibrium the foreign government will also choose its optimal
capital tax in period 0. In the Appendix, we show that the optimal tax for the foreign
government is expressed as


                               F0 dR0w         R0w   1     dF1   F1 dR1w
                       0   =             E               1     +                                   (16)
                               R0w dF0           0 R1
                                                     w
                                                           dF0   R1w dF0

     Given our discussion of (15), expression (16) has a straightforward interpretation. The
…rst term on the right hand side represents foreign country terms of trade manipulation, and
given F0 < 0, this implies that the foreign country has an incentive to set         0   < 0, or set an
in‡ow tax, in period 0. The second term indicates that, given that the expected value of

 1   is positive, the time zero foreign country planner has an incentive to further set        0   < 0,
increasing initial foreign net foreign assets and thus generating a higher F1 .
     Finally, in a cooperative equilibrium in period 0, assuming that governments in period 1
also follow a cooperative equilibrium, it is easy to show that the terms of trade manipulation
terms will be absent. In this case, the cooperative equilibrium will set        0   = 0 but    0   < 0,
since the cooperative planner will wish to encourage an increase in home country net foreign
assets brought into period 1 in order to relax the borrowing constraint, in expectation. Given
this discussion, we can state the following general results from the analysis of capital taxes
set in period 0.

                                                  24
Result 6 The motivation to manipulate the terms-of-trade leads the home country policy-
        maker to set   0   higher than would obtain in a cooperative equilibrium, and this leads
        to higher home country borrower debt levels in period 0.

Result 7 The motivation to manipulate the terms-of-trade leads the foreign country poli-
        cymaker to set     0   lower than would obtain in a cooperative equilibrium, and this also
        leads to higher home country borrower debt levels in period 0.



4       A quantitative analysis of capital controls

4.1        Calibration

We now turn to numerical simulations of the model to better highlight the key general results
from the last section. When the home country constraint binds in period 1, the underlying
tension between the desire to set         1   < 0 for terms-of-trade manipulation and the desire to
set    1   > 0 for crisis-management leads the home country to su¤er signi…cantly more from
the absence of cooperation. Furthermore, as we will show, this trade-o¤ actually leads to a
higher probability of a binding borrowing constraint relative to a cooperative policy setting.
      We will show in addition that in the pre-shock period 0, the same tension between terms-
of-trade manipulation and the optimal prudential policy that would minimize the chances of
binding borrowing constraint in period 1 leads home country borrowers to hold more debt
than they would have if pre-shock policy were set cooperatively.
      The initial state in the model is given by the beginning level of home country borrower
debt, B b , and the endowments X0 ; X1 ; Y; X2 . The endowments X0 and X2 are normalized to
one. Given this, the endowments X1 and Y are set such that in the symmetric equilibrium
prior to the realization of the shock, the relative price of non-traded goods, p, is equal to one
and the marginal utility of consumption is equal to one in all 3 periods in the deterministic
equilibrium with no shock, A = 1 (this is achieved when X1 =                and Y = 1       ). The



                                                     25
share of traded goods in the period 1 consumption basket                   = 0:2, and the parameter in the
borrowing constraint           = 0:5.
       The country speci…c productivity A = 1               ", where " follows an exponential distribution
with rate parameter 0:02. This implies that the probability that the shock is less than
10% is 0:993. The probability that the shock is large enough to cause the home country
borrowing constraint to bind is determined by the initial level of bond holdings, B b . We set
B b so that in the no tax scenario,        t   =   t   = 0, this probability is 10%. In our benchmark
parameterization this occurs when B b =                0:48755.
       Figures 1-3 plot equilibrium values under various period 1 capital tax scenarios as a
function of the size of the negative shock to the home country. In the …gures we plot four
capital tax scenarios; the unilateral, the non-cooperative, the cooperative, and the no-tax
scenario. The …gures show equilibrium values as the negative shock in the home country
varies from 0 to 10%. The vertical dotted line is the point where the shock starts to bind in
the case where there are no capital taxes,             t   =    t   = 0.


4.2         Period 1: Crisis management

Here we discuss the e¤ect of increasing shock size on period 1 capital controls under the four
policy regimes. When setting period 1 policy, policymakers take period 0 variables as given.
The expectation of the policy regime in period 1 a¤ects precautionary savings behavior in
period 0. To have a clean comparison across the four period 1 policy regimes, we want the
initial period 0 variables to start from the same place. We do this by assuming that period 0
savings rates and thus period 1 initial debt levels are based on the period 1 no-tax scenario,
i.e.    1   =   1   = 0. Later we consider the case where period 0 savings decisions, and thus the
initial state in period 1 are made in expectation of a certain period 1 policy regime.




                                                           26
4.2.1   Unilateral capital controls

We start with the unilateral case, where the home country imposes capital controls in period
1 without a foreign response. The optimal tax rates are shown in Figure 1. The unilateral
case in the …gure is based on the numerical derivation of condition (7), assuming that         1   = 0.
   The home country will begin period 1 with a small amount of precautionary savings
F0 > 0. So for no shock, or a very small negative shock, the home country is a creditor,
F1 > 0and the planner will choose    1   > 0, i.e. a capital out‡ow tax (or in‡ow subsidy). But
as the shock size increases F1 falls, and the home country becomes a net debtor, F1 < 0,
at a shock size around 1%. At this point, the optimal         1   for terms-of-trade manipulation
becomes negative.
   As the shock size increases further, the collateral constraint becomes binding. This occurs
in the no tax regime when the shock size is around 4.6%. At this point the home country has
an incentive to encourage domestic absorption, increase domestic spending on traded goods,
and thereby raise the relative price of non-traded goods and loosening the constraint.
   The con‡ict between terms-of-trade manipulation and crisis management motives for
capital controls leads the unilateral capital in‡ow tax to reverse direction at the point where
the constraint starts to bind. As the shock size becomes greater, the crisis management
response gradually becomes the main motivation for imposing capital taxes         1.   While at the
point where the constraint binds,   1    is still negative, when the shock size is around 7%, the
optimal in‡ow tax reverses sign, and becomes an out‡ow tax.
   From Figure 3, with a small shock, terms-of-trade manipulation is the main motive for
setting capital controls, then unilateral capital controls raise home country welfare but lower
                                                                                         h
foreign country welfare. But at the point where the level of the optimal unilateral          switches
from negative to positive, the e¤ect of unilateral capital controls on foreign country welfare
switches from negative to positive. Home welfare is higher because the capital out‡ow tax
acts so as to ease the binding internal borrowing constraint. Foreign welfare is higher because
the capital out‡ow tax raises world interest rates and the foreign country is a creditor.


                                                27
Thus, in the global context, absent foreign retaliation, crisis management capital controls
are uniformly bene…cial (relative to the no-tax case). But this conclusion depends on a
passive response of the foreign country. In fact, the foreign country will have an incentive to
respond to the home capital controls, and the welfare consequences of the home country’s
use of capital controls are radically di¤erent.


4.2.2    Non-cooperative capital controls

In a non-cooperative game the home and foreign policy-makers respectively set                         1   and    1   to
maximize home and foreign welfare. Since the two countries are large open economies, there
is a strategic interaction between the two policymakers. Optimal policy in the home country
is therefore a schedule of the optimal               1   for a given   1,   the best response function      1   ( 1 ).
Similarly optimal policy in the foreign country is given by the best response function                      1   ( 1 ),
the intersection of these two best response functions in ( 1 ;                 1)   space is the non-cooperative
equilibrium.
   The best response functions are plotted in Figure 4. The red lines are the best response
of the home policymaker,             1   ( 1 ), while the blue lines are for the foreign policymaker,       1   ( 1 ).
The best response functions are positively sloped. Starting from a point where F1 = 0, a rise
in the foreign          1   will increase foreign borrowing, raising the world interest rate and making
the home country a net creditor. Then the home country would want to impose its own
out‡ow tax         1,   to further raise the world interest rate and improve its terms-of-trade. A
similar logic applies to the slope of foreign best response function. The solid best responses
represent the case when there is no shock and A = 1. The dashed lines depict the situation
after the home country receives a negative shock. The …rst panel represents a small shock
of 4%, and the home country constraint does not bind for most points ( 1 ;                      1)   in the plane.
The second panel represents a 10% shock, and the home country constraint binds at every
point ( 1 ;   1)   in the plane.
   When A = 1, due to the precautionary savings motive in period 0 the home country is a


                                                            28
net creditor. Relative to an initial position with F1 = 0, this pushes the home best response
function to the right and the foreign best response down. The non-cooperative equilibrium
then implies   1   > 0 and    1   < 0. But as the negative shock gets larger, the home country
borrows in the …rst period to smooth consumption, and as F1 falls, the home best response
shifts to the left and the foreign best response shifts up. When the shock size is 4%, the
home country is a net debtor. However, the constraint does not bind, and the top panel
of Figure 4 shows the outcome of the non-cooperative equilibrium where home imposes an
in‡ow tax of about 1 percent and foreign chooses and out‡ow tax of around the same size.
   But with a larger shock to the home country’s endowment, the borrowing constraint in
the home country will bind. In this case, the home country best response function shifts to
the right, since it would wish to impose an out‡ow tax, raising the price of collateral (non-
traded goods) and relaxing the borrowing constraint. It will start gradually shifting to the
right as soon as the borrowing constraint binds. The path of the home best response function
as the shock size increases can be summarized by the optimal unilateral     1   in Figure 1 (since
the optimal unilateral   1   is just the point on the best response function when   1   = 0). After
the constraint starts to bind the home best response shifts to the right, it crosses the best
response from the no-shock, A = 1 case when the shock size is about 8%. And when the
shock size is 10%, as shown in the second panel of Figure 4, it is to the right of the no-shock,
A = 1 best response. By contrast, the foreign best response still shifts upwards, since the
foreign country’s capital tax is still driven by terms-of-trade motives alone.
   The key feature of the second panel is the asymmetry. In the case of the small negative
shock, the shifts in the home and foreign best response functions are symmetric. But when
the shock is large enough that the home country borrowing constraint is binding, the terms-
of-trade motive pushes the home best response function to the left and the crisis-management
motive pushes the home best response function to the right. Meanwhile the foreign best
response shifts up by the terms-of-trade motive alone. As a result in the non-cooperative
equilibrium, although both home and foreign may impose out‡ow taxes, we have              1   <   1.




                                                 29
   Returning to the paths of            1   and    1   in Figure 1, we see that the path of   1   in the
non-cooperative equilibrium is again non-monotonic, as in the unilateral case. By contrast
path of the non-cooperative     1   is monotonic. The Figure also contrasts the non-cooperative
equilibrium with the unilateral case where the foreign country does not respond. Given that
its best response function is positively sloped, the home country impose a higher             1   in the
non-cooperative equilibrium than in the unilateral case.
   Figure 2 contrasts the non-cooperative outcomes with those of unilateral capital controls.
Before the constraint starts to bind, the in‡ow tax              1   < 0 imposed by the home country
and the out‡ow tax    1   > 0 imposed by the foreign country cancel and there is no e¤ect on
the world interest rate, R1w . After the constraint starts to bind, the positive out‡ow taxes
imposed by both the home and foreign country raise the world interest rate R1w . Furthermore,
the fact that the equilibrium       1   <    1    means that home country net borrowing is lower in
the non-cooperative equilibrium than in the unilateral case. This reduces home consumption
of the traded good and thus depresses the response of the non-traded goods price p, thus
tightening the home country borrowing constraint. The path of , re‡ecting the tightness of
the borrowing constraint, is higher in the non-cooperative equilibrium than in the unilateral
case.
   The attempt to use capital controls for crisis management purposes is entirely undone in
a non-cooperative equilibrium. The home country sets a positive capital out‡ow tax for a
large shock, even though it is a debtor. But the foreign country also chooses a large out‡ow
tax, which has a negative impact on the home country. As a result, in a non-cooperative
equilibrium, the world interest rate is higher, home country borrowing is lower, the price of
the home country non-traded good is lower, and the collateral constraint is more binding
(higher   ) than if both the home and foreign countries pursued completely open capital
markets with no capital controls at all.
   The asymmetric nature of the adjustment to a shock means that the home country is a
net debtor and faces a domestic …nancial constraint. These two features compete for a capital


                                                        30
control policy response. But the optimal capital tax in the foreign country is unambiguously
positive. As a result, even though the two countries begin with a fully symmetric endowment
process, the country receiving the large negative shock inevitably loses out when it attempts
to implement a crisis management capital controls policy.
   The welfare consequences for the home country in a non-cooperative equilibrium di¤er
starkly from those under unilateral capital controls. This is shown in Figure 3, where again,
welfare is measured relative to the no capital control outcome. While the two countries
are of equal size and the initial equilibrium, before the shock, is fully symmetric, the non-
cooperative equilibrium in the case of binding collateral constraints leaves the home country
much worse o¤, and in fact worse than the case of no capital controls at all. At the same
time, when the collateral constraint binds, the foreign country may actually better o¤ than
in the Laissez Faire case.


4.2.3   Cooperative Capital Controls

Now suppose that the two countries cooperate to choose capital taxes to maximize overall
world welfare. In the cooperative case, taxes will only be used when the borrowing constraint
is binding. In Figure 1 we see that the cooperative outcome involves a home country out‡ow
tax that is imposed as soon as the borrowing constraint binds and rises monotonically in the
size of the shock. When the home constraint binds, the home country will begin to impose
an out‡ow tax. But by raising the world interest rate, this directly bene…ts the foreign
country. Since the home country ignores this positive spillover in a Nash equilibrium, the
cooperative equilibrium calls for a higher home out‡ow tax than would obtain in a non-
cooperative equilibrium. By contrast, the foreign out‡ow tax imposed in a Nash equilibrium
has unambiguously negative spillovers and is set to zero in the cooperative equilibrium. The
higher home out‡ow tax in a cooperative equilibrium implies that the crisis management role
of capital taxes is achieved to a greater extent with cooperation than in a non-cooperative
equilibrium.


                                             31
   The welfare consequences of the cooperative setting of capital controls is shown by the
red line in Figure 3. Cooperative capital controls do the most to manage the binding col-
lateral constraint in the home country, so have the greatest bene…t for world welfare. But
cooperative capital controls have a negative e¤ect on the home country terms-of-trade. In
Figure 3, the cooperative outcome in fact leaves the home country worse o¤ than in the
no-tax case, although still better than in the non-cooperative case. Although not shown in
the Figure, it is easy to set a lump-sum transfer from foreign to home households so that
both the home and foreign countries bene…t from cooperative policy.
   More generally, we can conclude from this and the previous two subsections that the case
can be made the use of capital controls as crisis management policy in a global context only
if a) there is no capital control response on the part of partner countries, or b) if there is
e¤ective policy cooperation between countries in the determination of capital controls. If
neither of these two conditions are satis…ed, capital controls as crisis management represent
a self-defeating response to …nancial crises in the large open economy.


4.2.4   Capital controls causing constraints to bind

We observed above that the nature of the interaction between the two countries changes
when …nancial constraints begin to bind in the home country. But in fact, the timing of
the binding …nancial constraint itself depends upon the capital taxes chosen by the home
and foreign policy-maker. Figure 5 illustrates the home and foreign best response functions
where we have zoomed in towards the critical shock thresholds where the home borrowing
constraint begins to bind. For regions of the shock in this neighborhood, we …nd that the
constraint may bind under one capital tax policy scenario but not bind in another.
   Figure 5 presents the home and foreign best responses when the shock size is 4.35%, just
below the point where the shock would start to bind in the home country in the no-tax case.
The red (blue) line depicts the home (foreign) best response.
   The purple line in the …gure marks the combination of ( 1 ;     1)   where the constraint is


                                             32
just binding. At any point above this line the constraint will bind and at any point below
this line the constraint will not bind. The line has a slope of 1. Holding …xed                 1,   an increase
in     1   will lead the home constraint to bind more tightly. Holding …xed             1,   an increase in      1

will relax the home country borrowing constraint.
       As the shock size increases this purple line moves down, expanding the region where the
home constraint binds.10 Thus, the frontier will …rst cross the non-cooperative equilibrium
at the intersection of the two best response functions, it will then cross the unilateral equi-
librium, where the home best response function crosses the x-axis. Finally it will cross the
cooperative and no-tax equilibrium. The optimal cooperative tax                 1   is marked on this plane
with the red star near the origin.
       This best response graph explains the path of the multiplier on the home country bor-
rowing constraint,          , that we see in Figure 2. As the shock size increases, the constraint
starts to bind …rst in the non-cooperative case, and then it begins to bind in the unilat-
eral case, and …nally it binds in the no-tax and cooperative cases. In the non-cooperative
equilibrium, to manipulate the terms-of-trade, the foreign policymaker raises                        1,   and this
leads the home country constraint to bind at a smaller shock size. Similarly in the both the
non-cooperative and unilateral cases, the desire to manipulate the terms-of-trade implies a
lower value of       1,   and this too makes the home country constraint bind at a smaller shock
size. Again, this points to a further negative aspect of non-cooperative policy-making for
a country attempting to balance terms-of-trade and crisis management motives for capital
controls in a depressed economy.
       Recall that in the calibration we use in these numerical exercises, the shock follows a
exponential distribution. The initial level of debt, B b , is calibrated so the probability of
the constraint binding is 10%. Furthermore, for ease of comparison, in this section we have
assumed that when making period 0 decisions, agents assume that the period 1 policy regime
  10
     The best response functions also shift as the shock size changes, but the movement in the best response
functions is much slower than the movement in the purple frontier line as the shock size changes. The purple
line moves quickly across the plane, so for all intents and purposes, we can assume that in this small region,
the best response functions are …xed.


                                                     33
will be the no-tax regime,    1   =   1   = 0. This ensures that regardless of the period 1 tax
regime, home country agents begin period 1 with the same level of precautionary savings.
   In this case, the constraint starts to bind in the no-tax and cooperative regimes when the
shock is around 4.6%. It begins to bind in the unilateral case when the shock is around 4.4%,
and it begins to bind in the non-cooperative case when the shock is around 4.3%. Given
our assumed shock distribution, under no-tax or cooperative capital controls the probability
of the constraint binding is 10%, but in the unilateral case it raises to 11:1% and in the
non-cooperative case it raises to 11:7%.
   In summary, not only does non-cooperative policy-making eliminate the possible welfare
gains from the use of capital controls for crisis management, leaving the a¤ected country
worse o¤ than if controls were unavailable, but in addition, the frequency of crises is itself
higher in a non-cooperative environment.


4.3     Period 0: Prudential policy

We now focus on the decisions made in period 0, before the resolution of uncertainty over
the home country shock. When making decisions in period 1, both agents and policymakers
take all period 0 variables as given. But the expectation of the policy regime in period 1 will
a¤ect period 0 decisions by both private agents and policy makers.
   We …rst address the question of prudential response in period 0 by private agents, where
they will determine their saving choices based on the expectation for the period 1 shock
outcome as well as the policy response.


4.3.1      Precautionary saving in period 0

Table 1 reports the model’s outcomes for precautionary savings and the resulting probability
of a binding collateral constraint in period 1 under various scenarios for capital taxes in both
periods.
   Panel A in the table reports the probability of a binding collateral constraint, period 0


                                                 34
borrower debt B0b , and period 0 net foreign assets F0 , when there are no period 0 or period
1 capital taxes. Recall that the initial stock of borrower debt B b is calibrated such that
the probability of a binding collateral constraint under our assumed shock process is 10%.
Panel B in the table presents the outcome under the three period 1 policy regimes when
all period 0 variables are held constant across the three regimes. This is the scenario that
was considered in the last subsection. The period 0 debt levels are the same across all 3
scenarios. The di¤erent probabilities of crises under each policy regime are those that were
discussed in the last section.
   Panel C in the table presents the outcome under the three period 1 policy regimes,
but here we allow for agents to adjust their period 0 precautionary savings, anticipating
the policy regime that will pertain in period 1. Agents engage in the most precautionary
savings, with the highest net foreign assets F0 and the lowest level of borrower debt       B0b ,
when they anticipate that period 1 policy will be non-cooperative. The next highest level
of precautionary savings is when they believe period 1 policy will be unilateral. When they
believe period 1 policy will be cooperative, they engage in less precautionary savings than
they would have in the zero tax regime.
   As a result, the probability of a binding constraint is still highest when period 1 policy
is non-cooperative, but the fact that agents engage in extra precautionary savings reduces
the probability from 11.7% to 11%. When agents anticipate that period 1 policy will be
unilateral, their extra savings reduces the probability of a crisis from 11.1% to 10.8%. By
contrast, when it is anticipated that period 1 policy will be cooperative, period 0 precaution-
ary savings will actually fall, and this raises the probability of an ex post crisis from 10% to
10.6%.


4.3.2    Period 0 capital controls

The home and foreign best response functions for setting optimal prudential policy in period
0 are presented in Figure 6. Again the home country best response is represented with the


                                              35
red line, and the foreign country is shown in the blue line. The red star near the origin
represents the optimal ( 0 ;          0)   chosen by the cooperative policymaker.
     As   0   increases or     0   decreases, home country borrower debt in period 0,       B0b , increases.
A positive      0   is a home country out‡ow tax, which will lead home savers to buy fewer foreign
bonds F0 and more domestic bonds                 B0b . The 45 degree lines in the …gure are iso-debt lines.
The level of home country borrower debt,                B0b , is the same at each point along an iso-debt
line. Iso-debt lines to the right represent a higher debt level. The best response functions
and iso-debt lines in Figure 6 are calculated assuming that the period 1 policy regime is
zero-tax.
     Due to the precautionary savings motive, the home country will accumulate a positive
stock of foreign bonds in period 0, F0 > 0. Thus the home country is a net saver. The
home policy-maker thus has an incentive to set an out‡ow tax,                  0   > 0, to manipulate the
terms-of-trade and raise the world interest rate in period 0. Conversely, the foreign country
is a net debtor in period 0 and the foreign policy-maker has an incentive to set                    0   < 0.
This terms-of-trade motive places the home country best response function to the right of
the symmetric zero tax point               =    , and the foreign country best response function below
that point. As a result, in the non-cooperative equilibrium, the home country taxes capital
out‡ows and the foreign country taxes in‡ows. Referring back to equation (15), we noted
that in period zero, the home country faces a trade-o¤ between taxing capital in‡ows and
reducing period 0 borrowing for macro-prudential reasons, as against taxing capital out‡ows
for strategic manipulation of the terms of trade. For this calibration, we see then that the
incentive to raise       0   to manipulate the terms-of-trade is greater than the incentive to reduce

 0   for prudential reasons.
     The point where the home country impulse response crosses the horizontal axis is the
optimal unilateral period 0 tax set by the home country. This point lies on a higher iso-
debt line than the regime where there are no period 0 taxes or where the period 0 tax is
cooperative. The point where the two best responses cross is the non-cooperative equilibrium


                                                        36
in period 0. This point lies on a higher iso-debt line than the unilateral regime.
   The quantitative e¤ect of these period 0 tax regimes is presented in Panel D of Table 1.
As shown by the iso-debt lines in the best response …gure, the level of precautionary saving
is lowest when period 0 policy is non-cooperative. In the zero tax regime, the probability of
a binding constraint is 10%. Unilateral period 0 capital taxes reduces precautionary savings
and raises this probability to 10.2%. The probability increases to 10.3% when period 0
capital taxes are non-cooperative. Thus just as in the analysis of optimal period 1 capital
taxes, this tension between terms-of-trade manipulation and prudential motives ensures that
period 0 capital taxes are not prudential. Just as in the previous section, when policymakers
set period 0 capital taxes unilaterally or non-cooperatively, they will increase the frequency
of crises. But in this case, they do so by reducing period 0 precautionary savings, leading to
less net foreign assets and more internal debt at the beginning of period 1.
   This is the exact counterpart to the period 1 best responses in Figure 5. When discussing
period 1 policy, the terms-of-trade motive led the home country policymaker to pick a policy
that made a crisis more likely (by setting   1   < 0, and thus reducing the price of non-traded
goods). In period 0, the terms-of-trade motive leads the home country policymaker to pick a
policy that makes a crisis more likely (by setting    0   > 0, that thus leading to higher period
0 borrower debt).
   Panel E Table 1 puts together the results of this section and the last section by incorpo-
rating endogenous policy choices in both period 0 and period 1, as well as optimal period 0
precautionary saving by the private sector. Focussing …rst on the case of unilateral capital
controls in period 0 and period 1, we see that the period 0 capital out‡ow tax is three times
that of Panel D, where the unilateral period 0 planner expects no tax in period 1, and like-
wise, the expected period 1 capital in‡ow tax is four times that of Panel C, where the period
1 planner chooses a capital tax, but without any period 0 taxes. We can see the logic behind
this again from equation (15). Given a period 1 in‡ow tax chosen by the period 1 home
country to manipulate the terms of trade, the second expression in equation (15) indicates


                                                 37
that the period 0 planner has an incentive to raise the period 1 out‡ow tax, thus reducing
F0 further than would be warranted by purely period zero terms of trade manipulation. But
this then leads to a lower value of net foreign assets at the beginning of period 1, thus exac-
erbating the incentive for the period 1 planner to manipulate the terms of trade. As a result
we get a magni…ed capital out‡ow tax in period 0 combined with a higher capital in‡ow tax
in period 1. The result is that the frequency of crises jumps substantially from 10 percent
to 11.8 percent.
    When we move from the unilateral to the non-cooperative equilibrium in both periods
(the last row of Panel E), we see that the response of the foreign policy maker leads to an
adjustment of period 0 out‡ow taxes and period 1 in‡ow taxes downward. Period 0 home
country internal borrowing is somewhat reduced, and net foreign assets F0 are increased.
But still the probability of crises is substantially higher than the zero tax case.
    In the case where policy-makers cooperative in both period 0 and period 1, we note that,
as shown above, foreign capital taxes are zero in both periods, but the home country sets
an in‡ow tax for prudential purposes in period 0, and an expected out‡ow tax for crisis
management purposes in period 1. This increases the net foreign assets brought into period
1, and substantially reduces the probability of crises relative to the case of unilateral or
non-cooperative policy-making.



5     Conclusion

This paper highlights the tension between the di¤erent motives to use capital controls in the
large open economy. On one hand, the policymaker in the large open economy desires to use
capital controls for terms-of-trade manipulation, on the other hand they may desire to use
capital controls for crisis management. In the …rst they exploit the fact that by changing
capital taxes they can manipulate the world interest rate, in the second they exploit the fact
that by changing capital taxes they can manipulate the domestic price of non-traded goods.



                                              38
   The fact that the policy maker in the large open economy can use capital controls to
manipulate the world interest rate provides the violation of Korinek’s “…rst welfare theorem
for open economies” (Korinek 2017), and ensures a role for international cooperation. The
results in the capital controls literature concerning optimal macro-prudential capital controls
is derived from small open economy models. Our results show that those same type of
unilateral capital controls would be ine¤ective for macro-prudential policy in the large open
economy. And once we factor in the possibility of strategic interactions and capital controls
imposed by the foreign country, non-cooperative capital controls are not only ine¤ective,
they are harmful to the country in crisis.




                                              39
References
Benigno, G., H. Chen, C. Otrok, A. Rebucci, and E. R. Young (2013): “Financial
 crises and macro-prudential policies,”Journal of International Economics, 89, 453–470.

Benigno, G., H. Chen, C. Otrok, A. Rebucci, and E. R. Young (2016): “Optimal
 capital controls and real exchange rate policies: A pecuniary externality perspective,”
 Journal of Monetary Economics, 84, 147–165.

Bianchi, J. (2011): “Overborrowing and Systemic Externalities in the Business Cycle,”
  American Economic Review, 101(7), 3400–3426.

Bianchi, J., and E. G. Mendoza (2018): “Optimal Time-Consistent Macroprudential
  Policy,”Journal of Political Economy, 126(2), 588–634.

Costinot, A., G. Lorenzoni, and I. Werning (2014): “A theory of capital controls as
 dynamic terms-of-trade manipulation,”Journal of Political Economy, 122(1), 77–128.

Davila, E., and A. Korinek (2017): “Pecuniary externalities in economies with …nancial
 frictions,”The Review of Economic Studies, 85(1), 352–395.

De Paoli, B., and A. Lipinska (2013): “Capital Controls: A Normative Analysis,”
 FRBNY Sta¤ Report No. 600.

Devereux, M. B., E. R. Young, and C. Yu (2018): “Capital controls and monetary
 policy in sudden-stop economies,”Journal of Monetary Economics.

Edwards, S. (1999): “How e¤ective are capital controls?,” Journal of Economic Perspec-
 tives, 13(4), 65–84.

Farhi, E., and I. Werning (2014): “Dilemma Not Trilemma?; Capital Controls and
  Exchange Rates with Volatile Capital Flows,”IMF Economic Review, 62(4), 569–605.

       (2016): “A theory of macroprudential policies in the presence of nominal rigidities,”
  Econometrica, 84(5), 1645–1704.

Heathcote, J., and F. Perri (2016): “On the desirability of capital controls,” IMF
 Economic Review, 64(1), 75–102.

International Monetary Fund (2012): “The Liberalization and Management of Capital
  Flows: An Institutional View,”.

Jeanne, O., and A. Korinek (2010): “Excessive Volatility in Capital Flows: A Pigouvian
  Taxation Approach,”American Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings), 100(2), 403–
  407.

        (2013): “Macroprudential regulation versus mopping up after the crash,” NBER
  Working Paper No. 18675.



                                            40
        (2018): “Managing Credit Booms and Busts: A Pigouvian Taxation Approach,”
  Journal of Monetary Economics.

Korinek, A. (2017): “Currency Wars or E¢ cient Spillovers,”mimeo.

         (2018): “Regulating capital ‡ows to emerging markets: An externality view,”
  Journal of International Economics, 111, 61–80.

Korinek, A., and D. Sandri (2016): “Capital controls or macroprudential regulation?,”
 Journal of International Economics, 99, S27–S42.

Korinek, A., and A. Simsek (2016): “Liquidity trap and excessive leverage,” American
 Economic Review, 106(3), 699–738.

Lorenzoni, G. (2008): “Ine¢ cient credit booms,”The Review of Economic Studies, 75(3),
 809–833.

Ma, C., and A. Rebucci (2019): “Capital Controls: A Brief Survey of the New Literature,”
 mimeo.

Magud, N. E., C. M. Reinhart, and K. S. Rogoff (2018): “Capital controls: myth
 and reality,”Annals of Economics and Finance, 19(1), 1–47.

Mendoza, E. G. (2010): “Sudden stops, …nancial crises, and leverage,”American Economic
 Review, 100(5), 1941–1966.

Schmitt-Grohe, S., and M. Uribe (2016): “Downward nominal wage rigidity, currency
  pegs, and involuntary unemployment,”Journal of Political Economy, 124(5), 1466–1514.




                                          41
A       Appendix

In this appendix we …rst present the full list of the 40 variables and equations in the model.
We then solve the planner’s problem for the optimal                                   1    or       0.




A.1       Full list of model variables and equations

This has been updated with the addition of period 0
    There are 40 variables in the model. 26 in periods 1 and 2: cb2;X ; cb1;X ; cb1;Y ; cs2;X ; cs1;X ;
                                                                             b        b        s         s
cs1;Y ; c2;X ; c1;X ; c1;Y ; R1 ; R1 ; B1b ; B1s ; B1 ; F1 ; F1 ;            1;       2;       1;        2;   1;    2;       ; p; p ; T; R1W and
                                                                                                     b        s
14 in period 0: cb0;X ; cs0;X ; c0;X ; R0 ; R0 ; B0b ; B0s ; B0 ; F0 ; F0 ;                          0;       0;    0;   R0W
    The 40 model equations are given by:


                                                                                      b
                                                     cb2;X : cb2;X           =        2




                                                                                           1
                                             1                               1                                      1          b
                         cb1;X :                 1       cb1;X       cb1;Y                                cb1;X          =     1
                                        (1       )

                                                                                  1
                                        1                              1                                                 1         b
                 cb1;Y    :                  1       cb1;X       cb1;Y                     (1             ) cb1;Y            =p    1
                                   (1        )


                                                                                      s
                                                     cs2;X : cs2;X           =        2




                                                                                           1
                                             1                               1                                      1          s
                         cs1;X :                 1       cs1;X       cs1;Y                                cs1;X          =     1
                                        (1       )

                                                                                  1
                                        1                              1                                                 1         s
                 cs1;Y    :                  1       cs1;X       cs1;Y                     (1             ) cs1;Y            =p    1
                                   (1        )



                                                     c2;X : c2;X             =        2


                                                                  42
                                                                                   1
                         1                                             1                         1
   c1;X :                     1          c1;X                 c1;Y                      c1;X         =   1
                 (1           )

                                                                           1
                 1                                             1                                     1
c1;Y :                    1        c1;X               c1;Y                         (1   ) c1;Y           =p   1
            (1           )



                                         R1 : B1b = B1s



                                          R1 : B1 = 0


                                                      b
                                                      1                        b
                                      B1b :                        =           2
                                                      R1


                                                          s
                                                          1            s
                                         B1s      :           =        2
                                                      R1


                                                          1
                                         B1 :                  =       2
                                                      R1


                                              s
                                              1   (1 +         1)                  s
                                  F1 :                                 =           2
                                                   R1W


                                              1   (1 +         1)
                                  F1 :                                 =           2
                                                   R1W


                     b                                    B1b
                     1   : cb1;X + pcb1;Y +                   = xb1 + py1b + B0b
                                                          R1


                                  b
                                  2   : cb2;X = xb2 + B1b + T



                                                          43
          s                        B1s                     F1
          1   : cs1;X + pcs1;Y +       + (1 +         1)       +   1   = xs1 + py1s + B0s + F0
                                   R1                      R1W


                                   s
                                   2   : cs2;X = xs2 + B1s + F1          T



                                   B1                      F1
      1   : c1;X + p c1;Y +           + (1 +          1)       +   1   = x1 + p y1 + B0 + F0
                                   R1                      R1W



                                       2   : c2;X = x2 + B1 + F1



                                       B1b
                               :           =          xb1 + py1b or      =0
                                       R1



                                       p : cb1;Y + cs1;Y = y1s + y1b



                                               p : c1;Y = y1



                                                       s       b
                                                T :    2   =   2




                                              R1W : F1 = F1

and


                                                                   b
                                           cb0;X : cb0;X       =   0




                                                                   s
                                           cs0;X : cs0;X       =   0


                                                       44
                    c0;X : c0;X                 =       0




                          R0 : B0b = B0s



                             R0 : B0 = 0


                                 b
                                 0                  b
                    B0b :            = E            1
                              R0


                                 s
                    B0s :        0
                                     = E ( s1 )
                                R0


                                 0
                    B0 :             = E ( 1)
                                R0


                         s
                             (1 +     0)
             F0 :        0
                                           = E ( s1 )
                              R0W


                         0   (1 +     0)
             F0 :                          = E ( 1)
                              R0W


                b                 B0b
                0   :   cb0;X   +     = xb0 + B b
                                  R0


s               B0s                        F0
0   : cs0;X +       + (1 +            0)       +            0   = xs0 + B s
                R0                         R0W


                        B0                      F0
     0   : c0;X +          + (1 +          0)       +            0   = x0
                        R0                      R0W



                                     45
                                                            R0W : F0 = F0


A.2       Planner’s problem

The home country policymaker will choose                                 t   to maximize the sum of home saver and
borrower welfare subject to the saver and borrower budget constraints in each period and
the borrower borrowing constraint. The Lagrangian is given by (where for brevity we have
gone ahead and made the substitution based on the domestic bond market clearing Bth =
Btb;h =   Bts;h and B h = B b;h =                  B s;h for t = 0; 1):




                                                            2                                                          2
   W = u cs0;X + u cs1;X ; cs1;Y +                              u cs2;X + u cb0;X + u cb1;X ; cb1;Y +                      u cb2;X
                 b                 B0
                 0       cb0;X +            xb0      B
                                   R0
                     b                             B1
                     1    cb1;X + pcb1;Y +                  xb1    py1b       B0
                                                   R1
                 2 b
                   2       cb2;X     xb2      B1        T
                 s                  B0 (1 + 0 ) F0
                 0       cs0;X          +          + 0 xs0 + B
                                    R0      R0W
                     s                      B1 (1 + 1 ) F1
                     1    cs1;X    + pcs1;Y    +           + 1 xs1                                    py1s + B0   F0
                                            R1      R1W
                 2 s
                   2       cs2;X     xs2 + B1           F1 + T
                          B1
                                        xb1 + py1b
                          R1

                                                                                            t Ft
    We can go ahead and make the substitution                                    t   =     RtW
                                                                                                 ,   since the planner internalizes
the fact that tax revenues are rebated back to savers lump sum.


A.2.1     Choice of ex-post capital controls                                 1


                                           dW
When taking the derivative                 d 1
                                               ,   since the choice of               1   is made in period 1, the planner will
                                                                                                                             b    s
take all period 0 variables as given: cb0;X ; cs0;X ; c0;X ; R0 ; R0 ; B0b ; B0s ; B0 ; F0 ; F0 ;                            0;   0;   0;



                                                                    46
R0W . Terms involving the derivatives of cs1;X ; cs1;Y ; cs2;X ; cb1;X ; cb1;Y ; cb2;X ; B1 will cancel since
households are already optimizing with respect to these variables. This leaves the derivatives
of p; F1 ; R1 ; R1W since those variables are not internalized by households, or they are not
fully internalized by households (in the case of F1 , households do not internalize the rebating
of the tax revenue)



                    dW               b                           s                   dp
                            =        1    cb1;Y       y1b        1   cs1;Y   y1s
                    d 1                                                              d 1
                                     b       B1 dR1
                                              s               s 1                                s   dF1
                                 +   1        1  2    +       1 w +                              2
                                            (R1 ) d 1          R1                                    d 1
                                             w
                                      F1 dR         B1 dR1
                                 + s1 w 2 1
                                     (R1 ) d 1     (R1 )2 d 1
                                       dp
                                 + y1b
                                       d 1

    And after some rearranging this becomes:



                      dW                      b                              s                       dp
                             =           R1   2   cb1;Y      y1b       R1    2   cs1;Y     y1s
                      d 1                                                                            d 1
                                          b       s   B1 dR1
                                 +        2       2
                                                      R1 d 1
                                             s 1         s  dF1              s    F1 dR1w
                                 +           1 w +       2        +          1
                                              R1             d 1                 (R1w )2 d 1
                                                                 dp
                                 +       y1b     cb1;Y y1b
                                                               d 1

    The …rst two lines in this derivative represent the planner’s use of                                   1   for domestic re-
distribution, either by changing p, and thus a¤ecting saver and borrower welfare due to
di¤erences in consumption and endowments of the non-traded good, cb1;Y                                         y1b and cs1;Y   y1s .
Or by changing R1 and thus a¤ecting saver and borrower welfare given that borrowers hold a
stock of bonds B1 < 0. The use of the transfer T is meant to eliminate the planner’s motive
                                                                                           b          s
to use   1   for domestic redistribution, where T is set such that                         2     =    2.   Thus the transfer


                                                            47
will eliminate the …rst two lines of this derivative.
   The third line of this derivative represents the planner’s use of                          1    for terms-of-trade
manipulation.
   And …nally the fourth line in the derivative represents the macroprudential motive for
the use of   1.   Note that this motive is only relevant when the constraint is binding and thus
  > 0. By increasing      1   the planner will reduce exports of the traded good in the …rst period
                                                                                  dp
and thus increase the relative price of the non-traded good,                     d 1
                                                                                         > 0. This increase in the
relative price of the non-traded good will lead to a loosening of the home country borrowing
constraint by increasing the value of the borrower’s collateral, y1b . But at the same time
the increase in p will either tighten or loosen the borrowing constraint depending on whether
the borrower consumes more or less of the non-traded good than their endowment, cb1;Y                               y1b .
   Since the …rst two lines in this derivative cancel out due to the transfer, the maximization
                                                                                                  R1w
condition reduces to (after factoring in the equilibrium conditions R1 =                          1+
                                                                                                        and the saver’s
…rst order condition with respect to F1 ):

                        s
                  dW                dF1   F1 dR1w                                            dp
                      = 1w        1     +                  +       y1b   cb1;Y     y1b           =0
                  d 1  R1           d 1 R1w d 1                                              d 1

A.2.2    Choice of ex-ante capital controls                    0


                                  dW
When taking the derivative        d 0
                                      ,   the derivatives with respect to cb0;X ; cs0;X ; B0b ; B0s ; cs1;X ; cs1;Y ;
cs2;X ; cb1;X ; cb1;Y ; cb2;X ; B1 will cancel since households are optimizing with respect to these
variables. This leaves the derivatives of p; F1 ; R1 ; R1W ; R0 ; F0 ; R0W since households do not
internalize these variables, or in the case of F0 and F1 , do not fully internalize (since they
do not internalize the rebate of the tax revenue): (all period 1 and 2 variables are expected
values since this is taken before the shock in period 1)




                                                         48
             dW              b                           s                   dp
                    =        1   cb1;Y        y1b        1   cs1;Y   y1s
             d 0                                                             d 0
                             b        s B1 dR1           s 1                             s   dF1
                        +    1        1     2    +       1 w +                           2
                                       (R1 ) d 0          R1                                 d 0
                                        w
                            s F1 dR1           B1 dR1
                        +   1       2
                              (R1w ) d 0      (R1 )2 d 0
                                  dp
                        +     y1b
                                  d 0
                              b      s  B0 dR0           s 1                             s   dF0
                        +     0      0      2    +       0 w +                           1
                                       (R0 ) d 0          R0                                 d 0
                                        w
                            s F0 dR0
                        +   0
                              (R0w )2 d 0

And after some rearranging this becomes:



              dW                      b                              s                       dp
                    =            R1   2   cb1;Y      y1b       R1    2   cs1;Y     y1s
              d 0                                                                            d 0
                                  b       s B1 dR1
                        +         2       2
                                            R1 d 0
                                   s 1         s  dF1                s    F1 dR1w
                        +          1 w +       2        +            1
                                    R1             d 0                   (R1w )2 d 0
                                                       dp
                        +      y1b     cb1;Y y1b
                                                     d 0
                             2               s B0 dR0                   B0 dR0
                        +      R1 b2         2          +
                                               R0 d 0                   R0 d 0
                                                                                 w
                                   s 1         s  dF0                s F0 dR0
                        +          0 w +       1        +            0
                                    R0             d 0                 (R0w )2 d 0

Where we are making the substitution




                                                    49
            b       s    B0 dR0                                   b           s    B0 dR0
            0       0              =                              1           1
                        (R0 )2 d 0                                                 R0 d 0
                                                                  b           s    B0 dR0        B0 dR0      B0 dR0
                                                 =                1           1                         +
                                                                                   R0 d 0        R0 d 0      R0 d 0
                                                                  b                  s B 0 dR 0      B0 dR 0
                                                 =                1                  1          +
                                                                                       R0 d 0        R0 d 0
                                                          2               b         s B0 dR0        B0 dR0
                                                 =            R1          2         2           +
                                                                                       R0 d 0       R0 d 0

                                  b        s                                              dW
  Using the fact that             2   =    2,    the expression for                       d 0
                                                                                                 reduces to:



      s                                                                                                                  s
dW                dF1  F1 dR1w                                                                   dp             B0 dR0                    dF0  F0 dR0w
    = 1w        1     + w      +                      y1b              cb1;Y        y1b              +                 + 0w           0       + w           =0
d 0  R1           d 0 R1 d 0                                                                     d 0            R0 d 0 R0                 d 0 R0 d 0

  So the optimal        0   is:



                               s
          F0 dR0w       R0w    1                  dF1   F1 dR1w                                                                  dp           B0 dR0
  0   =                     s                   1     +                                         y1b     cb1;Y        y1b
          R0w dF0              w
                            0 R1                  dF0 R1w dF0                                                                   dF0           R0 dF0


  The …rst order condition of world welfare with respect to                                                  0   is:

dW w                    b                                     s                            dp                                   dp
     =           R1     2   cb1;Y         y1b        R1       2       cs1;Y        y1s         +         1   c1;Y          y1
 d 0                                                                                       d 0                                  d 0
                    b       s  B1 dR1        B dR1
           +        2       2          + 1 1
                               R1 d 0        R1 d 0
                      s 1         s  dF1             1                                                dF1        s    F1 dR1w                F1 dR1w
           +          1 w +       2        +      1 w +                                     2             +      1               +        1
                       R1             d 0           R1                                                d 0            (R1w )2 d 0            (R1w )2 d 0
                                          dp
           +      y1b     cb1;Y y1b
                                        d 0
                2               s B0 dR0         B0 dR0
           +      R1 b2         2          +
                                  R0 d 0         R0 d 0
                      s 1         s  dF0             1                                                dF0        s    F0 dR0w                  F0 dR0w
           +          0 w +       1        +      0 w +                                     1             +      0               +        0
                       R0             d 0           R0                                                d 0            (R0w )2 d 0              (R0w )2 d 0


                                                                              50
which simpli…es to:



                    s
            dW w    1       dF1         s    F1 dR1w                F1 dR1w
                 =        1     +       1                +       1
             d 0   R1w      d 0             (R1w )2 d 0            (R1w )2 d 0
                                                      dp
                      +   y1b   cb1;Y         y1b
                                                     d 0
                          B0 dR0
                      +
                          R0 d 0
                            s 1               s   dF0        s    F0 dR0w           F0 dR0w
                      +     0 w +             1       +      0               +   0
                             R0                   d 0            (R0w )2 d 0       (R0w )2 d 0




                                                  51
Table 1: The probability of a binding constraint in period 1 and period 0 debt levels under
di¤erent capital control regimes.

                                              0        0   E ( 1)     E ( 1)    Crisis Prob.       B0b       F0
                             Zero tax    0:0000   0:0000   0:0000     0:0000          10:0     0:4810    0:0021

                Optimal Period 1 Tax
           (hold per 0 variables …xed)
                        Unilateral   1    0:000    0:000     0:162     0:000          11:1     0:4810    0:0021
                      Cooperative    1    0:000    0:000     0:124     0:000          10:0     0:4810    0:0021
                 Non-cooperative     1    0:000    0:000     0:066     0:243          11:7     0:4810    0:0021

               Optimal Period 1 Tax
 (precautionary a¤ect per 0 variables)
                        Unilateral   1    0:000    0:000     0:095     0:000          10:8     0:4808    0:0026
                      Cooperative    1    0:000    0:000     0:132     0:000          10:6     0:4814    0:0015
                 Non-cooperative     1    0:000    0:000     0:009     0:154          11:0     0:4806    0:0028

                Optimal Period 0 Tax
           (assume Per 1 is zero tax)
                        Unilateral   0    0:062    0:000     0:000     0:000          10:2     0:4812    0:0015
                      Cooperative    0    0:001    0:000     0:000     0:000          10:0     0:4810    0:0021
                 Non-cooperative     0    0:052    0:022     0:000     0:000          10:3     0:4812    0:0014

        Optimal Period 0 and 1 Tax
                (tax in both periods)
                Unilateral   0 and   1    0:168    0:000     0:358     0:000          11:8     0:4812 0:0009
              Cooperative    0 and   1    0:054    0:000     0:129     0:000          10:3     0:4813 0:0020
         Non-cooperative     0 and   1    0:046    0:123     0:078     0:251          11:5     0:4808 0:0021

Note: All 0 ,E ( 1 ) ; and crisis probabilities in the table are in percentage point terms.




                                                     52
Figure 1: Optimal home and foreign capital taxes as a function of the size of the negative
shock to the home country.




Notes: The blue line represents the scenario where the home country tax is set to maximize home country
welfare, and the foreign tax is equal to zero. The green line represents the scenario where home and foreign
tax rates are set non-cooperatively. The red line represents the cooperative scenario. The vertical dotted
line marks the point where the home country borrowing constraint begins to bind in the no-tax scenario.



                                                    53
Figure 2: Various home and foreign endogenous variables as a function of the size of the
negative shock to the home country,




Notes: The black line represents the scenario where home and foreign taxes are equal to zero. The blue line
represents the scenario where the home country tax is set to maximize home country welfare, and the
foreign tax is equal to zero. The green line represents the scenario where home and foreign tax rates are set
non-cooperatively. The red line represents the cooperative scenario. The vertical dotted line marks the
point where the home country borrowing constraint begins to bind in the no-tax scenario.



                                                     54
Figure 3: Home and foreign country welare as a function of the size of the negative shock to
the home country,




Notes: Graphs plot the di¤erence in welfare from the no-tax regime. The blue line represents the case of
unilateral home capital taxes. The green line represents non-cooperative home and foreign taxes, and the
red line represents cooperative capital taxes. The vertical dotted line marks the point where the home
country borrowing constraint begins to bind in the no-tax scenario.




                                                   55
Figure 4: Home and foreign best responses following a negative shock in the home country.




Notes: The red lines are the best responses of the home country tax to a given foreign country tax, and the
blue lines are the best responses of the foreign country tax to a given home country tax. The solid best
response lines are the pre-shock best responses, the dashed best response lines are the best responses after
a negative shock to the home country.




                                                    56
Figure 5: Home and foreign best responses following a negative shock in the home country.
The shock size is calibrated so the …gure zooms in on the region where the home constraint
starts to bind.




Notes: The red line is the best response of the home country tax to a given foreign country tax, and the
blue line is the best response of the foreign country tax to a given home country tax. The purple diagonal
line marks the frontier where above the purple line the home country borrowing constraint binds and below
the frontier the borrowing constraint does not bind.



                                                   57
Figure 6: Home and foreign best responses in period 0. Best responses are calculated assumin
the post-shock policy regime is zero-tax.




Notes: The red line is the best response of the home country tax to a given foreign country tax, and the
blue line is the best response of the foreign country tax to a given home country tax. The black, blue, and
green 45 degree lines are iso-debt lines, where the period 0 level of borrower debt is the same at each point
along the line. Iso-debt lines to the right imply a higher level of period 0 borrower debt.




                                                     58
