                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


            TESTING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF CONSUMER FINANCIAL
       DISCLOSURE: EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM SAVINGS ACCOUNTS

                                         Paul D. Adams
                                          Stefan Hunt
                                       Christopher Palmer
                                        Redis Zaliauskas

                                      Working Paper 25718
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25718


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2019


For helpful comments, we thank our discussants Xiao Liu and Daniel Martin; participants at
Advances with Field Experiments 2018 Conference, RAND Behavioral Finance Forum, CFPB
Research Conference, Boulder Summer Conference on Consumer Financial Decision Making,
NBER Summer Institute (Law & Economics); and Joseph Briggs, Michael Grubb, Arvind
Krishnamurthy, Sheisha Kulkarni, David Laibson, Peter Lukacs, Brigitte Madrian, Adair Morse,
Philipp Schnabl, and Jonathan Zinman. Matthew Ward and Tim Burrell provided invaluable help
with execution. We thank Margarita Alvarez-Echandi, Sam Hughes, Tammy Lee, and Lei Ma for
their research assistance. This research was conducted in conjunction with the Financial Conduct
Authority, where Adams, Hunt, and Zaliauskas were employed during the trials. The views
expressed in this paper are those of the authors and not the Financial Conduct Authority, which
has reviewed the paper for human subjects compliance and the release of confidential
information. All errors and omissions are the authors’ own. This RCT was registered in the
American Economic Association Registry for randomized control trials under trial number
AEARCTR-0004053. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25718.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Paul D. Adams, Stefan Hunt, Christopher Palmer, and Redis Zaliauskas. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Testing the Effectiveness of Consumer Financial Disclosure: Experimental Evidence from
Savings Accounts
Paul D. Adams, Stefan Hunt, Christopher Palmer, and Redis Zaliauskas
NBER Working Paper No. 25718
March 2019, Revised May 2020
JEL No. D14,D83,E21,G28,M38

                                          ABSTRACT

While popular with policymakers, most evidence on consumer financial disclosure’s
effectiveness studies borrowing decisions (where optimality is unclear) or lab experiments (where
attention is not scarce). We provide field evidence from randomized-controlled trials with
124,000 savings-account holders at five UK depositories. Treated consumers were disclosed
varying degrees of salient information about alternative products, including one with their current
provider strictly dominating their current product. Despite switching taking roughly 15 minutes
and the moderate average potential gains ($190/year), switching is rare across disclosure designs
and depositors. We find pessimistic beliefs drive disclosure inattention and limit disclosure’s
effectiveness, helping explain deposit stickiness.

Paul D. Adams                                    Christopher Palmer
Autoriteit Financiele Markten                    MIT Sloan School of Management
Netherlands                                      100 Main Street, E62-639
paulduncanadams@gmail.com                        Cambridge, MA 02142
                                                 and NBER
Stefan Hunt                                      cjpalmer@mit.edu
Competition and Markets Authority
UK                                               Redis Zaliauskas
stefanhunt@gmail.com                             Lloyds Banking Group
                                                 48 Chiswell Street
                                                 London
                                                 United Kingdom
                                                 redis.zaliauskas@gmail.com




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/4053
1       Introduction
In practice, consumer choice is sticky. Across an array of decisions including insurance,
utilities contracts, pension plans, mortgage choice, and others cited below, individuals act as
if they are reluctant to reoptimize. The stickiness of bank deposits in particular has featured
prominently in empirical banking models (e.g., Drechsler et al., 2018). Such inertia poses a
challenge for consumer disclosure, the (often mandated) practice of providing information to
consumers to support their decision making. Informational disclosures have been one of the
most popular types of regulatory intervention in retail financial markets across the world,
owing in part to their simplicity and relatively low cost.1 Yet despite this policy reliance
on disclosure, little is known about how the delivery of disclosures actually affects financial
behavior because of a variety of practical and methodological challenges. Generally, attempts
to assess disclosure effectiveness suffer from a joint-hypothesis problem, where the researcher
must both model optimal choice and measure deviations therefrom. For example, estimates
of whether mortgage or credit-card disclosures are effective are confounded by the problem
of first needing to determine what the “right” debt choice is for a given consumer in order to
be able to learn whether the disclosure has moved decisions closer to that optimum.2
    In this paper, we are the first to use a large-scale field experiment with consumers in an
advanced economy to evaluate the effectiveness of various disclosure designs aimed at sup-
porting consumer choice across savings products. We partnered with five UK retail financial
institutions to conduct a series of randomized-controlled trials (RCTs) testing the extent to
which disclosures about comparable-product interest rates would be useful to consumers. By
experimentally varying disclosures consumers received about their savings account, compet-
ing products, and the switching process, we provide evidence on the origins of both deposit
stickiness and inattention to mandated disclosures. Over 124,000 savings account holders
were randomly assigned into treatment and control groups, and we collect rich administra-
tive data on account balances, demographics, and switching behavior from each of the five
financial institutions. Consumers in the treatment groups received various forms of informa-
tion about their account. Comparisons of outcomes for treatment and control groups within
each trial provide internally valid estimates of the absolute importance of various frictions
in the optimization process. Comparing effects across trials, each operating in a different
context with a different customer mix, allows us to benchmark the external validity of our
experimental results and study the importance of disclosure context. Finally, we conduct
follow-up surveys with a subsample to supplement our analysis of behavioral responses with
    1
    See Loewenstein et al. (2014) for an overview of the economic motivation for disclosure.
    2
    For an example of lower debt not necessarily being optimal, Medina (2018) finds that interventions that
induce debt repayment can cause financial distress elsewhere on household balance sheets.

                                                    2
direct explanations for consumer behavior.
    Importantly, this straightforward disclosure setting with a relatively simple financial
product is free of many of the confounds present studying other markets. Compared to
the borrowing context, savings-account decisions are a financial setting where normative
statements about optimal choices are relatively straightforward to make. A further virtue of
our design is that we analyze the behavior of consumers presented with the opportunity to
switch to an equivalent savings account from their current provider that differs only in the
amount of interest it pays.3 Given this option, at a minimum, switching to a higher-paying
equivalent product at the same institution theoretically dominates doing nothing apart from
the time cost (15 minutes on average) and cognitive cost (reduced in some trials) spent
to switch products. However, despite modest gains from switching (an average increase in
first-year interest income of $190), only 8.9% of consumers across all of our trials at baseline
take any action to move their savings account balances.4 While we explore several possible
rationalizations of this inertia, we emphasize that many explanations for infrequent account
switching are also impediments to the effectiveness of consumer disclosure to incumbent
account holders.5
    To test among explanations for low baseline switching levels, our trials are intended to
address various frictions consumers face when deciding whether to attend to a disclosure.
Our experimental variation allows us to examine the importance of (i) increasing the return
on attention by simplifying and improving the precision of comparison across products, (ii)
lowering switching costs through process improvements, and (iii) increasing attention to the
switching decision itself to promote active choice. If the non-monetary cost of information
acquisition has led to rational inattention, then providing information through mandated
disclosure has the potential to improve consumer outcomes.6 However, if easily acquired
salient information on opportunities to increase interest income does not materially affect
consumer behavior, this points towards behavioral frictions limiting the usefulness of disclo-
sure. For example, if the source of inertia is the psychological cost of focusing on financial
decisions, then mandated disclosure may even overwhelm consumers with an onslaught of

   3
      As we detail below, this internal switching option allows consumer to keep the same ATM and branch
network, account linkages, etc.
    4
      Because introductory interest rates could decrease after one year, our gains from switching calculations
focus on the first year of additional interest income as a lower bound.
    5
      For example, consider the possibility that consumers do not switch their accounts because they skep-
tically view the provided information to be “too good to be true.” Such an explanation for low switching
reinforces our thesis; while disclosure could be designed to partially mitigate these effects, the potential
existence of such beliefs highlights challenges to consumer disclosure’s effectiveness.
    6
      In a rational inattention framework, consumers may be inert when they believe that the net benefits
of action to be small or that a signal of the magnitude of those net benefits will be imprecise or costly to
obtain (for an overview, see Gabaix, 2019).

                                                      3
notices and fine print. Similarly, if cognitive processing costs are structured in a way that
consumers choose to either pay attention to all disclosures or no disclosures, then even salient
mandated disclosures may not be enough for consumers to pay the ongoing cost of vigilance.
    Cash savings accounts are the most popular formal household savings vehicle in the UK:
93% of consumers have a savings account amounting to total holdings of £700 billion (Fi-
nancial Conduct Authority, 2015), equivalent to 37% of UK GDP.7 With an average account
balance of £4,900, instant-access savings accounts, in particular, are among the simplest
financial products—they are usually not used for routine transactions and their primary fea-
ture is the interest rate payable on the balance (although we discuss other relevant dimensions
of product differentiation below). Robust deposit insurance also means that counterparty
risk is a non-factor for the majority of consumers—UK depositors’ savings accounts are cur-
rently insured against bank failure up to £85,000. Yet even though most consumers report
being most concerned with obtaining the highest possible interest rate (Financial Conduct
Authority, 2015), significant differences in interest rates persist on similar accounts both
across providers and within providers across nearly identical products. Many providers of-
fer higher interest rates on a marketed set of accounts (known as the “front book”) while
reducing the rates on legacy accounts (“back book”). In principle, higher front-book rates
may persuade consumers, especially those with back-book rates, to switch. Although there
is significant heterogeneity across providers, we find that switching is not widespread—most
consumers seldom switch their savings accounts and thereby forgo higher interest earnings,
missing out on an average of around 120 bp higher rates in our data.
    Estimates of how disclosure actually works in practice are most externally valid when
tested in the field, where, among other important considerations, disclosure has many com-
petitors for consumer attention.8 While the typical disclosure may apprise consumers of a
particularly unlikely state of the world, we test one with quantifiable and certain impacts
on interest income. Although an observational comparison of baseline switching rates across
providers can be informative, an RCT further controls consumer selection by precisely ma-
nipulating disclosure across treatment and control in a way that permits robust comparison
across design alternatives. Because treatment groups are on average identical to control
groups by virtue of random assignment, we can causally attribute any differential account
switching to the amount and form of information they receive to understand the relative
importance of each component of inattention.
    Previewing our results, even among consumers that were provided with reliable informa-

   7
     According to SCF data, 51% of U.S. households had a savings account in 2016 with aggregate holdings
around $2 trillion.
   8
     See Harrison and List (2004) for a discussion of the virtues of field versus laboratory experiments.

                                                   4
tion about more attractive interest rates (including at the same provider), there is still a low
level of switching. While we find interesting heterogeneity in effectiveness across designs,
the average disclosure increased switching behavior by 0.7 percentage points, from 8.7% in
the control group to 9.5% in the treatment group. Survey results complement our precisely
estimated, small effects of disclosure with evidence on consumer inattention, beliefs, and
preferences over non-price features. In particular, consumers report overly pessimistic be-
liefs about whether they could earn significantly higher interest income by switching and how
time consuming the switching process would be. Given these beliefs, many consumers report
ignoring the disclosure, failing to update their priors on the net benefits of reoptimizing their
savings account and highlighting how difficult it is for traditional informational disclosures
to help consumers in real-world financial settings.
    What are the strongest drivers of consumer inertia and sticky deposits? Our results
are most consistent with models with a fixed-cost of attention rather than a search cost
incurred for each price quote attained. Process improvements (Trial 3) led to modest in-
creases in switching, as did well-timed reminders (Trial 4) even though the monetary gains
to switching are nearly identical just before and after a rate decrease. A just-sign-here re-
turn switching form increased switching to 12% from a baseline of 3%, and timely emails
and text messages increased switching by 4-5 percentage points. Particularly prominent dis-
closures—e.g., readable front-page information on better available products (Trial 1)—had
marginal positive effects, raising switching from 3% to 6%, while disclosures not on the front
page of a mailing had no effect (Trial 2).
    Comparing control-group switching rates across trials, a few notable patterns emerge. In
general, switching rates were higher for trials with younger consumers, although the effect of
age on switching was not consistent across trials. Whether having a checking account with
the same provider or having a large savings account balance increased or decreased switching
also varied across trials. Switching in the control group was highest for Trial 4 that involved
the impending expiration of a one-year introductory rate. Average account balances (and
thus the gain from switching) were also largest for Trial 4, suggesting that the particular
savings account studied in this trial attracted an attentive and responsive set of consumers
compared with the other trials, where the average account had been open for 5-16 years.
    However, despite significant heterogeneity in depositor characteristics across the trials, we
find only weak evidence for individual-level heterogeneity in these effects. For example, the
sensitivity of disclosure responsiveness with respect to the level of interest income is limited.
One obvious explanation is that when a low amount of money is at stake (account balance ×
potential interest-rate gain), even a modest opportunity cost of time can justify not ignoring
disclosures, and those with the highest balances may face the highest opportunity cost of


                                               5
time. We find at best mixed evidence for this explanation; switching is not consistently
higher among retired depositors and even among the highest balances in our sample, the
effect of disclosure improvements on switching remains low. Overall, our results on cross-
sectional heterogeneity suggest that the low effectiveness of disclosure that we document is
not specific to a particular type of depositor.
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 contextualizes our study in the rele-
vant literatures on the efficacy of informational disclosure, consumer mistakes, and rational
inattention. Section 3 provides background on our experimental design. We describe our
data and conduct balance tests for each trial in Section 4. Sections 5 and 6 present our
experimental and survey findings, respectively. We conclude in Section 7.


2       Related Literature
In this section, we briefly discuss the contribution of our findings to related work on disclosure
effectiveness, sticky deposits, and consumer decision making.
    A significant literature spanning industrial organization, behavioral economics, household
finance, accounting, law, and marketing critically examines consumer disclosure regulations
in many consumer markets.9 These papers provide mixed evidence for disclosure effective-
ness, highlighting cases of both disclosure successes and failures. If lacking information is
a significant reason for sticky (and perhaps suboptimal) consumer choice, disclosures have
potential to affect decisions. However, much of the disclosure literature seeks to explain vari-
ation in disclosure effectiveness with ex-post arguments contrasting estimates across designs
and domains. In contrast, we experimentally vary disclosure design for a single product with
a relatively clear hierarchy of consumer benefits, allowing us to make causal claims about
the relative importance of disclosure content and design features in generating benefits for
consumers.
    Closest to the mandated disclosure setting we study, two recent studies have experimen-
tally tested disclosure effectiveness in the Mexican credit-card market. Ponce et al. (2017)
find that credit-card borrowers in Mexico are insensitive to disclosures about the interest
rates of available alternative credit cards. Directly testing Truth-in-Lending-Act-type dis-
closures, Seira et al. (2017) conduct an RCT with high-risk credit-card borrowers in Mexico
and find very small effects that they attribute to consumer inattention. See also Kulkarni
et al. (2018), who use quasi-experimental variation to contrast the effects of contract stan-

    9
      A complete treatment of these literatures is outside the scope of this paper; see Dranove and Jin (2010),
Ben-Shahar and Schneider (2014), Loewenstein et al. (2014), Leuz and Wysocki (2016), and Roychowdhury
et al. (2019) for recent surveys of disclosure-related research.

                                                      6
dardization and discourse in the Chilean personal loan market. Our study adds to these
papers testing disclosure effectiveness using field experiments in several ways. By looking
across several providers at depositors as opposed to borrowers, our setting allows clear nor-
mative predictions about dominating choices among plausibly financially savvy households
in a developed economy. Whereas it may not be obviously optimal for high-risk borrowers
to reduce their debt levels, many savings depositors in our setting could obtain a higher
interest rate worth hundreds of dollars risk free in the first year alone by spending a few
minutes asking their bank to costlessly relabel their savings account to qualify for a materi-
ally higher interest rate. Note, too, the results of Medina (2018), who shows that directing
consumer attention toward paying down debt may decrease welfare by leading to an increase
in otherwise avoidable overdraft fees.10 Our savings setting helps here, as well, given that the
externality on financial distress of reclassifying savings to a higher-paying savings account is
plausibly zero.
    A long banking literature documents the stickiness of both deposit pricing and deposit
balances, and our experimental and survey results speak to many of the mechanisms at
play. Flannery and James (1984) and Hutchison and Pennacchi (1996) find deposit flows
to be under-sensitive to interest rates, and our results on inattention provide a key reason
why in addition to the liquidity function of deposits (Nagel, 2016). Kahn et al. (1999)
examine bank’s price-posting strategies, modeling banks’ slow adjustments to deposit pricing
as optimal given the limited recall of retail depositors. We provide direct evidence for limited
recall in our survey section, showing a general unawareness of own and market interest
rates and that even when provided benevolently designed, salient information about interest
rates, consumers struggle to recall receiving information about their account. Kiser (2002)
examines the role of self-reported switching costs in predicting switching behavior, finding
particularly high switching costs (and low levels of switching) among people on the ends
of age, geographic mobility, and income spectrums. Our results complement this literature
on consumer inertia and are most consistent with consumer optimization models wherein
consumers must first pay a fixed cost to open the reoptimization decision before searching
across alternative choices. Recent influential work by Drechler et al. (2017, 2018) studies the
implications of sticky deposits for the pass-through of monetary policy and banks’ exposure
to interest rate risk. We provide microeconomic evidence on why deposits are sticky, tracing
deposit stickiness to inattention arising from consumer beliefs and preferences over non-price
features, even among consumers with substantial foregone interest income. Finally, Allen
et al. (2019) find strong brand loyalty effects in mortgage lending in Canada. We confirm
this finding in a different market and product, show the implications of such attachment for
  10
       See also recent work by Hall and Madsen (2020) on the negative consequences of traffic safety disclosures.

                                                        7
disclosure effectiveness, and highlight the role of beliefs in inhibiting switching.
    The potential importance of disclosure design also poses a risk to successful policy imple-
mentation by increasing the scope for non-robust regulations to be undone. Grubb (2015)
and Persson (2018) find endogenous complexification responses by firms to be an additional
obstacle to first-best decision making. While disclosure may un-shroud important attributes
(a la Gabaix and Laibson, 2006), firms endogenously obfuscating the disclosure or complexi-
fying the information set may be able to blunt any benefits of disclosure. Célérier and Vallée
(2017) find evidence of issuers endogenously increasing the opacity of structured securities
marketed to retail investors.11 Johnson et al. (2018) show how consumer suspicions about
the veracity of mortgage advertising can inhibit take-up of otherwise attractive offers. Other
studies test for the importance of various advertising design features in stimulating loan
demand (Bertrand et al., 2010; Ferman, 2015; Kulkarni et al., 2018). Acknowledging the
difficulty of asserting optimal consumer behavior in their setting, Bertrand et al. (2010)
focus on evaluating advertising persuasiveness and consumer demand instead of whether ad-
vertising design features matter for consumer benefits.12 Even in our setting, where products
are largely one-dimensional, confusion is likely to be low, and discloser credibility is high,
we find significant scope for firms to (intentionally or not) obfuscate mandated disclosures
through disclosure design, e.g., by burying information on the back page of annual state-
ments. Such potential responses by firms have motivated disclosure policy to often specify
detailed design elements such as font, font size, and placement.13 Prominent examples of
formatting specifications in US lending policy include the Truth In Lending Act, the CARD
Act, and the prescribed HUD settlement form for residential mortgages.
    This paper also contributes to a broad literature documenting consumer financial mistakes
and the potential role of disclosures or reminders in preventing them. Much of the literature
on consumer financial mistakes focuses on credit cards, e.g., Ausubel (1991), Agarwal et
al. (2015), Keys and Wang (2018), Jorring (2018), and Gathergood et al. (2019). However,
credibly documenting consumer mistakes entails a high burden of proof given the challenge of
modeling and estimating optimal behavior in complex real-world settings. For example, the
mortgage refinancing rule of Agarwal et al. (2013) requires several simplifying assumptions
   11
      Jin et al. (2018) find in a lab setting that disclosing parties choose complex disclosure designs more than
half the time when forced to reveal harmful private information. Recent work in accounting finds similar
responses: firms adjust information presentation when investors have limited attention (Hirshleifer and Teoh,
2003) and external attention from institutional investors drives the frequency but not quality of voluntary
disclosures by target firms (Abramova et al., 2018).
   12
      See also the public finance literature on tax salience (e.g., Finkelstein, 2009; Chetty et al., 2009), which
demonstrates the important role of price information delivery design in affecting consumer demand.
   13
      In a classic illustration of such responses, a UK judge specified the font size and prominent website
placement for Apple’s mandated apology to Samsung for patent infringement after Apple’s initial apology
was posted in small print, using unclear language, in a remote area of their website (Leach, 2012).

                                                        8
about preferences, transaction costs, unobserved heterogeneity, and probability distributions
to approximate an optimal option exercise rule. Borrowing high-cost debt could be optimal
at low levels of consumption (with high marginal utility) and acute liquidity needs (Medina,
2018). In many settings, optimal choice is not obvious. Optimality is more straightforward
in a savings setting where reoptimization transaction costs are close to zero (Stango and
Zinman, 2009; Karlan et al., 2016). Even in our simplified setting, we cannot identify
mistakes per se without knowing switching costs and beliefs, although the survey evidence
in section 6 suggests the former are negligible when there is an option to switch to another
savings product with the same provider. When consumers do not believe attention to be
worthwhile, disclosure will fail to be impactful.
    More broadly, many economic decisions exhibit inertia in the sense that after initial prod-
uct choices, demand across alternatives becomes inelastic.14 A rich literature on rational
inattention in macroeconomics (e.g., Sims, 2003) offers an explanation for inertial behavior,
relevant to evidence here of consumers not making an active choice of savings product.15
However, while it may be that in many settings the foregone utility from not reoptimizing
is uncertain and relatively small (Sallee, 2014), there are several impediments to effectual
disclosures even when reoptimizing has the potential to increase the utility of a given choice.
For choices consisting of repeated interactions, switching costs including convenience costs
and the loss of value of complementary choices inhibit changing providers ex-post (Farrell
and Klemperer, 2007), motivating our inclusion of an option to retain one’s current provider.
Financial literacy (Calvet et al., 2009; Lusardi and Mitchell, 2014) is likely a necessary con-
dition for effective financial disclosure, although our study focuses on savers in an advanced
economy, and we do not find evidence that account holders with larger balances are more
likely to respond to disclosures. Work in behavioral economics on commitment-problems pro-
vides evidence for the prevalence of procrastination and the difficulty of completing intended
tasks, and we test treatments that provide salient follow-up digital reminders.16

  14
      See Samuelson and Zeckhauser (1988), Abaluck and Gruber (2011), Choi et al. (2011), Ericson (2014),
and many others for inertia in health insurance and retirement plan decisions. Andersen et al. (2017)
and Keys et al. (2016) provide recent evidence on mortgage refinancing reticence, and Grubb and Osborne
(2015) and Della Vigna and Malmendier (2006) document evidence of stickiness in cell-phone plan choice
and gym memberships, respectively. Ater and Landsman (2013) document the slow learning of retail deposit
account holders. Calem and Mester (1995) and Ponce et al. (2017) show existing credit-card borrowers have
cross-price elasticities near zero. Hortaçsu et al. (2017) find consumers reluctant to switch to an otherwise
identical lower-cost utility provider.
   15
      See DellaVigna (2009) and Gabaix (2019) for surveys of the limited attention literature in behavioral
economics.
   16
      An established literature documents the importance of default choices in retirement plans (e.g., Choi
et al., 2011) because consumers in general seem reluctant to make active choices. See DellaVigna (2009)
for a survey of the self-control literature. Consumers may also choose to ignore even costless information
about alternatives to avoid cognitive costs such as the disutility of feeling overwhelmed by the complexity of

                                                      9
3     Experimental Design
To test for the role of context and whether some disclosure designs are particularly effective
for certain depositor types, we partnered with five UK depositories to test multiple disclosure
designs in a range of field trials. Each financial institution helped to complete one trial for
a total of five trials. See Table 1 for a harmonized overview of the five trials and Appendix
Figures 1-8 for redacted example disclosures. All trials were conducted with customers who
held an easy-access savings account with one of the partnering UK financial institutions at
the time of random assignment. Notably, the trials varied in terms of the situation in which
the customer received the disclosures (for example, whether at the point of an interest rate
decrease) and the specific disclosure designs tested within each trial. Customers in both the
control and treatment groups were experiencing an already-scheduled rate decrease unrelated
to our experiment in three trials (Trials 2, 4 and 5) but were already on a relatively low rate
in two trials (Trials 1 and 3) with no scheduled rate change. Trials 1, 2 and 3 provided
customers with forward looking information about market interest rates currently available
to them.
    Customers in the reverse-page switching box trial (2) and in the reminder trials (4 and 5)
faced an interest-rate decrease to a level that was significantly below the average of what new
customers could obtain. In these trials, the firms sent letters to customers informing them
of the old and new interest rates and some general contact details for further information
no later than 60 days before the interest rate decrease, in accordance with EU regulatory
requirements. In the reverse-page switching box (2) and the SMS reminder trials (5), the rate
decrease applied to all customers holding the particular type of the account and occurred
on the same date for everyone. In the digital reminder trial (4), the rate decrease occurred
one year after the individual account opening date and was part of the account terms and
conditions. Customers in the front-page switching box (1) and the switching-form trials
(3) faced no interest rate decrease but were already receiving an interest rate that was
significantly below market average of what new customers could obtain. These customers
received no other specific communication in advance of the information sent out during the
trial. In the remainder of this section, we provide additional details on the design of each
trial.
    In Trial 1, consumers were already on a low rate and were due to receive their annual
statement in autumn 2015. Customers were randomly selected into five equally sized groups.
The control group received an annual statement with no additional information on the front


pricing (Sallee, 2014; Grubb, 2015; Haushofer, 2015) or the disutility of the bad news that a current product
generates under-market returns (Karlsson et al., 2009; Olafsson and Pagel, 2017; Andries and Haddad, 2017).

                                                     10
page. For treatment groups, different information was added to the front page of the annual
statement depending on the treatment arm. This included a simple encouragement to shop
around for another account (Appendix Figure A1); a comparison of the currently applicable
rate with the highest rate available on a comparable account with the current provider (best
internal rate); the best internal rate with the same provider and the average of three highest
rates on comparable accounts with competitors (best competitor rates); and a final variant
which added a graphical illustration of gains from switching (Appendix Figure A2). The
monetary gains used in the illustration were based on an illustrative balance of £100, £1,000
or £10,000, depending on which was the next lowest to the customer’s actual savings balance
at the time (for example, for an actual balance of £250 the illustration was for £100). We
excluded customers with balances lower than £100.
    In Trial 2, customers at the time of disclosure had rates close to market rates and were
being notified of an impending rate decrease.17 All letters were sent more than two months
ahead of the rate decrease. Customers were randomly assigned to one of five equally sized
groups: a control group and four treatment groups. The control group received a letter
which notified the customer of the rate decrease on all affected instant-access accounts early
summer of 2015 (Appendix Figure A3). The control letter included no additional information
about internal or external rates. The treatment groups received additional information on
the back page of the letter, formatted into a call-out box (referred to as the “switching box”)
with a graphical comparison of interest rates. Each treatment group received information
about the best available interest rate with the current provider. The four treatment groups
differed by whether the disclosure was personalized and whether it included information on
the best competitor rates (the average of the three highest rates on comparable accounts), for
a total of four possible combinations. The two non-personalized treatments (one displaying
external rates and one not) had an illustration of monetary gains from switching based on an
assumed balance of £5,000, and the personalized disclosures used each individual’s balance
at the time of mailing to illustrate the gains (see Appendix Figure A4).
    Trial 3 featured a disclosure bundled with a switching-process improvement designed to
lower both the expected time cost of switching and its uncertainty. In addition to providing
information as in Trials 1 and 2, we test the effect of providing a form that can be completed
and returned to the firm in order for the customer to be switched to an identical, “front
book” product paying a better rate at the same provider. In August 2015, the provider sent
a one-off mailing to encourage long-standing customers to switch to an equivalent internal
account with a significantly higher rate. The customers were selected randomly into two
equally sized groups. The control group received a letter with a switching box that included
  17
       Customers who had opted out of marketing communications were excluded from this trial.

                                                    11
the best internal rate and the best competitor rate as noted above, as well as potential gains
from switching based on a non-personalized balance example (£5,000). The treatment group
received the same letter, but with a tear-off return switching form pre-filled for a switch to
the best internal rate and a prepaid, addressed envelope (Appendix Figure A5).
    In Trials 4 and 5, we test the effect of timely repetition of informational disclosures
through reminders sent via email or SMS. In Trial 4, we test email or SMS reminders sent
to consumers who held accounts that experienced scheduled rate decreases during June-
September 2015.18 Customers were randomly selected into three equally sized groups. The
control group received only an initial letter sent at least 60 days before the rate decrease,
as mandated by current regulation. Two treatment groups were then issued either an email
reminder or an SMS reminder in addition to receiving the same mailing as the control group.
The email reminder was similar in its content to the letter sent to all groups (Appendix Figure
A6). It included information about the previous and new interest rates, and in addition to
the initial letter it included the best interest rate available on a comparable account with
the firm. The SMS reminder was shorter and included no information on interest rates
(Appendix Figure A7). Due to logistical constraints we sent the reminders on one actual
date to all customers, as it was not possible to randomly allocate reminders to be sent at
different points of time. Each customer account had an interest rate decrease date which
was within eight weeks before and seven weeks after the date of sending the reminders.
    In Trial 5, we test the effect of an SMS reminder around the time of a rate decrease in
early summer 2015.19 Customers were randomly selected into one of five groups. The control
group received no further communication following the initial letter sent 60 days or more
before the rate decrease. Customers in the four treatment groups received an SMS reminding
them of the rate change, one week before, one week after, or on the day of the rate decrease
(Appendix Figure A8). For those receiving the SMS on the day of the rate change, the SMS
either encouraged switching or said that there was no higher rate on a comparable product
available. Each treatment group included 16% of the trial sample and the control group
included the remaining 35% of the sample. Customers who switched between assignment
and the due date of the reminder still received the reminders and were retained in the sample
to ensure that the comparison of effects of timing is consistent across all treatment groups.


  18
      The trial sample consisted only of customers who all had an email address and a mobile phone number
on record. Over 90% of customers in the sample had both email and phone number on record. The partnering
institution reported that around 2% of email reminders and around 10% of SMS reminders could not be
delivered due to invalid records.
   19
      All customers in the trial had a mobile phone number on record. The partnering institution evaluated
that around 8% of reminders were not delivered to customers in the treatment groups due to invalid phone
number records.

                                                   12
4        Data and Balance Tests Across Treatment and Control
We collected detailed administrative data from each bank that includes account balances,
account closures, and new account openings before, during and after the trial intervention.
The dataset also provides us with age, gender, account age, mobile and online banking be-
havior, whether each consumer held a checking account at the same bank, and the number of
other financial product holdings. Variation in depositor types within a trial allows us to test
whether a given disclosure design is particularly effective for certain groups. Heterogeneity
in customer mix and context across trials (e.g., whether consumers are facing an impending
rate decrease) allows us to use the control-group to measure the importance of the decision
setting in overall attentiveness and willingness to switch.
    We report descriptive statistics for each trial in Table 2. The average consumer in our
data is 54 years old, and the average savings account has been open for nine years. About half
of our data’s savings account holders also have a checking account with the same depository,
and the average consumer has roughly three other financial products at the same provider.
Across all trials, the average savings account balance is £15,740 ($24,396 in 2015). Within
each trial, we oversampled consumers with large balances in all trials relative to the market to
ensure sufficient power to detect any differential switching behavior among consumers with
ample financial motivation to do so. However, we included customers with lower balances
in order to contrast the applicability of our findings across customers with varying degrees
of forgone interest income. We calculate the potential gain from switching as the additional
interest income from moving each consumer’s entire balance from their current interest rate
to the best available external rate. The average potential gain from switching is £123,
meaning that the average depositor could earn an additional $190 in interest income in the
first year after switching their account.
    The sample size of each trial varies depending on the number of treatments tested and
the available customer base.20 Average age, average savings balance, proportion of customers
who have their current account with the same bank, and average account age all vary across
trials, in line with our understanding of the different customer mixes across the five providers
as summarized above. For example, only 9% of consumers in Trial 1 use online banking,
whereas 90% of the consumers in Trial 5 use online banking, consistent with the depository
in Trial 1 having older consumers and older accounts than Trial 5. Average account ages
(the number of years the average account has been open) are smallest and average balances
are largest in Trials 4 and 5, consistent with these providers attracting younger customers
    20
     The length of the observation period also varies due to practical data constraints, however our main
results consider effects within four weeks and our results are robust to considering different observation
horizons.

                                                   13
willing to move their money in search of better rates.
    As shown in Table 3, the means of key demographic statistics are well balanced across
treatment and control groups, as expected given random assignment of customers into trial
groups. In some instances, equality of means of age, account age and gender are rejected
individually at 5% significance level given the large sample sizes, although the differences in
means are not practically significant. For Trials 1-4, p-values for the test that all variable
means are equal suggest that the key customer demographic variables are equally distributed
across treatment and control groups within each trial. While the joint test rejects the equality
of means across treatment and control for Trial 5, the magnitude of the significant differences
are economically small (six-month and one-month differences in depositor age and account
age, respectively).
    The primary outcome we are interested in is switching. We define switching as when
customers convert, close, or withdraw at least 95% of their savings account. We define
internal switching as when customers convert their account to another instant-access savings
product or fund a new instant-access savings account with the same firm and empty their
old account. We define external switching as all remaining switching that does not fall into
internal switching, including cases where, for example, the depositor converted their savings
account to an investment account with the same firm. Internal and external switching are
mutually exclusive and always sum up to any switching.21
    External switching contains many alternatives including transferring the balance to an
account outside the firm or a different type account with the incumbent firm (such as a
certificate of deposit) or withdrawing the money and spending or investing it elsewhere.
However, when an option for internal switching to a higher-paying rate exists, at a minimum,
internal switching dominates not switching (subject to switching costs). Of course, an even
better option may exist for the household than internal switching, motivating our focus on
any switching. Given this, but for the disutility of the switching process (including processing
and deliberation about the disclosure), any switching should be optimal for consumers that
have an option to internally switch.
    To understand consumer choices of accounts, it is useful to consider the relative attrac-
tiveness of internal and external switching given the rate differentials and the potential costs
involved in switching. In all trials, the interest rate customers would receive if they took no
action following the trial treatments is no higher than 50 bp per year. Within each provider,
the highest available internal rate ranges from 20 to 90 bp higher than the the applicable

  21
      Where our measures overlap, we record the latest action as the final action. For example, if a customer
first converts an account internally and then closes the newly converted account, we classify that as external
switching.

                                                     14
rate on each consumer’s current account. The best competitor interest rates are comparable
for all trials and range between 108-135 bp, for an incremental gain from external switching
compared to internal switching ranging from 10 to 60 basis points.
    However, the incremental cost of external switching may be substantially higher than
the cost of internal switching. Switching to another provider could involve (1) search and
evaluation of alternative brands and product features, (2) the operational cost of time spent
opening the new account and transferring funds, and (3) an ongoing convenience cost of
monitoring the account and/or having different level of service, such as the presence of a
network of branches. In contrast, internal switching would involve a simplified version of
(2) and almost none of (1) and (3) such that fully attentive and informed households may
well prefer internal to external switching despite more attractive interest rates available to
eternal switchers.
    Our survey results (section 6) contain evidence that consumers report a greater willing-
ness to reoptimize their savings product choice given the opportunity to increase interest
income with the same provider. Internal switchers report spending less than 15 minutes on
the switching process, whereas most external switchers report spending less than 30 min-
utes on the switching process and up to two hours on shopping for alternative products.
In the next section, we will contrast effects on any switching and internal switching to pro-
vide revealed preference evidence on the relative attractiveness of internal switching, mindful
that consumers may prefer internal switching despite lower available income both because
of non-price product features and differential switching costs.


5    Empirical Strategy and Results
Given random assignment, trial-specific treatment effects are internally valid estimates of
the causal effect of disclosure on depositor switching. However, comparing disclosure effects
across trials raises selection concerns. For example, might a given disclosure have been partic-
ularly ineffective not because of its design but because of the mix of customers at that bank?
After presenting estimates for each trial and discussing factors potentially explaining each
result, we will compare effects across trials to motivate additional empirical specifications
testing candidate explanations for differences in disclosure effectiveness across trials.
    We begin by reporting treatment effects from a linear-probability model of a given switch-
ing outcome for individual i on a treatment indicator T reatmenti that pools all treatment
arms within a trial.
                             Switchingi = β · T reatmenti + Xi0 γ + εi                      (1)



                                              15
The omitted category is the control group such that the estimated coefficient β̂ reports the
treatment effect of the disclosure in percentage points. Controls Xi consist of age (measured
in tens of years), age squared, gender, potential gains from switching to the best available
external rate (measured in hundreds of pounds), potential gains squared, and an indicator
for whether consumer i also holds a checking account at the same financial institution. Given
the random assignment of treatment (by construction and verified in Table 3), our results
will be similar regardless of including controls. We include them, however, because they
are of independent interest, enhance precision by reducing residual variation, and are useful
context for studying treatment effect heterogeneity. We estimate equation (1) separately for
each trial and report treatment effects in Table 4 for any switching (top panel) and internal
switching (bottom panel).22
    Column 1 of Table 4 reports the average effect of the disclosures tested in Trial 1, which
featured an interest-rate disclosure on the front page of the annual statement. Baseline
switching for this trial was small; 2.6% of consumers in the control group switched their
accounts in the month following the disclosure. Panel I shows that the treatment increased
any switching (internal or external) by 1.9 percentage points, and panel II shows that 1.7
percentage points of this was accounted for by internal switching. This pattern holds across
specifications and trials—despite larger gains available at other banks, most switching we
document is internal switching, consistent with consumers valuing non-monetary product
attributes of savings accounts or a more behavioral explanation such as choice overload, as
we discuss below when contrasting the effects of disclosure designs.
    Trial 2, which placed disclosures on the reverse side of a regulation-mandated letter in-
forming consumers about an upcoming rate decrease, was generally ineffective. Even though
the marginal monetary returns to switching were similar for depositors at both institutions,
baseline switching in Trial 2 was five percentage points higher than in Trial 1. While higher
control-group switching could be due to the sense of immediacy provided by the looming
rate decrease (or other compositional differences across institutions), it is still low in ab-
solute terms at 7.7%, and the disclosure treatment in Trial 2 was even less effective than
in Trial 1. Column 2 of Table 4 shows that we cannot reject no treatment effect and can
reject disclosure effects on any switching of more than one percentage point and on internal
switching of 0.3 percentage points.
    The most effective treatment we tested was Trial 3, in which both treatment and control
groups received an informational disclosure about their rates and better available rates in
a letter. Treatment-group account holders’ letters were accompanied by a detachable pre-

  22
    The results presented here measure switching behavior as of four weeks after disclosures were received.
Our results over longer horizons are quite similar.

                                                    16
filled form and a prepaid envelope. Signing and mailing this form would automatically
switch an individual’s account classification to an otherwise identical savings product with
a higher interest rate. The pre-filled detachable form the treatment group received increases
any switching by 9 percentage points (column 3 of panel I) and internal switching by 8
percentage points (column 3 of panel II).
     We interpret the relative success of Trial 3 as indicative that the disutility of the switching
process itself is a key component of customer inertia and that simplifying the path to respond
to a disclosure has potential to be effectual. Comparing Trials 1 and 3, which were similar
in most respects, provides further evidence for the importance of the switching process
improvement itself. Both Trials 1 and 3 had similar customer mixes and contexts (neither
involved an impending rate change), and very similar control-group switching rates (2.6%
and 3%, respectively). However, the treatment effect for Trial 3 was over four times larger
than the treatment effect for Trial 1 that featured only information and did not include a
pre-filled form making the switching process trivial. This interaction between disclosure and
the ease of responding to the disclosure also highlights the potential for firms to undo any
effect of consumer-facing disclosure by endogenously making taking a responsive action more
cumbersome.
     Trials 4 and 5 were digital in nature with treatment group account holders receiving
informational disclosures by email or text message. In both trials, all customers received a
legally mandated letter informing them of an impending decrease to their savings account
rate sixty days before the decrease. Treatment group consumers then received additional
reminders by email or text message. In Trial 4, the control-group mean switching is highest
(40%), suggesting that these deposits are the least sticky of all the trials customer bases,
perhaps due to selection into a high introductory rate and heightened attention around its
expiry. However, these trials also had relatively high balances, young account ages, and high
online banking shares. We explore the role of such heterogeneity across consumers within a
trial in section 5.2 below.
     The SMS disclosure in Trial 5 has a 1.6 percentage point effect on any switching (column
5 of Table 4). There was no internal switching option for consumers in Trial 5 because the
provider only had one type of savings account paying the same rate for everyone in each
account-opening cohort. Accordingly, we cannot assume that external switching (the only
switching outcome for Trial 5) would dominate doing nothing even if there were no switching
costs. It is conceivable that non-price considerations, such as switching account numbers,
branch and ATM networks, etc. would cause a customer to incur sufficient disutility as to
make not switching in response to a rate decrease to be optimal.
     Comparing treatment effects and control-group means across trials supports several over-


                                                17
all conclusions and highlights the benefits of studying multiple trials together. First, there
are significant differences in baseline switching across the trials’ control groups, from 3% to
40%. The lack of substantial heterogeneity across depositor types within trials documented
in section 5.2 points to a limited role for observable depositor heterogeneity to explain these
differences across trials. However, we note that the trials with the highest fraction of control-
group switching are also the trials where depositors faced an impending rate decrease (Trials
2, 4, and 5). Independent of any special disclosure, depositors facing a rate decrease seem
to be much more likely to switch their savings account than those earning below-market
but static rates. While this finding could be also attributable to selection into provider and
product, in section 5.3, we test within trial whether the timing of disclosures relative to rate
decreases matters to document the importance of context in disclosure attentiveness.
    Second, even though only a small fraction of control-group switching is internal switching,
most of the switching we observe in response to treatment-group disclosures is internal
switching. This highlights that disclosure may be of limited value to consumers when not
coupled with a straightforward alternative course of action. Finally, although few consumers
responded to even the most successful disclosure, disclosure effectiveness varies meaningfully
across trials. In the additional specifications below, we probe further whether this difference
can be attributed to disclosure design, customer mix, or disclosure context.


5.1    Treatment Effect Heterogeneity by Disclosure Design
To study the various disclosure designs tested in each trial, we reestimate (1) using a full set
of treatment dummies T reatmentik for each treatment k that was included in the trial T (i)
in which i was enrolled.

                                                 βk T reatmentik + Xi0 γ + εi
                                        X
                        Switchingi =                                                         (2)
                                       k∈T (i)


Here, the effect βk of design k represents the percentage-point increase in switching for a
given treatment group k relative to the control group. We estimate (2) for the three trials
that had disclosure design variants (1, 2, 4) in Table 5, and alternating columns show effects
on any switching and internal switching to check whether some designs were differentially
effective at inducing internal switching as opposed to any switching.
    For the first trial, there were four treatment arms, each a variant on the design of an
informational disclosure situated on the front page of an annual statement. While we reject
the null hypothesis that disclosure design doesn’t matter by testing whether the treatment
effects are equal, even the best treatment effect still had only marginal absolute effects


                                                   18
on switching. The Call to Action treatment that did not provide any information about
competitor rates, and increased any switching by 0.9 percentage points (column 1) and
internal switching by 0.5 percentage points (column 2). While the option to switch internally
should strictly dominate not switching (up to the cost of switching), it may be that an outside
option dominates internal switching such that any switching is the optimal choice. Although
0.9 percentage points is high in relative terms given the low baseline level of switching for
the population of consumers in the first trial (2.6%), it is low in absolute terms given the
optimality of the choice and our conditioning on potential gains. In further results in section
5.2, we explore whether these small effects are driven by low average monetary gains from
switching.
    The other treatment arms of the first trial were more successful, although still ineffective
in absolute terms. Interestingly, showing the best internal rate led to more switching (2.9
percentage points higher in column 1) than showing the best internal rate available and the
best competitor interest rate on savings accounts (1.8 percentage point increase in column 1).
While this difference is small, it is statistically significant and consistent with choice overload
models (e.g., Schwartz, 2004). Showing a graph to illustrate a consumer’s rate in the context
of available market rates increase switching slightly but is still dominated by simply showing
the best internal rate. The relative success of various disclosure designs is quite similar when
we restrict our attention on internal switching (column 2). Within the treatments of Trial
1, information is valuable and design matters, but even the most effective disclosure design
that provides information still moves switching by less than three percentage points.
    The second trial had a similar set of treatment arms varying disclosure design as Trial 1
but were mailed to consumers in a different context. The disclosures for the second trial were
on the back page of mailing informing them that their savings account interest rate was about
to decrease. Despite providing comparable information as the disclosures of Trial 1, with the
added urgency of an impending rate decrease and with two treatment arms personalizing the
amount of annual gains from switching, we cannot reject that the Trial 2 disclosures had zero
effect on either type of switching, irrespective of design. Survey results discussed in section
6 suggest that part of this is low attention to the letter at all, handicapping well-designed
disclosure from being effective.
    For Trial 4, we find that the email reminder was slightly more successful than the text-
message reminder at inducing any and internal switching (5.3 versus 4.2 percentage points,
respectively, in column 5). While this could be plausibly attributed to the additional, per-
sonalized information content of the email relative to the text message or the relative ease
with which a consumer could accomplish account switching once already on a computer in-
stead of a cell phone, the difference between the two coefficients is small and not statistically


                                                19
significant.


5.2    Disclosure Effect Heterogeneity by Depositor Attributes
We explore several dimensions of treatment effect heterogeneity to test whether there are
groups for which disclosure is particularly effective and whether observable differences in
customer mixes can explain differences in disclosure effectiveness across trials. In particular,
we are interested if knowing whether the lack of disclosure responsiveness is driven by cus-
tomers with high opportunity cost of time or low balances, for whom switching costs may be
large or switching gains may be small, respectively. Looking at age groups most likely to be
retired and balance categories with substantial interest gains allows us to check whether our
disclosure’s relative ineffectiveness is plausibly due to purely rational factors such as time
costs or low benefits. We pool all treatments within a trial into one treatment indicator and
ask whether treatment effects are stronger for several binary characteristics W . We estimate

               Switchingi = β · T reatmenti + T reatmenti · Wi0 ψ + Wi0 α + εi               (3)

where α is the coefficient on a set of indicator variable for each consumer characteristic
including four age categories, four monetary gains categories, and an indicator for whether
the depositor also had a checking account at the same institution. The coefficient vector ψ
captures the degree to which the main treatment effect β is different for customers falling
into each category described by W . The omitted age and gains categories are under 40 years
old and under £50 in annual gains from switching to the best available interest rate.
    We report the results of estimating equation (3) by trial in Table 6. Across all five trials,
the control variables have little explanatory power on their own. The youngest and oldest
consumers appear the most likely to switch, along with consumers with the highest gains,
though the effect of both of these controls is small and of inconsistent sign across the trials.
Intuitively, consumers less than 40 years of age (the omitted category) are more responsive
to text message-disclosures (column 5) than any other age groups.
    Looking at treatment effect heterogeneity across the trials, the preponderance of the
evidence shows that disclosure is equally (in)effective for all age and balance levels. Inter-
estingly, consumers who could be expected to have strong loyalty to their current depository
because they have a checking account with the same provider are generally more likely to
engage in some sort of switching, but are not necessarily more responsive to the treatment.
Might low levels of disclosure responsiveness simply reflect a high opportunity cost of time
relative to low returns on switching? In only one of the five trials (column 1) can we reject
that there is heterogeneity in treatment effects by depositor characteristics. Put another

                                               20
way, even among customers for who the gains of switching are particularly high or who are
likely to be retired, the overall effects of our tested disclosures are low.


5.3    Treatment Effect Heterogeneity by Disclosure Timing
A unique feature of Trials 4 and 5 is that the timing of disclosures varied with respect to the
date of an impending rate decrease. In Trial 4, although all customers received disclosures
on the same day, cross-sectional heterogeneity in when this day fell relative to impending
rate decreases varied because of heterogeneity in account opening dates and a fixed-length
introductory rate period. In Trial 5, treatment-group consumers received SMS reminders of
the disclosure on the day of the rate decrease or one week before or after. We explore which
groups had the strongest reaction to the disclosure and what timing was the most effective
in Table 7. Treatment effects were strongest for emails received 0-2 weeks before the rate
decrease in the digital reminder trial, and text-message effects were smallest for reminders
received on the day of the decrease in the SMS-only trial.
    The presence of any sort of timing effects is curious. Even for customers with large
balances, the difference in switching a few weeks early or late is small in monetary terms,
and yet customers are twice as responsive to disclosures received immediately before an
impending rate decrease as otherwise. We interpret this as evidence of the increased salience
of reminders that appear to have a natural deadline attached and may be easier to dedicate
the necessary attention. The low effect of text message disclosures on the day of switching
may be driven by the likelihood that text messages are read at a time that is inopportune
for consumers to take action or resolve to take action in the future and as a medium less
conducive to converting into a memorable task. The importance of information acquisition in
close proximity to the rate decrease is consistent with results from lab and field experiments in
Tu and Soman (2014), who find that consumers are more likely to take action if consideration
thereof occurs before (rather than after) a salient event. That said, even optimally timed
reminders have economically small impacts on switching.
    Taking stock, we find that best-performing intervention increased switching to a higher-
rate paying account by nine percentage points, while the worst-performing intervention had
a precisely estimated zero effect on switching. While there is scope to improve disclosure
effectiveness through optimal design, we note the converse is also true. Unless every aspect
of disclosure design is precisely specified, firms may always have an incentive and scope
to tweak design to render disclosure ineffectual, consistent with Grubb (2015) and Persson
(2018). Moreover, even among consumers facing a nearly costless task of switching to a
nearly identical but strictly dominating internal account with pre-filled out paperwork worth


                                               21
at least £100 in year one, the most optimally designed (or timed) disclosure only increases
switching by nine percentage points relative to an already low baseline.


6    Survey Evidence
In this section we discuss the key findings of our follow-up surveys. We measure three
categories of outcomes: 1) recall of information about the disclosure, 2) responsiveness to
the disclosure, and 3) ex-post satisfaction with the individual decision taken. We conducted
the surveys with 261 consumers from the Trial 1 sample (the front-page switching box trial)
and with 500 consumers from the Trial 2 sample (the reverse-page switching box trial). Both
survey samples were largely composed of long-standing customers with low overall propensity
to engage with their savings accounts. However, given that participation in the follow-up
survey was voluntary, respondents may be more likely to be drawn from the sub-set of
customers who are relatively more engaged with their savings. Both surveys were conducted
by a research company over the phone within three weeks after we stopped collecting data
on trial outcomes. We imposed quotas on the survey sample along two dimensions: observed
switching behavior and starting balance. Around one in ten contacted customers agreed to
complete the phone interview which lasted up to 15 minutes, in line with typical response
rates for such surveys.
    To ensure a degree of response quality in the survey, we asked customers to indicate
which providers they held their savings account with. As an initial quality screen, we ter-
minated interviews with a small number of customers who failed to indicate they had or
until recently had an account with the provider in question even after being prompted. We
asked customers who were eligible to continue the survey to recall details about the account
in question, including basic properties such as interest rate payable and the actions they
took. We matched survey responses to the administrative data provided by the institutions.
For a substantial share of customers, actions recorded in the administrative data and ac-
tions reported in the survey did not match, including under-reporting by those who switched
their accounts and over-reporting by those who did not. We interpret this imperfect recall
as further evidence that customers did not dedicate full attention to the task of switching,
but lack of incentives to report accurately and possible drawbacks in questionnaire design
could have also been at play. Given small sample sizes, possible selection into participation,
and imperfect recall, we interpret survey evidence with caution and focus on key findings as
reported below.
    The recall of any recent communication from their provider related to better available
interest rates was modest. Approximately 40% of customers in both surveys did not recall

                                             22
the annual statement (Trial 1) or the rate-decrease notification letter (Trial 2). Of those
respondents who remembered receiving a communication from their provider, 60% and 75%
in the front-page and reverse-page trials, respectively, reported that they did not read beyond
the first page or only skimmed the communication. Respondents who remembered receiving
the letters found it difficult to recall the details without explicit prompting by the interviewer.
When prompted, many control-group and treatment-group respondents were able to recall
details of received disclosures. However, many respondents also reported information that
they did not in fact receive. Customers in the age group of 60-80 years were most likely to
correctly recall disclosure information (+25 p.p.) and have read the letter in detail (+15
p.p.), relative to customers aged 40 years or younger. Gains from switching or the age of
account did not predict whether customers recalled or read the communication in detail.
    Customers’ awareness was not widespread both of their account’s current interest rate and
recent changes to the rate. Most respondents were not aware of the interest rate they were
receiving on their savings account and the majority of those who estimated the rate upon
prompting were overoptimistic, thinking their rate was higher than their actual rate. The
most popular motivation for hypothetically considering switching accounts was if there were
to be an equivalent product with a higher interest rate available with their current provider.
However, a substantial proportion of respondents reported that they were not aware that
their provider offered a higher rate on an equivalent account (56% in the front-page trial
survey and 58% in the reverse-page trial survey) despite our disclosures being designed to
convey this information. Only 4% and 8% of customers in the front-page and reverse-page
switching box trials, respectively, indicated their primary consideration in deciding whether
to switch their accounts was the availability of a better rate with another provider, consistent
with the literature on deposit stickiness (e.g., Drechsler et al., 2018) and our empirical results
that most switching was internal switching.
    Did the disclosure treatment mitigate this unawareness of opportunities to earn a higher
rate with the same provider? In the front-page switching box trial, treatments had a positive
and significant effect on the awareness of a better internal rate but not on other survey
outcome measures, including the likelihood of thinking about switching, searching for better
accounts, and the number of accounts compared. Treatments in the reverse-page switching
box trial did not have significant effects on any surveyed outcome, including consideration of
switching, awareness of their interest rate, shopping around, and recall of the communication
received.
    The survey responses also provide a window into how consumers trade off product pref-
erences, the disutility of the switching process, and foregone interest income. Two thirds of
respondents said they would require a minimum gain of less than £100 per year to switch


                                                23
their account. In our survey sample, where the potential gains were significantly higher than
average, 26% of customers had £100 or more to gain. While having potential gains lower
than the reported cost of switching could explain why many customers did not switch, even
among consumers with potential first-year gains well in excess of £100, switching is much
lower than 26% (see section 5).
    Beliefs about the onerousness of shopping and switching seem to matter. Most customers
who switched found searching for alternative products as easier than expected. Those who
switched reported an average time spent switching internally of 15 minutes and less than
30 minutes for those who switched to an external provider. Among those that shopped for
an alternative savings product, 80% of customers in the front-page switching box trial and
two thirds of customers in the reverse-page switching box trial said they spent less than
two hours searching for an alternative account. However, when evaluating the decision
they made, respondents who switched their account reported to be more satisfied than
respondents who did not switch their account. Over 80% of switchers reported being fairly
satisfied or very satisfied with their decision to switch, while less than half of non-switchers
reported satisfaction with their decision to not switch. This disconnect between pessimistic
beliefs about the cost and net benefits of switching versus higher ex-post satisfaction among
switchers emphasizes the role of current consumer expectations around the usefulness of
disclosure in driving inattention.
    In summary, survey findings suggest that a large proportion of consumers do not actively
engage with choosing optimal savings accounts and do not attend communications from their
providers, significantly constraining the usefulness of even optimally designed disclosure.
While the disclosure treatment significantly improved awareness of interest rates, many of
those who do engage review the communications quickly and remember only the key aspects.
Overall, pessimistic beliefs and the resulting inattention seem to harm consumers in this
setting. Many consumers overestimate the time cost of reoptimization, forego a magnitude
of interest income that they report would be sufficient for them to desire to switch, and end
up less satisfied with their decision.


7    Conclusion
In this paper, we provide direct evidence on the effectiveness of consumer financial disclosure
from a set of randomized-controlled trials. We study savings accounts, an important and
ubiquitous retail financial product with relatively homogeneous features and significant price
dispersion, test the importance of disclosure design features, and examine explanations for
their role in affecting consumer financial decisions. A key virtue of our experimental design

                                              24
relative to previous work is the ability to address joint-hypothesis concerns by focusing
on the savings setting and leveraging the availability of an otherwise identical alternative
product with each consumer’s current provider that has strictly better pricing. We test
three main disclosure features: information to aid search and comparison across products,
sending reminders to customers to call attention to the disclosure, and a pre-filled, prepaid-
postage, mail-back switching form to help make acting on the disclosure easier. Although
we find statistically significant effects for many of our disclosures, our interventions had at
best modest effects on switching, even among those with substantial financial incentives to
switch, the option to retain all non-price features of their current savings product, and who
received our most effectively designed disclosure.
    Why are deposits so sticky? The persistent locality of banking seems puzzling given the
national, integrated, online nature of modern banking. Our findings suggest that non-price
preferences over providers and pessimistic beliefs about both the returns to shopping around
and the inconvenience of the switching process are key reasons for the price-insensitivity of
individual deposits. In particular, our experimental and survey results point to limited con-
sumer attention to information about competitive alternative deposit products as inhibiting
more switching, consistent with the predictions of Loewenstein et al. (2014). Providing a
procedurally straightforward way to take an informed action, designing disclosure to make
alternative choices more salient, and complementary disclosure timing each help mitigate
the obstacles consumers face and to some extent can each increase switching to better priced
but otherwise identical products.
    Of course, we have not tested every possible design and it is conceivable that there exist
significantly more impactful ways to design disclosures. However, when firms have other
dimensions of disclosure design left to their discretion, there are simple ways to present
mandated content that limits its usefulness to consumers, with the classical example being
fine print. Moreover, disclosure could be even less effective when the optimal contract is much
less obvious than in our setting. Although it is possible that the effects of disclosure would
become more pronounced once customers become more habituated to receiving this type of
information from their providers, a variety of delivery media (routine statements, special
mailings, email, and SMS) failed to have large impacts. Similarly, while in principle a rising
interest-rate environment could stimulate active savings product choice by increasing the
return on attention, we do not find compelling evidence that consumers with large potential
gains from switching to respond differentially to disclosure.
    The sufficiency of disclosure remains a subject of debate. In advocating for robust con-
sumer financial protection, Campbell et al. (2011) conclude that disclosure is beneficial but
may not provide enough support in all circumstances. Our qualitative research further in-


                                              25
dicates that while optimizing disclosure design can improve its effectiveness on the margin,
inattention is a fundamental barrier to disclosure usefulness. Accordingly, when regulators
independently consider whether to mandate each disclosure without accounting for external-
ities diluting the salience of other disclosures, the low expected return on attention to any
given disclosure can reinforce beliefs about the low value of reading the fine print. Moreover,
any reform to disclosure design is likely to improve outcomes only slowly as consumers adjust
their expectations on the optimal level of attention. This suggests that beyond testing and
optimizing disclosure, regulators could consider a wider set of interventions that are targeted
at achieving more substantial improvements in market outcomes. Ultimately, disclosure’s di-
luted efficacy has to be weighed against any distortionary effect of more active policy and
the corresponding equilibrium responses by firms.
    There may also be unintended distortions from mandatory consumer financial disclo-
sures. Duarte and Hastings (2013) show that consumers may overly fixate on disclosed
dimensions at the expense of other product characteristics, and Medina (2018) documents
negative externalities of disclosure about one product on the rest of a household’s financial
portfolio. While this is perhaps less of a concern in our setting because of our focus on sav-
ing instead of borrowing, deposit insurance, and the homogeneity of savings products, firms
interested in keeping their deposits sticky still have many tools at their disposal. Future
research could seek to understand the efficiency of such product differentiation, the reasons
behind consumers’ (monetarily costly) brand loyalty, and the heterogenous incidence of pric-
ing models seemingly predicated on consumer inertia. Similarly, theoretical and empirical
work could study the fixed (psychological) costs consumers incur when reoptimizing and
the general disutility of financial decision-making along with a deeper empirical look at the
determinants of consumer inertia.




                                              26
References
Abaluck, Jason and Jonathan Gruber, “Choice inconsistencies among the elderly: ev-
 idence from plan choice in the Medicare Part D program,” American Economic Review,
 2011, 101 (4), 1180–1210.
Abramova, Inna, John Core, and Andrew Sutherland, “Institutional Investor At-
 tention and Demand for Inconsequential Disclosures,” 2018. SSRN Working Paper No.
 3066136.
Agarwal, Sumit, John C Driscoll, and David I Laibson, “Optimal Mortgage Refi-
 nancing: A Closed-Form Solution,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 2013, 45 (4),
 591–622.
  , Souphala Chomsisengphet, Chunlin Liu, and Nicholas S Souleles, “Do con-
  sumers choose the right credit contracts?,” The Review of Corporate Finance Studies,
  2015, 4 (2), 239–257.
Allen, Jason, Robert Clark, and Jean-François Houde, “Search frictions and market
 power in negotiated-price markets,” Journal of Political Economy, 2019, 127 (4), 1550–
 1598.
Andersen, Steffen, John Y Campbell, Kasper Meisner Nielsen, and Tarun Ra-
 madorai, “Inattention and Inertia in Household Finance: Evidence from the Danish Mort-
 gage Market,” 2017. NBER Working Paper No. 21386.
Andries, Marianne and Valentin Haddad, “Information Aversion,” October 2017.
 NBER Working Paper No. 23958.
Ater, Itai and Vardit Landsman, “Do customers learn from experience? Evidence from
 retail banking,” Management Science, 2013, 59 (9), 2019–2035.
Ausubel, Lawrence M, “The failure of competition in the credit card market,” American
 Economic Review, 1991, pp. 50–81.
Ben-Shahar, Omri and Carl E Schneider, More than you wanted to know: The Failure
 of Mandated Disclosure, Princeton University Press, 2014.
Bertrand, Marianne, Dean Karlan, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, and
 Jonathan Zinman, “What’s advertising content worth? Evidence from a consumer credit
 marketing field experiment,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2010, 125 (1), 263–306.
Calem, Paul S and Loretta J Mester, “Consumer behavior and the stickiness of credit-
 card interest rates,” American Economic Review, 1995, 85 (5), 1327–1336.
Calvet, Laurent E, John Y Campbell, and Paolo Sodini, “Measuring the financial
 sophistication of households,” American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (2), 393–98.
Campbell, John Y, Howell E Jackson, Brigitte C Madrian, and Peter Tufano,
 “Consumer financial protection,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2011, 25 (1), 91–114.

                                           27
Célérier, Claire and Boris Vallée, “Catering to investors through security design: Head-
 line rate and complexity,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017, 132 (3), 1469–1508.
Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft, “Salience and taxation: Theory and
 evidence,” American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (4), 1145–77.
Choi, James J, David Laibson, and Brigitte C Madrian, “$100 bills on the sidewalk:
 Suboptimal investment in 401 (k) plans,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2011, 93
 (3), 748–763.
DellaVigna, Stefano, “Psychology and economics: Evidence from the field,” Journal of
 Economic Literature, 2009, 47 (2), 315–72.
   and Ulrike Malmendier, “Paying not to go to the gym,” American Economic Review,
  2006, 96 (3), 694–719.
Dranove, David and Ginger Zhe Jin, “Quality disclosure and certification: Theory and
 practice,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2010, 48 (4), 935–63.
Drechsler, Itamar, Alexi Savov, and Philipp Schnabl, “The Deposits Channel of
 Monetary Policy,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 05 2017, 132 (4), 1819–1876.
  ,   , and    , “Banking on Deposits: Maturity Transformation without Interest Rate
  Risk,” May 2018. NBER Working Paper No. 24582.
Duarte, Fabian and Justine S Hastings, “Fettered consumers and sophisticated firms:
 evidence from Mexico’s privatized social security market,” 2013. NBER Working Paper
 No. 18582.
Ericson, Keith M Marzilli, “Consumer inertia and firm pricing in the Medicare Part D
  prescription drug insurance exchange,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
  2014, 6 (1), 38–64.
Farrell, Joseph and Paul Klemperer, “Coordination and lock-in: Competition with
  switching costs and network effects,” Handbook of Industrial Organization, 2007, 3, 1967–
  2072.
Ferman, Bruno, “Reading the Fine Print: Information Disclosure in the Brazilian Credit
  Card Market,” Management Science, 2015, 62 (12), 3534–3548.
Financial Conduct Authority, “Cash savings market study report,” January 2015. Market
  Study MS14/2.3.
Finkelstein, Amy, “E-ztax: Tax salience and tax rates,” The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 2009, 124 (3), 969–1010.
Gabaix, Xavier, “Chapter 4 - Behavioral inattention,” in B. Douglas Bernheim, Stefano
 DellaVigna, and David Laibson, eds., Handbook of Behavioral Economics - Foundations
 and Applications 2, Vol. 2 of Handbook of Behavioral Economics: Applications and Foun-
 dations 1, North-Holland, 2019, pp. 261 – 343.

                                            28
   and David Laibson, “Shrouded attributes, consumer myopia, and information sup-
  pression in competitive markets,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2006, 121 (2),
  505–540.

Gathergood, John, Neale Mahoney, Neil Stewart, and Jörg Weber, “How Do In-
 dividuals Repay Their Debt? The Balance-Matching Heuristic,” American Economic Re-
 view, March 2019, 109 (3), 844–75.

Grubb, Michael D, “Failing to choose the best price: Theory, evidence, and policy,” Review
 of Industrial Organization, 2015, 47 (3), 303–340.

   and Matthew Osborne, “Cellular service demand: Biased beliefs, learning, and bill
  shock,” American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (1), 234–71.

Hall, Jonathan D. and Joshua Madsen, “Can behavioral interventions be too salient?
 Evidence from traffic safety messages,” May 2020. Working Paper.

Harrison, Glenn W. and John A. List, “Field Experiments,” Journal of Economic
 Literature, December 2004, 42 (4), 1009–1055.

Haushofer, Johannes, “The cost of keeping track,” 2015. Working Paper.

Hirshleifer, David and Siew Hong Teoh, “Limited attention, information disclosure,
 and financial reporting,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 2003, 36 (1), 337 – 386.
 Conference Issue on.

Hortaçsu, Ali, Seyed Ali Madanizadeh, and Steven L Puller, “Power to choose?
 An analysis of consumer inertia in the residential electricity market,” American Economic
 Journal: Economic Policy, 2017, 9 (4), 192–226.

Jin, Ginger Zhe, Michael Luca, and Daniel J Martin, “Complex Disclosure,” June
  2018. NBER Working Paper No. 24675.

Johnson, Eric J, Olivier Toubia, and Stephan Meier, “What’s the Catch? Suspicion
  of Bank Motives and Sluggish Refinancing,” The Review of Financial Studies, 05 2018, 32
  (2), 467–495.

Jorring, Adam, “The Cost of Financial Mistakes: Evidence from U.S. Consumers,” 2018.
  Working Paper.

Kahn, Charles, George Pennacchi, and Ben Sopranzetti, “Bank deposit rate cluster-
 ing: Theory and empirical evidence,” The Journal of Finance, 1999, 54 (6), 2185–2214.

Karlan, Dean, Margaret McConnell, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Jonathan Zin-
 man, “Getting to the top of mind: How reminders increase saving,” Management Science,
 2016, 62 (12), 3393–3411.

Karlsson, Niklas, George Loewenstein, and Duane Seppi, “The ostrich effect: Selec-
 tive attention to information,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 2009, 38 (2), 95–115.

                                           29
Keys, Benjamin J and Jialan Wang, “Minimum payments and debt paydown in con-
 sumer credit cards,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2019, 131 (3), 528–548.

  , Devin G Pope, and Jaren C Pope, “Failure to refinance,” Journal of Financial
  Economics, 2016, 122 (3), 482–499.

Kiser, Elizabeth K, “Predicting household switching behavior and switching costs at de-
 pository institutions,” Review of Industrial Organization, 2002, 20 (4), 349–365.

Klemperer, Paul, “Markets with consumer switching costs,” The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 1987, 102 (2), 375–394.

Kulkarni, Sheisha, Santiago Truffa, and Gonzalo Iberti, “Removing the Fine Print:
 Standardization, Disclosure, and Consumer Loan Outcomes,” 2018. Working Paper.

Leach, Anna, “British judge: Say you’re sorry Apple... this time like you MEAN it,” The
  Register, November 2012.

Leuz, Christian and Peter D. Wysocki, “The Economics of Disclosure and Financial
  Reporting Regulation: Evidence and Suggestions for Future Research,” Journal of Ac-
  counting Research, 2016, 54 (2), 525–622.

Loewenstein, George, Cass R. Sunstein, and Russell Golman, “Disclosure: Psychol-
  ogy Changes Everything,” Annual Review of Economics, 2014, 6 (1), 391–419.

Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S Mitchell, “The economic importance of financial
 literacy: Theory and evidence,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2014, 52 (1), 5–44.

Medina, Paolina C, “Selective attention in consumer finance: Evidence from a randomized
 intervention in the credit card market,” 2018. Working Paper.

Nagel, Stefan, “The liquidity premium of near-money assets,” The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 2016, 131 (4), 1927–1971.

Olafsson, Arna and Michaela Pagel, “The Ostrich in Us: Selective Attention to Financial
 Accounts, Income, Spending, and Liquidity,” October 2017. NBER Working Paper No.
 23945.

Persson, Petra, “Attention manipulation and information overload,” Behavioural Public
 Policy, 2018, 2 (1), 78–106.

Ponce, Alejandro, Enrique Seira, and Guillermo Zamarripa, “Borrowing on the
 Wrong Credit Card? Evidence from Mexico,” American Economic Review, April 2017,
 107 (4), 1335–61.

Roychowdhury, Sugata, Nemit Shroff, and Rodrigo S Verdi, “The effects of financial
 reporting and disclosure on corporate investment: A review,” Journal of Accounting and
 Economics, 2019, 68 (2-3), 101246.



                                          30
Sallee, James M., “Rational Inattention and Energy Efficiency,” The Journal of Law and
  Economics, 2014, 57 (3), 781–820.

Samuelson, William and Richard Zeckhauser, “Status quo bias in decision making,”
  Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 1988, 1 (1), 7–59.

Schwartz, Barry, The Paradox of Choice, New York: HarperCollins, 2004.

Seira, Enrique, Alan Elizondo, and Eduardo Laguna-Müggenburg, “Are information
  disclosures effective? evidence from the credit card market,” American Economic Journal:
  Economic Policy, 2017, 9 (1), 277–307.

Sims, Christopher A, “Implications of Rational Inattention,” Journal of Monetary Eco-
  nomics, 2003, 50 (3), 665–690.

Stango, Victor and Jonathan Zinman, “Exponential growth bias and household finance,”
  The Journal of Finance, 2009, 64 (6), 2807–2849.

Tu, Yanping and Dilip Soman, “The categorization of time and its impact on task
 initiation,” Journal of Consumer Research, 2014, 41 (3), 810–822.




                                           31
                        Table 1: Overview of Trials              Customer
      Trial         Treatment details         Rate change         tenure
                   Comparison with
  Front-page
                  market rates on front
1 switching                                       None              Long
                     page of annual
  box
                       statement
                  Comparison with
  Reverse-page                                60 days after
               market rates on back of
2 switching                                 treatment to all       Mixed
               rate-change notification
  box                                          customers
                        letter

                Tear-off form pre-filled
  Return
                to switch to higher rate-
3 switching                                       None              Long
                  paying account with
  form
                     same provider
                                         End of individual
                                        bonus period seven
    Digital      Rate decrease reminder
4                                         weeks before to           Short
    reminder       via email or SMS
                                         eight weeks after
                                             treatment
                                        One week before to
    SMS          Rate decrease reminder   one week after
5                                                                  Mixed
    reminder            via SMS          treatment to all
                                            customers
Note: Table overviews five trials, describing the treatment, whether it was
accompanied by a change in interest rates, and the approximate customer
tenure. “Long” refers to average customer relationships longer than 10
years, and “short” if the average tenure is less than 2 years. See Table 2 for
further details in composition across trials.




                                      32
                      Table 2: Descriptive statistics of consumers
                                             Reverse                     Digital
                              Front page      page         Return      (email and
                               switching    switching     switching       SMS)          SMS
              Trial               box          box          form        reminder      reminder
                                  (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)
Age (years)                      59.2          53.2         64.4          52.9          42.4
                                (16.58)       (17.23)      (15.92)       (16.15)       (13.92)
Male Indicator                   0.42          0.41         0.45          0.48          0.52
                                 (0.49)       (0.49)        (0.50)       (0.50)        (0.50)
Checking Account Indicator        0.25         0.80          0.06         0.77          0.98
                                 (0.43)       (0.40)        (0.24)       (0.42)        (0.16)
Account Balance (£)               8,436        7,407         6,812       37,939        24,162
                                  (20,788)    (22,862)     (18,156)       (88,633)      (78,574)
Potential Gains (£)                  70.02      82.96        76.29         230.56        198.13
                                  (172.54)    (256.05)     (203.35)       (538.50)      (644.31)
Account Age (years)                  13.7        6.7         16.1            1.0           4.7
                                   (10.86)     (1.25)       (3.99)         (0.09)        (2.45)
Number of products with               1.6        4.6          1.6            4.6           5.4
                                    (0.88)     (1.88)       (1.28)         (2.55)        (2.86)
Online Banking Indicator             0.09       0.58            -           0.84          0.90
                                    (0.28)     (0.49)           -          (0.37)        (0.29)
Mobile Banking Indicator             0.09       0.29            -           0.22          0.30
                                    (0.29)     (0.45)           -          (0.42)        (0.46)
Observations                       61,879      13,261        4,003         15,487        30,202
Notes: Table reports means and standard deviations in parentheses of savings account holder
characteristics across each trial. Checking Account Indicator is equal to one if a customer has a
checking account at the same institution. Potential gains is equal to depositor's account
balance multiplied by the difference between her account's interest rate and the best available
external rate. Account age is the number of years each account has been open. Number of
products with providers is the number of products including the savings account that a
customer has with her institution. Online banking and mobile banking indicators equal one if
the customer uses that account feature.




                                               33
    Table 3: Means of demographic variables and tests of equality of means
                                           Account            Checking    Account Joint
                  Number of     Age        Balance Gender      account      age     test
                 Observations (years)        (£)   (% male) colocated (%) (years) p-value

                               Panel I. Front-Page Switching Box
Control              12,723       59.33     8,685     0.42       0.25            13.76
Treatment            49,156       59.20     8,371     0.42       0.24            13.71
 Equality p-value                  0.45      0.13      0.89         0.12         0.66      0.20
Total Observations                                      61,879

                              Panel II. Reverse-Page Switching Box
Control               2,659        53.93     7,359    0.41        0.80           6.74
Treatment            10,602        53.01     7,419    0.41        0.80           6.71
 Equality p-value                  0.01      0.90      0.94         0.99         0.31      0.11
Total Observations                                      13,261

                                   Panel III. Switching Form
Control               1,999        64.65    6,749      0.44         0.06         16.00
Treatment             2,004        64.22    6,874      0.46         0.06         16.12
 Equality p-value                  0.40      0.83      0.22         0.80         0.35      0.72
Total Observations                                       4,003

                                   Panel IV. Digital Reminder
Control             5,180          51.86    37,957     0.48         0.79         0.96
Treatment          10,307          52.02    36,801     0.48         0.78         0.96
 Equality p-value                  0.57      0.43      0.56         0.51         0.31      0.66
Total Observations                                      15,487

                                    Panel V. SMS Reminder
Control              10,200        42.69    25,046       0.53         0.97         4.62
Treatment            20,002        42.22    23,711       0.51         0.98         4.70
  Equality p-value                 0.01      0.16        0.00        0.70          0.01     0.00
Total Observations                                        30,202
Notes: Table reports means of consumer attributes for both treatment and control groups for
each trial. Equality p-values in italics test for the equality of means across treatment and
control. The p-value in the final column tests for the joint equality of all variable means within
a trial.




                                              34
        Table 4: Disclosure Treatment Effect on Account Switching
Trial                  Front page Reverse
                                                Switching     Digital      SMS
                        switching switching
                                                  form       reminder    reminder
                           box       box
                          (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)

                                             I. Any Switching
Disclosure Treatment    0.019***      -0.003     0.089***     0.047***    0.016***
                         (0.002)     (0.006)      (0.008)      (0.008)     (0.003)
Controls                   yes          yes         yes          yes         yes
Control-Group Mean        0.026       0.077        0.030        0.400      0.062
R-squared                0.005        0.008       0.034       0.071        0.010
Observations             61,879      13,261       4,003       15,487       30,202

                                           II. Internal Switching
Disclosure Treatment    0.017***      0.001        0.078***    0.044***
                         (0.001)     (0.001)        (0.006)     (0.007)
Controls                   yes         yes            yes         yes
Control-Group Mean        0.009       0.026          0.005       0.267
R-squared                 0.011       0.001          0.043       0.107
Observations             61,879       13,261         4,003       15,487
Notes: Table reports heterogeneity in disclosure treatment effects on switching at a
four-week horizon by disclosure design. The dependent variable in panel I is any
switching, an indicator for whether the depositor switched to a different product
with the same provider or withdrew their entire balance. The dependent variable in
panel II is internal switching, defined as switching to an different instant-access
savings product at the same depository. For the SMS reminder trial, there was no
internal alternative such that all switching is other switching. Controls include a
quadratic in age and annual potential monetary gains and indicators for gender and
having a checking account with the same institution. Robust standard errors in
parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                        35
                 Table 5: Treatment Effect Heterogeneity by Disclosure Design
Trial                                  Front-page switching        Reverse-page        Digital reminder
                                       box annual statement       switching box          rate decrease
Switching type                            Any      Internal      Any       Internal    Any       Internal
                                           (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)       (5)         (6)
Call to Action                          0.009*** 0.005***
                                         (0.002)    (0.001)
Best Internal Rate                      0.029*** 0.025***      -0.0002      0.002
                                         (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.007)     (0.001)
Best Internal and Competitor Rates      0.018*** 0.017***       -0.004     0.0005
                                         (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.007)     (0.001)
Best Internal and Competitor Rates      0.021*** 0.020***
   + Graph                               (0.002)    (0.002)
Best Internal Rate, Personalized                                -0.006      0.001
                                                               (0.007)     (0.001)
Best Internal and Competitor Rates,                             -0.002      0.001
    Personalized                                               (0.007)     (0.001)
Email                                                                                 0.053***   0.051***
                                                                                       (0.009)    (0.009)
SMS                                                                                   0.042***   0.037***
                                                                                       (0.009)    (0.008)

Controls                                   yes        yes         yes        yes         yes         yes
Control-Group Mean                        0.026      0.009       0.077      0.026       0.400       0.267
Treatment Effect Equality p-value         0.000      0.000       0.873      0.722       0.228       0.114
Observations                             61,879     61,879      13,261     13,261      15,487      15,487
R-squared                                 0.005      0.012       0.008      0.001       0.067       0.099
Notes: Table reports disclosure treatment effects at a four-week horizon by disclosure design. Each row
corresponds to a treatment arm with the indicated disclosure design. Any switching (odd columns) is an
indicator for whether the depositor switched to a different product with the same provider or withdrew
their entire balance. Internal switching (even columns) is switching to an different instant-access savings
product at the same bank. Controls include a quadratic in age and annual potential monetary gains and
indicators for gender and having a checking account with the same institution. Robust standard errors in
parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                  36
 Table 6: Disclosure Treatment Effect Heterogeneity by Individual Characteristics
                                      Front page Reverse
                                                                   Switching    Digital      SMS
                                       switching switching
                                                                     form      reminder    reminder
                                          box       box
                                          (1)              (2)        (3)        (4)          (5)
Treatment Indicator                      0.01*           -0.028     0.065**     0.026        0.016
                                        (0.006)         (0.018)     (0.026)    (0.023)      (0.022)
Treatment *
    Age 40-60 yrs                       -0.0003         0.004        -0.006    0.046**       -0.004
                                         (0.006)        (0.016)     (0.028)    (0.021)      (0.010)
    Age 60-80 yrs                         0.009          0.002       0.036     0.055**       -0.000
                                         (0.006)        (0.017)     (0.030)    (0.022)      (0.013)
    Age >80 yrs                         0.029***         -0.022      0.017      0.031        0.007
                                         (0.008)         (0.024)    (0.032)     (0.058)     (0.053)
    Gains £50-100                         0.006           0.020      0.022       0.026       -0.007
                                         (0.005)         (0.015)    (0.036)     (0.025)     (0.013)
    Gains £100-500                        0.003           0.015      0.032       0.001     -0.029***
                                         (0.005)         (0.012)    (0.023)     (0.020)     (0.010)
    Gains >£500                           0.007           -0.007     0.005       -0.029      -0.006
                                         (0.013)         (0.024)    (0.056)     (0.029)     (0.016)
    Checking Account                      0.005           0.026*     0.011        -0.02      0.015
                                         (0.004)         (0.014)    (0.036)     (0.020)     (0.022)
Age 40-60 yrs                          -0.017***        -0.034**     0.007     0.131***    -0.028***
                                         (0.005)         (0.014)    (0.012)     (0.017)     (0.005)
Age 60-80 yrs                           -0.011**       -0.039***     0.025*    0.245***    -0.022***
                                         (0.005)         (0.015)    (0.013)     (0.018)     (0.007)
Age >80 yrs                               -0.011          -0.012     0.003     0.150***    -0.045***
                                         (0.007)         (0.022)    (0.014)     (0.048)      (0.016)
Gains £50-100                           -0.008**       -0.055***   0.053***      0.034*    -0.032***
                                         (0.004)         (0.013)    (0.019)     (0.021)      (0.007)
Gains £100-500                            -0.003       -0.064***     -0.007    0.063***    -0.036***
                                         (0.004)         (0.011)    (0.009)     (0.016)      (0.005)
Gains >£500                               0.001         -0.046**     0.032     0.180***    -0.032***
                                         (0.010)         (0.022)    (0.032)     (0.023)      (0.008)
Checking Account                        0.011***          -0.015     -0.012    0.093***     0.031***
                                         (0.004)         (0.013)    (0.015)     (0.020)      (0.011)
Constant                                0.037***        0.132***     0.012     0.144***     0.062***
                                         (0.005)         (0.017)    (0.011)     (0.019)      (0.011)

Treatment Effect Equality p-value       0.0002         0.44         0.27         0.10          0.21
Observations                            61,879        13,261       4,003        15,487        30,202
R-squared                                0.005        0.013        0.041        0.068         0.014
Notes: Table reports treatment effects, control variable main effects, and treatment-control
interactions by trial. Dependent variable is any switching. All controls are indicator variables for
the indicated category. Checking account indicates whether the depositor had a checking account at
the same depository. P-values test whether all treatment-control interactions are jointly zero. Robust
standard errors in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                                  37
 Table 7. Disclosure Treatment Effect Heterogeneity by Reminder Timing
                                   Digital         Digital          SMS             SMS
                                    (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)
Treatment *
  4+ weeks before                   0.018*        0.054***
                                   (0.011)         (0.014)
  2-4 weeks before                0.046***          0.025
                                   (0.012)         (0.017)
  0-2 weeks before                0.102***        0.083***        0.019***        0.020***
                                   (0.014)         (0.023)         (0.005)         (0.005)
  Day of switch                                                   0.012***        0.013***
                                                                   (0.004)         (0.004)
  0-2 weeks after                 0.055***        0.037**         0.021***        0.021***
                                   (0.012)        (0.017)          (0.005)         (0.005)
  2-4 weeks after                 0.054***         0.045*
                                   (0.016)        (0.026)

Cohort Fixed Effects                                yes                             yes
Controls                            yes             yes             yes             yes
Observations                       15,487          15,487          30,202          30,202
R-squared                          0.073           0.074            0.010            0.010
Notes: Table reports disclosure treatment effect heterogeneity on any account switching by
the timing of reminders relative to an interest-rate decrease for the digital trial (email and
SMS, columns 1-2) and SMS trial (columns 3-4). Cohort fixed effects consist of fixed effects
for each account opening half month (column 2) and date (column 4). Controls include a
quadratic in age and annual potential monetary gains and indicators for gender and
having a checking account with the same institution. Robust standard errors in
parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                             38
Appendix

                    Figure A1: Example Call to Action Treatment Letter



 <technical summary>                                                       <account details>




 Check your account is still right for you.

 You’ve had your <account> for a little while now, and we know how important it is to make the most
 of your savings. So now might be a good time to consider if it’s still the best option, or whether
 there’s another savings account out there that could pay more interest, or suit you better.

 Your <account> currently offers
    • An interest rate of <x.x%> variable
    •     <conditions in relation to minimum deposit,
    •     withdrawals, and frequency of interest
    •     payments>

  How this account compares,
  We have a range of savings accounts available that could get you more from your money. Find out
  more at <weblink>

  Let us know,
  Making the move to another savings account is simple – sign in at <weblink> and select ‘renewal
  options’, call us on <phone> or pop in branch. If you’d prefer to carry on saving in your <account>
  you don’t need to do anything.




                                                 39
Figure A2: Example Treatment with Best internal and Market Rates with Graph
                                                                                                 Page 1 of 3

  <technical summary>                                                                  <account details>




  Important Information for you


  Check your account is still right for you.
  You’ve had your <account> for a little while now, and we know how important it is to make the
  most of your savings. So now might be a good time to consider if it’s still the best option, or
  whether there’s another savings account out there that could pay more interest, or suit you better.

  Your <account> currently offers
     • An interest rate of <x.x%> variable
     •     <conditions in relation to minimum deposit,
     •     withdrawals, and frequency of interest payments>
     •

   How this account compares,
   A of 10th August the savings account with the most similar features that we can offer is our
   <account> with an interest rate of < Y.YY% >, but there may be other suitable accounts within
   our range.

   Taking a look at the wider savings market, the three highest-paying easy access accounts across
   the market on 10th August offered an average rate of 1.08% variable. You can find out more about
   these options at www.moneysupermarket.com

       X.XX%        Your account

                               Y.YY%             <account>


                                           1.08%       Market alternative

   Interest you could earn this year on every £10,000 of savings
   <current
    <currentsavings
              savingsaccount>
                      account>                        £X.XX
                                                       £X.XX
    <alternativeinternal
   <alternative   internalsavings
                           savingsaccount>
                                   account>            £X.XX(£A.AA more)
                                                      £X.XX(£A.AA
   Highest paying accounts on the market*              £108.00(£83.00more)

   Let us know,
   Making the move to another savings account is simple – sign in at <weblink> and select ‘renewal
   options’, call us on <phone> or pop in branch. If you’d prefer to carry on saving in your
   <account> you don’t need to do anything.
   *Based on an average of the three highest paying equivalent accounts on the market at 10th August, 2015 using
   moneysupermarket.com. Restrictions and exclusions may apply.




                                                          40
                          Figure A3: Example Rate Change Letter
<Name>                                                                                     <firm name
<Address 1>
                                                                                          and address>
<Postcode>
                                                                                                   <Date>



Your <A/C name> account rate is reducing in                                   <date>               .
Dear <Name>,

Following a review of savings rates, we’re writing to let you know that the interest rate on your <A/C
name> account will change from .       <date>
The rate applied to your <A/C name> account is currently:

                                           Rate applied on
     Account          Account number                              AER/gross %              Net %
                                           balances from:
   <A/C name>           <XXXX1234>                £0+               <X.XX%>              <X.XX%>


From 25 August 2015, the variable rate below will apply:

                                           Rate applied on
     Account          Account number                              AER/gross %              Net %
                                           balances from:
   <A/C name>           <XXXX1234>                £0+                X.XX%
                                                                    <X.XX%>                Y.YY%
                                                                                         <X.XX%>


As we will be changing the interest rate on your account, you do have the option to close your account
or move your money elsewhere without charge. We do offer some other easy access savings accounts
that you may be eligible for. More information on alternative accounts is provided on the back of this
letter.

If you decide to close your account, move your money elsewhere, or want to speak to us about our
other savings accounts, we’d be happy to help you. If we don’t hear from you before     <date>           ,
we’ll assume that you’ve accepted this change.

If you have any questions about this change or would like to speak to <firm name>, please call us on
    <phone>      or visit  <weblink>

Thank you for saving with <firm name>.

Yours sincerely,


     <name>
    <position>                                                                       Continued overleaf




                                                  41
                     Figure A4: Example Reverse-Page Comparison Box
COULD YOU GET A BETTER RETURN ON YOUR <firm name> SAVINGS?

Your account: <A/C name>

Your balance: <£5,432> as at 30 April 2015

Your new interest rate: X.XX% AER/gross                   Your rate:       Our best             Average of 3 of the
                                                          X.XX%            Comparable rate:     highest paying
Account type: <A/C name> - you can withdraw
                                                          AER/gross        <A/C name> B.BB%     account: 1.32%
              money without charge                                         AER/gross (inc.      AER/gross (may inc.
                                                                           bonus)               bonus)
How does my savings account compare?
As at 26 May 2015, the highest interest rate available from <firm name> account is B.BB%
AER/gross on your <A/C name> (inclusive of <length> introductory bonus of C.CC% AER/gross). The <A/C
name> is an easy access account that can only be managed online using internet Banking – you cannot
access the account in branch or over the phone.

Three of the highest paying easy access account offered by other banks and building societies offer an
average rate of A.AA% AER/gross. Price comparison websites can provide information on rates offered by
other providers.

How much more could I earn in interest?
A balance of £5,432 in a <firm and A/C name>              would earn £X.XX this year.

Best comparable <alternative with firm>                                 £Y.YY in total (or £A.AA more) a year.

Average of three of the highest paying accounts on the market: <£xx.xx> in total (or <£xx.xx> more) a year.

Moving your money is easy.
To move your money to <alternative with firm> simply call us on <phone>, visit <weblink> or visit us in
branch to find out more. To move your money to an account offered by an alternative provider, open a
new account with them and transfer your funds.

Average of 3 of the highest paying accounts currently on offer on the market at 26 May 2015 using moneyfcats.co.uk.
Some restrictions may apply.
Calculations based on interest rates at 26 May 2015 and show interest earned prior to appropriate tax deductions
dependent on your individual circumstances and your current tax status. Rates are variable and subject to change. To
open an <A/C name> account you must be 16 or over, and have a current account with us.



If you’d like this in another format such as large print, Braille or audio
please ask in branch.

          <directions to customers with hearing or speech impairment>




                                                       42
Figure A5: Example Rate Change Letter with Detachable Switching Form

             <logo>                                                                                                 <contact
                                                                                                                     details>

       <Title><Initials 1><Surname>
       <Title><Initials 1><Surname>
       <Title><Initials 1><Surname>&<Title><Initials 1><Surname>
       <Address line>
       <Address line>
       <Address line>
       <Address line>
       <Post code>

       September 2015

       Dear <Salutations>

       Get a better rate of interest on your savings
       We are writing to let you know that you can get a better rate of interest on your savings.
       Your savings are currently in a <account name>, which pays an interest rate of x.xx% Gross PA/AER and
       provides easy access, meaning you can withdraw money without charge. By moving to another of our savings
       accounts you can earn a better rate of interest and make your savings work harder for you.

       How does my savings account compare?
       As at <date> 2015, the highest interest rate available from <firm name> on a comparable account is Y.YY%
       Gross PA/AER on our <account name>

       Three of the highest paying easy access accounts offered by other banks and building societies offer an average
       rate of <%> Gross PA/AER. Price comparison websites can provide information on rates offered by other
       providers.

       How much more could I earn in interest?
       To make it easier to compare the accounts, the following examples all use an account balance of £5,000 based
       on a Gross interest rate.
       > ₤5,000 balance in your existing <account name> ₤x.xx per year
       > ₤5,000 balance in our <account name> ₤Y.YY per year
       > ₤5,000 balance in one of the average 3 highest paying accounts on the market <₤> per year




       Your rate:                  <firm name> best
                                                                     Average of 3 of the
       X.XX%                       Comparable rate:
                                                                     highest paying accounts:
       Gross PA/AER                <account name>
                                                                     <%> Gross PA/ AER
                                   Y.YY% Gross PA/AER
                                                                     (may include bonus)

       What to do next
       If you would like to open an <account name> please contact us. If you have a passbook remember to send to us
       as well.
       If you would prefer to leave your savings where they are that’s fine – there is nothing you need to do.

                                                     <authorisation details>

       I would like to switch my savings to the <account name> account
       <Deposit account> <Account number>
       <title><initial><surname><and><title><initial><surname>
       <title><initial><surname><and><title><initial><surname>
       How much would you like to transfer?
       Either choose “Transfer all” or fill in the amount you want to transfer from your <deposit account>.
       Transfer all                  Transfer part of my savings       ₤
       How would you like your interest paid? Annually                       Monthly
       Interest will be paid to the same account as the interest from your <deposit account>. If you would like to change this,
       please tell us in writing.



                                               <declaration details>


        Signature(s)                                                       Date




                                                                  43
                 Figure A6: Example Email Disclosure

  Your savings account interest rate is reducing                                View this email here
  This email is intended for %%Title%% %%Last Name%%, %%Postal Code%%.


<logo and firm name>


  Your savings account
                   interest rate is reducing


Dr Tester

The interest rate on your <account> was for <length> and will end soon. From
%%closing-date%%, your account will change to an <account> account and the
interest rate will reduce, as shown below

                        Current
                                                                                   New interest
   Current           interest rate        New account         New balance
                                                                                    rate Gross/
 balance tiers        Gross / AER           name                 tiers
                                                                                   AER(variable)
                       (variable
     <₤X>              <X.XX%>             <account>             <₤X.XX>             <Y.YY%>

The interest rate on the <account> is a variable rate, which can be increased or reduced at any time


You can change to a different savings account at any time.

Although you can carry on using your account as you do now, you may prefer to
open another <account> or <                other options                     >

                                                        <condition for          <condition for
Account Name
                                                       interst rate tier>      interst rate tier>
                              Interest rate
                          Gross/AER (variable)
    <account>                                                 A.AA%                   B.BB%
                            for <length> on
                             balances <₤X>

The interest rates in the table above are correct as at 10 August 2015. This product can be withdrawn
from sale at any time.


If you’d like more information about the full range of options available:

            Visit our website           Find us in branches              Call us
              <weblink>                                                         <phone>

                                                                          <times of availability>




                                                44
Figure A7: Example Text Message Disclosure




                   45
  Figure A8: Example Test Message Disclosure with Varied Timing
One week before rate change            Day of rate change, version 1




Day of rate change, version 2            One week after rate change




                                46
