                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               THE PATENT TROLL:
                      BENIGN MIDDLEMAN OR STICK-UP ARTIST?

                                        David S. Abrams
                                          Ufuk Akcigit
                                           Gokhan Oz
                                        Jeremy G. Pearce

                                      Working Paper 25713
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25713


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2019




The authors would like to thank Alan C. Marco, Iain Cockburn, Ali Hortacsu, Casey, Mulligan,
Jill Grennan, Murat Alp Celik and seminar and conference participants at the U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office, Stanford University, 5th Annual Research Roundtable on Patents and
Technology Standards, and University of Bordeaux for very helpful feedback and discussions.
Akcigit gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the
Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation, and the National Science Foundation. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research, nor those of Analysis Group.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by David S. Abrams, Ufuk Akcigit, Gokhan Oz, and Jeremy G. Pearce. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Patent Troll: Benign Middleman or Stick-Up Artist?
David S. Abrams, Ufuk Akcigit, Gokhan Oz, and Jeremy G. Pearce
NBER Working Paper No. 25713
March 2019
JEL No. O31,O34

                                          ABSTRACT

How do non-practicing entities ("Patent Trolls") impact innovation and technological progress?
Although this question has important implications for industrial policy, little direct evidence
about it exists. This paper provides new theoretical and empirical evidence to fill that gap. In the
process, we inform a debate that has historically portrayed non-practicing entities (NPEs) as
either "benign middlemen", who help to reallocate IP to where it is most productive, or "stick-up
artists", who exploit the patent system to extract rents and thereby hurt innovation. We employ
unprecedented access to NPE-derived patent and financial data, as well as a novel model that
guides our data analysis. We find that NPEs acquire patents from small firms and those that are
more litigation-prone, as well as ones that are not core to the seller's business. When NPEs
license patents, those that generate higher fees are closer to the licensee's business and more
likely to be litigated. We also find that downstream innovation drops in fields where patents have
been acquired by NPEs. Finally, our numerical analysis shows that the existence of NPEs
encourages upstream innovation and discourages downstream innovation. The overall impact of
NPEs depends on the share of patent infringements that come from non-innovating producers.
Our results provide some support for both views of NPEs and suggests that a more nuanced
perspective on NPEs and additional empirical work are needed to make informed policy
decisions.


David S. Abrams                              Gokhan Oz
University of Pennsylvania                   Analysis Group
3501 Sansom Street                           Denver, CO 80202
Philadelphia, PA 19104                       United States
dabrams@law.upenn.edu                        gokhan.oz@analysisgroup.com

Ufuk Akcigit                                 Jeremy G. Pearce
Department of Economics                      University of Chicago
University of Chicago                        jgpearce@uchicago.edu
1126 East 59th Street
Saieh Hall, Office 403
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
uakcigit@uchicago.edu
                “Having made a really meritorious invention, and having secured a patent thereupon, the
                battle of the inventor, who would sell his patent, is just begun. Heretofore he may have
                done some good skirmishing, but now he must face the music of solid battle."

                                                                                     William Edgar Simonds
                                                         Practical Suggestions on the Sale of Patents, p.5, 1871


1    Introduction
Are Non-Practicing Entities (NPEs)1 , often referred to as “Patent Trolls”, good or bad for tech-
nological progress? This longstanding question has gained renewed urgency with their recent
proliferation. Concern about potential negative effects of NPEs has led to the introduction of
legislation in state legislatures and Congress aimed at curtailing their activity. The view of the
NPE as stick-up artist holds that they provide no benefits, but simply amass patents and hold
up companies, using the threat of litigation to extract rents. At the same time, legislative efforts
have been opposed by advocates who hold that NPEs can provide positive benefits akin to mar-
ket intermediaries found in a range of industries. According to this view of the NPE as benign
middleman, the market for patents requires intermediation to facilitate inventors monetizing their
ideas and overcoming the frictions noted in the opening quote. Thus, inventors who are not
well-positioned to fully utilize their invention may sell or license them through an NPE’s large
network of industrial companies.
    Despite the popularity and importance of the subject, the inner workings of NPEs have re-
mained mysterious, and discussions about them have mostly been based on anecdotal evidence.
This is largely because NPEs act in secrecy, making it harder for researchers to access micro data
on their direct business transactions and paid prices. We seek to inform this important debate by
analyzing extensive novel data obtained directly from large NPEs in order to understand their
impact on innovation. We develop a new model that incorporates NPEs to frame our empirical
analysis and calibrate it in order to understand whether NPEs facilitate or harm innovation.
    This paper makes two major contributions to our understanding of NPEs. We first develop a
model of innovation based on quality-ladder growth models that incorporates NPEs and makes
testable predictions. We then test the model by using a proprietary dataset with detailed financial,
transaction and technological information on tens of thousands of NPE-held patents (Abrams
et al., 2018). We build on prior work that has developed important metrics for patents, such as
litigation risk (Lanjouw and Schankerman, 2001) and patent distance (Akcigit et al., 2016), which
quantifies the technological similarity between patents or groups of patents. While our dataset
is quite large, it is far from the entire set of NPEs, and our empirical results should not be seen
as universal or representative. They provide a new window into the impact of large professional
NPEs.
    1 We define an NPE broadly as a firm whose primary source of revenue is from patent licensing fees or patent

litigation awards. In Section 2 we discuss the relationship with related terms such as patent assertion entities (PAEs)
or patent trolls.
   Even though NPEs have received increased attention in recent years, middlemen in the market
for ideas not a new phenomenon. In fact, the market for patents has been aided by intermediaries
for about as long as patents have existed. This market, like most, suffers from informational
and financial frictions that makes it harder to match the right buyers and sellers (Lamoreaux
and Sokoloff, 1999). Intermediaries have the potential to serve an important function in this
regard (Khan, 2014). People with meritorious inventions look for channels whereby they can be
compensated if they cannot make the best use of their invention. According to Lamoreaux and
Sokoloff (1999), 550 patent intermediaries were present in the 1880’s across the United States,
working to build a bridge between buyers and sellers of patents. There were even extensive
guidebooks for interacting with patent intermediaries, such as Simonds (1871). Khan (2014,
2015) also show how constant NPEs have been throughout history.
   Our analysis begins with a theoretical investigation which we use to guide our empirical
analysis. Following in the tradition of quality-ladder growth models (Aghion and Howitt, 1992;
Grossman and Helpman, 1991), we build a new model of innovation where patents can be in-
fringed and sold in the secondary market with the help of an intermediary. The intermediary has
two potential roles: as benign middleman and stick-up artist. In the model, patents are produced
with multiple levels of uncertainty. First, as in classical models, the arrival rate of innovation is
probabilistic. Second, unlike the traditional models, a patent can have differential fit (i.e. patent
distance as in Akcigit et al. (2016)) to the original inventor. This creates an incentive for an inven-
tor to sell a patent to another user if it does not fit the inventor’s portfolio well. An NPE, with its
more extensive network of buyers and sellers, facilitates this transaction and serves as a benign
middleman.
   In the model, there is also some probability other firms will infringe a particular patent. In
this case, the patent-holders can sue and win the case with a probability determined by their
legal and financial resources, which we capture by firm size. In their second role as stick-up
artist, NPEs can buy patents from weak inventors and use their legal power and new status as
the rightful owner of the patent to sue the infringing firm. This provides an incentive for smaller
firms to sell their patents to an NPE. We use this framework to generate a number of predictions
which we then test with our data as we detail below.
   In addition to deal-level acquisition and licensing data received directly from NPEs, we also
construct an index for how likely a patent is to be litigated (following Lanjouw and Schankerman
(2001)), and compute a distance measure that denotes how well a patent fits to a firm’s portfolio
(following Akcigit et al. (2016)). These core measures allow us to examine several questions,
which test predictions of the model: How do patent attributes, such as distance and likelihood
of litigation, impact the price paid by NPEs in acquisition deals? How does the entity size of
the original assignee affect likelihood of sale and price? When NPEs license patents, what patent
characteristics impact licensing revenue? Finally, using patent citation data, we also investigate
how the citation rate to patents varies around the time of acquisition by NPEs and whether there
is heterogeneity by patent value.

                                                  3
    In our empirical investigation, we find that patent distance contributes positively to the like-
lihood of a patent sale to an NPE, especially for large firms. Examining the source of NPE-held
patents, we also find that they buy patents predominantly from smaller entities, and more so for
litigation-prone patents. With another novel feature of our data, acquisition prices, we find that
NPEs pay more for patents from large firms. We also find that NPEs pay less for patents that are
a worse fit (greater distance) for the original inventor. Next, we focus on licensing transactions
and find that NPEs receive higher fees from patents that have a lower distance (better fit) to the
licensee’s portfolio. All of these findings corroborate predictions made in the model. Finally,
we find a decline in citations to NPE-acquired patents upon acquisition. This decline is driven
primarily by high-value patents.
    Our theoretical and empirical analysis is agnostic about the overall impact of NPEs on new
technology creation since the existence of NPEs can have both positive and negative effects on
innovation incentives. In order to understand the net effect of NPEs, we undertake a numerical
exercise in which we bring the model closer to the data by matching a number of informative
moments in our data using Simulated Method of Moments (SMM). We find mixed results de-
pending on the quantitative magnitudes of the role of the benign middleman and stick-up artist
mechanisms. The ultimate effect of NPEs on innovation depends on the source of patent in-
fringement. If the majority of infringement comes from innovating producers, we find that the
stick-up artist role dominates and NPEs reduce the overall innovation effort in the economy. If a
significant majority of infringement is due to non-innovating producers, the benign middleman
role dominates and NPEs increase the overall innovation effort.
    Taken together, the evidence in this paper does not solely support the benign middleman
or the stick-up artist theory. Rather, it suggests that there are some aspects of NPEs that may
increase aggregate innovation and some that may not. As debate continues both in academia
and the policy world, it will be helpful to keep these benefits and costs in mind. The rest of
the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides some institutional details and a summary
of the literature. In Section 3 we present our model of innovation with NPEs, stressing the
multiple roles NPEs can play. In Section 4 we introduce the data with the main empirical results
presented in Section 5. Section 6 presents the numerical analysis and calibration exercise. Section
7 concludes.


2   Background and Related Literature

Since the terms patent troll, NPE, and patent assertion entity (PAE) are frequently used to denote
similar or overlapping entities, it is useful to have a clear definition of what we study in this
paper. We define an NPE broadly as a firm whose primary source of revenue is from patent
licensing fees or patent litigation awards. This can include a large array of entities, from in-
dividual inventors who do not practice their inventions, to shell companies that file hundreds
of lawsuits, to universities, to patent aggregators whose primary revenues come from licensing

                                                 4
fees. Some use the term PAE almost synonymously to NPE, but excluding entities that perform
research, such as universities (and potential inventors who still invent). We here also exclude
a related group of legal entities that issued demand letters to hundreds of businesses alleging
patent infringement for the use of networked scanners to email documents.2
   We will use the term NPE in this paper and focus on large firms that purchase patents and
primarily license them or litigate when they cannot license. We focus on this category for several
reasons. First, these are the types of NPEs receiving the most attention from the media and
legislatures in recent years. They are also arguably the most interesting case because there are
plausible positive and negative attributes. In addition, university licensing is unlikely to become
a hot policy issue. Finally, not only is their effect on innovation more contentious and uncertain,
these large firms are most likely making the biggest impact of the set of middlemen in markets
for innovation.


Related Literature      This paper contributes to an extensive literature that links the role of patents
to growth in the aggregate economy. In particular, Eaton and Kortum (1996) estimate a model
to explain international patterns of productivity and patenting while Jaffe and Trajtenberg (1999)
show how international knowledge flows occur through patents. Akcigit et al. (2017) show that
economies that produce more patents also grow faster in the long-run. Kortum (1997) emphasizes
the role of searching for ideas in linking patents to productivity growth. As Ahmadpoor and
Jones (2017) and Henderson et al. (1998) show, patents can contribute to aggregate productivity
through channeling basic academic research to products. Caballero and Jaffe (1993) estimate a
quality-ladder model using patent data to quantify the role of creative destruction on economic
growth. At a more micro level, Bloom and Van Reenen (2002) show that patents have a significant
impact on firm-level productivity and market value. Blundell et al. (1999) find a strong and robust
effect of the headcounts of innovations and patents on market share.
   In the theoretical model, we build on endogenous growth theory where ideas are the fun-
damental building blocks of long-run growth. Our framework applies quality ladder models
following in the tradition of Aghion and Howitt (1992), Grossman and Helpman (1991), Klette
and Kortum (2004), Lentz and Mortensen (2008), Acemoglu et al. (2018) and Akcigit and Kerr
(2018). Other papers in this space, i.e. Benhabib et al. (2014), Konig et al. (2016), and Perla and
Tonetti (2014) focus on how growth emerges initially from innovation but also from imitation as
technologies ripple through the economy. Patents here can serve as a channel for incentivizing
idea creation, making information available to the public, as well as increasing the value of a
firm.
   For the most part, idea transfer and middlemen in the market for ideas has not been central
to the theory of growth–but as Serrano (2010) and Akcigit et al. (2016) note, the transfer of ideas
can be key for a firm building its portfolio. Within the quality ladder framework, Akcigit et al.
(2016) address the misallocation and reallocation of ideas being a key contributor to economic
  2 See   http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2013/01/patent-trolls-want-1000-for-using-scanners/


                                                    5
growth. In another theoretical exploration, Chatterjee and Rossi-Hansberg (2012) discuss how
idea “spinoffs” can be fundamental to growth and address problems of information asymmetry
in marketing new ideas. Although the role of NPEs is not addressed in this literature, these
investigations leave a large space for a middleman that can reduce informational frictions.
   Serrano (2010, 2018) finds that patent renewal and transfer is an important component of
innovation. As such, there seems to be a role for the NPE in serving as a important player in
this market. Indeed, Akcigit et al. (2016) find that the secondary market in patents is mostly
governed by middlemen. Griffith et al. (2003, 2004) find that R&D investment also allows firms
to generate “absorptive capacity,” as firms may spend more on R&D with the expectation that
they can engage in technology transfer through middlemen. This absorptive capacity may also
make firms more likely to be linked to networks of patent middlemen–with capabilities to move
on ideas the firm itself does not create.
   This paper also contributes to a rich literature on industrial policy, knowledge spillovers
(Bloom et al., 2013), and firm size e.g. (Garicano et al., 2016). In particular, we focus on issues
related to patent and innovation policy. Galasso and Schankerman (2015) use exogenous vari-
ation from patent examination and invalidation and find a heterogeneous effect of changes in
patent rights on downstream innovation, significantly depending on industry. We may expect
the NPE to reflect this underlying reality, as areas with high litigation may induce the NPE to
fulfill their role through their legal resources. In areas where downstream innovation is unaf-
fected, the NPE may indeed be a benign middleman simply serving the role of improving idea
allocation. Galasso et al. (2013) use exogenous changes in tax rates and find that taxes strongly
affect the market for innovation. In addition, they find the reallocation of patent rights reduces
litigation risk, indicating that patents are moving to more highly valued owners.
   We unite this mostly theoretical growth literature with a burgeoning empirical literature on
the role of NPEs in the market for innovation that has primarily focused on the role of NPE as
stick-up artist. The biggest challenge of this set of papers has been data limitations. As discussed
earlier, NPEs often operate in private and it is very hard to get at both the transactions and the
underlying prices of these transactions. However, some creative papers have tried to measure
this NPE impact through various methods.
   Some studies attempt to measure the impact of NPE assertions outside of the courtroom,
drawing from data beyond claims litigated to finality. In a well-known study, Bessen and Meurer
(2014) utilized survey data gathered by RPX, a risk-management company helping firms deal
with patent litigation. RPX invited 250 (nonrandomly selected) firms to participate in the survey,
of which 82 provided information on lawsuits, and 46 provided information on non-litigation as-
sertions (such as demand letters). Bessen and Meurer (2014) concluded from this limited sample
that NPE assertions resulted in $29 billion in direct costs, disproportionately burdening smaller
and medium-sized companies. Similarly, Chien (2014) relied on nonrandom survey responses
and a database of patent cases, curated by RPX, to conclude that most defendants in NPE suits
are smaller companies. Through polling in-house attorneys across an array of industries, Feld-

                                                 6
man and Lemley (2015) find that when an NPE expressed an interest in licensing from firms,
it did not induce further innovation. Lu (2012) finds the royalty rates paid to NPEs are similar
to those paid to practicing entities, using information from vendors that aggregate royalty rates
primarily drawn from companies’ public SEC filings.
   Tucker (2014) focuses on the heathcare technology industry and finds a large reduction in
sales of defendants’ software projects that were allegedly infringed by a selected NPE’s patents,
while surrounding products and firms did not see the same effect. A limitation of this study is
the single focus on defendants. When Kiebzak et al. (2016) look across industry by district pairs,
they find that venture capital investment and patent litigation follows an inverted-U relationship.
This could indicate how litigation to protect patents both holds back investment and induces new
innovators.
   Another strain of research focuses solely on litigated cases, deriving information on NPE
activity from awarded damages or whether an asserted patent is found invalid. Risch (2012)
attempted to defend the decision to only include litigation data in a study of the 10 most litigious
NPEs by asserting that it is more likely that litigious NPEs’ activities incur greater social costs.
Cohen et al. (2016, 2017, 2018) used proprietary data from PatentFreedom, another company
that aggregates litigation data, in arguing that NPEs are more likely to target cash-rich firms.
However, Ashtor et al. (2013) rejected the notion NPE litigation activity differs significantly from
practicing entity patent assertions. They examined over 1,750 patent cases litigated to a verdict,
and found little difference in outcomes between NPEs and practicing entities. Cotropia et al.
(2014) hand-coded information about the litigants in all patent infringement lawsuits filed in 2010
and 2012, concluding that the hype about the dangers posed by NPE litigation is overblown.
   Some scholars, including Schwartz and Kesan (2014), have questioned the generality of con-
clusions based on data that is potentially unrepresentative and unreliable. They suggest that
there may be an overemphasis on technology firms, and express concerns about varying def-
initions of what constitutes an NPE. In terms of using litigation data, the aggregate economic
effect of NPEs may be underestimated, since many assertions may take place outside the scope
of publicly accessible records. Instead, NPEs may rely on extracting licensing royalties, much of
which is contractual and not subject to public disclosure.
   Fischer and Henkel (2012) may not be subject to this problem as the classify NPEs using
public searches, newspapers, blogs, and websites. With these identified NPEs, they then search
the patent assignment databases to arrive at a sample of patent acquisitions by NPEs. Using
proxy indicators for various characteristics of the acquired patents, they conclude that NPE-
acquired patents are likely to be higher-quality and of broader scope and application than non-
NPE patents.
   Czarnitzki and Toole (2011) explore the role of patent protection in mitigating uncertainty,
something which a reliable intermediary can improve. Toole and Turvey (2009) find that reduc-
ing risk, in turn, can lead to increases in follow-on funding. This would be especially valuable
for liquidity-constrained small firms–the types of firms we find most commonly selling to NPEs.

                                                 7
This complements Haber and Werfel (2015, 2016) who present experimental evidence that NPEs
provide insurance and liquidity to firms by committing resources to protecting inventors’ prop-
erty rights.
    Lemley and Feldman (2016) argue that NPEs are more prominent in litigation than in fa-
cilitating intellectual property transfers. They discuss the expanding importance of NPEs in
the market for patents, indicating that NPEs account for the majority of patent lawsuits filed.
However, Cotropia et al. (2014) note that when we focus on the number of alleged infringers as
opposed to cases, as in Lemley and Feldman (2016), there is little increase in NPE share of liti-
gation. While Lemley and Feldman (2016) suggest the idea of the middleman is not convincing,
they caution that the evidence is from small sample survey data.
    When it comes to NPEs, the underlying legal institutions will be a relevant concern. Feng
and Jaravel (2017) find that heterogeneity in patent outcomes is often based on how the rights
are crafted in the examination process. They find that NPEs are active in targeting patents with
“lenient” examiners–backing up the story that NPEs can act as stick-up artists. As Marco and
Miller (2017) and Graham et al. (2015) note, problems in the examination process can lead to
patents having a higher risk of litigation. There are cases where patent thickets and aggregation,
in particular from NPEs, can reduce innovation. If this is prominent, we can see how problems in
the underlying property institution can induce NPEs to act more as stick-up artist than middle-
man, which could be linked to the “destructive” role of patents, which Nicholas (2013) addresses
in general. Our paper allows for both channels discussed in this section. We start with the model
to frame our empirical analysis.


3   Model
In this section, we build a tractable model of production with innovation to address the role
NPEs play in the market for innovation. By examining a firm’s decision to sell to an NPE or
license from one, our goal is to find theoretical implications for the stick-up artist and benign
middleman views of NPEs, which we then test with data. The model generates a number of
predictions about how patent and firm characteristics, such as patent fit (distance), litigation risk,
and firm size, impact the decision to sell or license; in addition, the model generates predictions
on how these characteristics affect the prices at which NPEs buy and license. This provides
the framework that will guide our empirical analysis in Section 5 and inform our calibration in
Section 6.


Basic Environment Consider a simple economy represented by a unit circle C , as in Figure 1a.
There are many intermediate-good-producing firms that are located along that unit circle, each
of which produces a differentiated good i. A unique final good is produced from a combination
of all these intermediate goods as follows: Y = 1−1 σ C qiσ k1i −σ di, where k i denotes the quantity
                                                     R

and qi the quality of intermediate good i used in final good production. The final-good sector

                                                  8
                            Figure 1: Model Economy, Unit Circle C
      Firm i                                                                     Firm i

                                       Firm k                                                                          Firm k


                       r = 1/π                                                                          r = 1/π


                                                                       di                                                 dk



                                                                                                                  Patent z
        (a) Example of Two Firms i and k                                            (b) Two Firms and a Patent z


operates with perfect competition, and we normalize the price of the final good to 1 without any
loss of generality. Therefore, the objective function in the final-good sector is simply:
                                                                                     
                                      1
                                           Z                           Z
                           max                     qiσ k1i −σ di   −           Pi k i di ,   ∀i ∈ C .
                            ki       1−σ       C                           C

where Pi is the price of variety i. This maximization problem delivers the following demand
function for each intermediate good i:
                                                      Pi = qiσ k− σ
                                                                i .                                                             (1)

   Each intermediate good i is produced by a monopolist who owns a patent for their cutting
edge technology. The monopolist can produce k i at a constant marginal cost ψ in terms of the
unique final good. Each monopolist firm chooses a price and quantity to maximize profits on
its product line, taking the demand in (1) into account. The profit-maximization problem of the
monopolist with a cutting edge technology for intermediate good i can then be written as
                                              n                 o
                                      Πi = max qiσ k1i −σ − ψk i .
                                                   k i ≥0


   The first-order condition of this maximization problem implies a constant markup over marginal
                                      h        i1
                                        (1− σ ) σ
cost, Pi = ψ/(1 − σ), and thus k i =      ψ       qi . Equilibrium profit for a product line with tech-
nology qi is
                                                        Πi = πqi ,                                                              (2)
                                       1− σ
where we define π ≡ σ [(1 − σ) /ψ]      σ      .
                                                                                                                        1− σ
    The usual firm size proxies, such as profits Πi = πqi , and sales Pi k i = [(1 − σ ) /ψ] σ qi , both
increase linearly in quality qi . Therefore, in what follows, we proxy for firm size using qi .

                                                              9
3.1     Patents

Patent Distance and Firm Quality The circumference of the circle C in Figure 1 is normalized
to 2 such that the maximum distance between any two points along the circle is equal to 1. Like
firms, innovations (patents) in production are located along the circle. Figure 1b illustrates this
in an example. Firms i and k are located in different parts of the circle. There is a patent z that
has a distance di to firm i and dk to firm k.
      Firm quality improves upon the invention or acquisition of new, patented innovations. Con-
sider an innovating firm i. Its quality improves according to the following law of motion

                                            qinew = qi + γxi

where γ is some scale parameter and xi ∈ [0, 1] is the goodness of fit of the patent to the firm,
which is the inverse of patent distance di ∈ [0, 1]:


                                                di = 1 − xi .

      Low values of di (i.e., high xi ) indicate that a patent is a good fit to the firm i. Given the
linearity of the profit function in (2), the incremental gain to monopolist i from using this patent
is

                                    ∆Πi = π [qi + γ (1 − di )] − πqi
                                                                                                  (3)
                                        = πγ (1 − di ) .

Given that π and γ will appear multiplicatively for the rest of the analysis, we normalize γ = 1
such that
                                          ∆Πi = π (1 − di ) .                                     (4)


3.2     Non-practicing Entities

There are NPEs in this economy that may act as (i ) middlemen or as (ii ) stick-up artists. They have
two key features: First, they have a broad network of firms to which they may license patents
as middlemen. Second, they have substantial financial and legal resources, which increase their
likelihood of winning a case in court when they act as a stick-up artist. We detail these features
now.


The Middleman         Any firm i that owns a patent can decide to keep its patent or sell it to the
NPE. The NPE, through its wide network in the market, can potentially find a user k that is a
better fit for the patent with shorter distance dk < di or larger profit scale, Ωk (discussed below).
Having access to a large network is the first advantage of the NPE over a single innovating firm.
To keep things tractable and allow for focus on other dimensions, we use this as a reduced form

                                                     10
treatment, which is microfounded in Akcigit et al. (2016).


The Stick-up Artist The second key ingredient of our model is that patents may be infringed
upon by other firms. Let us denote the firm that infringes on firm i’s patent by j. When j infringes
on i’s patent, firm i can go to court and sue j. Winning a court case depends on resources that
a firm has to fight in the court, as has been empirically shown in Haber and Werfel (2015, 2016).
We capture this by assuming that a firm i wins the lawsuit with probability β i where β i increases
in firm size such that:3
                                               β i = β(qi ) and β0 (qi ) > 0.

    The second strength of the NPE is that it has greater experience and resources to fight in
court, i.e., it has a high probability of winning in court, β npe . Therefore, when a firm does not
have enough resources and faces a risk of infringement, it might be desirable for the firm to sell
the patent to an NPE.
    We describe the rest of the dynamics of the model with the help of the game tree shown in
Figure 2.

                                                  Figure 2: Game Tree
                                                                                                           rt         Vicourt
                                                                                                   cou
                                                                                         i goes to
                                                                         es
                                                                  f r ing ility α
                                                              j in obab
                                                                 pr                       i and
                                                             ith                                  j sett
                                                           w                                            le             pi,j
                                              Firm i,
                                                 keep
                                   at   ent    Vi
                            ep sp                           No i
                       i ke                             with     nfri
                                                             prob ngement
                                                                                                i produces                    prod
                                                                  abilit                                                 Vi
   Distance di ∈ [0, 1],                                                 y (1
                                                                              −α                                 rt      court
   cost of NPE contact                                                              )
                                                                                               oe   s to cou            Vnpe
                                                                                         NPE g
  e ∈ [0, κ ] are realized                                          inges
                                                              j infr ability α
                        i se                                     prob
                           lls                             with                           NPE
                         for to NP            NPE,
                                                                                                 and
                                                                                                       j sett
                             pi,   E                                                                            le      pnpe,j
                                 n pe         Vnpe
                                                         No i
                                                     with     nfri
                                                          prob ngement                                                   pnpe,k
                                                               abilit
                                                                      y (1                 License to some k
                                                                           −α       )   for production with dk


   3 Our analysis relies on the fact that an NPE and a patent producer have differential bargaining and/or negotiating
power on the market. To keep the math tractable, we will assume symmetric bargaining power throughout yet
differential negotiating power across firms and NPEs. Alternatively, one can model the bargaining power (instead of
the winning probability) as a function of the firm size. The results would go through the same way, yet the expressions
would be less tractable.


                                                                 11
    In the beginning of the game, firm i produces a patent with a random distance di ∈ [0, 1] with
mean νi . In addition, firm i realizes an idiosyncratic cost of finding an NPE, e. Next, it decides
whether to sell it to the NPE or keep it within the firm.

    If it decides to keep the patent, then the game evolves according to the upper branch.4 Before
production takes place, the patent is infringed with probability α. While α is assumed to be
exogenous in this section, it will be endogenized in Section 6. If there is no infringement, which
                                                                                                          prod
has probability (1 − α) , then the firm produces and collects the end-of-period return Vi                        which
is simply equal to the marginal profit (the additional profit that the firm makes by using its new
patent)
                                                  prod
                                               Vi        = π (1 − d i ) .

If there is infringement, which happens with probability α, then i can no longer procure the
incremental profits without patent enforcement; thus i will try to settle with j. If they cannot
settle, i goes to court and wins with probability β i . When i wins the case, it gets compensated for
lost profits π (1 − di ). Hence, the expected value of going to court is:

                                              Vicourt = β i π (1 − di ) .                                          (5)

Let Ω j denote the profit that j is making by infringing i’s patent. When the court decides in favor
of i, then firm j also loses Ω j . Settlement generates a surplus that the two parties split through
Nash bargaining with equal bargaining power for both sides. Let us denote the settlement (li-
censing) fee that i will collect from j by pi,j . Then the fee is simply the solution to the following
problem
                                                            0.5                              0.5
                          pi,j = arg max pi,j − Vicourt            Vicourt + β i Ω j − pi,j          .             (6)

Note that player i could receive Vicourt if there is no agreement and therefore her net surplus
from bargaining is pi,j − Vicourt . Likewise, player j will need to pay Vicourt and also give up his
Ω j additional profit if the case goes to court and the court decides in favor of i with probability
β i . Therefore j’s surplus from bargaining is Vicourt + β i Ω j . This problem delivers the following
settlement amount
                                                                   βi Ωj
                                               pi,j = Vicourt +          ,
                                                                     2
where Vicourt is expressed in (5). The settlement fee that j pays i is increasing in i’s probability of
winning the case β i , and in the profit that firm j is making by infringing i’s patent.

    Now, going back one step in the game tree in Figure 2, we can calculate the expected value




   4 Since our focus on this paper is the role of an NPE, we do not model the possibility of a patent owner selling her

patent to the end user. This structure is imposed without apology since patents are sold mainly through intermediaries
due to their larger networks, as described in Akcigit et al. (2016).


                                                            12
to i of keeping the patent as

                              keep                        prod
                            Vi       = αpi,j + (1 − α) Vi
                                                          Ωj                                                      (7)
                                                            
                                     = αβ i π (1 − di ) +      + (1 − α ) π (1 − d i ) .
                                                          2

    Next, consider what happens if i decides to sell the patent to the NPE, as illustrated by the
lower branch. With probability α, there is a chance that j infringes the patent that now belongs
to the NPE. In this case, the NPE can go to court or settle with j.5 There are two differences from
(6): one is that the NPE by definition does not produce and therefore does not have π (1 − di ) as
a bargaining chip. However, the NPE can block j from gaining Ω j and has potentially a higher
probability of winning, β npe . Therefore, the problem for the settlement can be written as
                                                             0.5                        0.5
                                 pnpe,j = arg max pnpe,j            β npe Ω j − pnpe,j

which delivers the following settlement fee that the NPE will charge j:

                                                             β npe Ω j
                                                  pnpe,j =             .
                                                                2

If there is no infringement with probability (1 − α), the NPE licenses the patent to some firm k
with a distance equal to dk ∼ Dk , which is taken from a uniform distribution on the unit circle.
and profit equal to Ωk . The price again is determined through Nash bargaining as follows:
                                                    0.5                        0.5
                                                           Ωk (1 − dk ) − pnpe,k
                                            
                            pnpe,k = arg max pnpe,k                                   .

The price is simply
                                                          Ω k (1 − d k )
                                               pnpe,k =                  .
                                                                2
With these prices, we can compute the expected value to the NPE of owning the patent:

                                          Vnpe = αpnpe,j + (1 − α) pnpe,k .                                       (8)

At this point, we have solved for the end-game values in each state of the world. Knowing the
continuation values in each branch of Figure 2, how much would the inventor i charge the NPE
for a patent sale? We are now ready to solve for the bargaining problem between i and the
NPE. After the realization of the distance, firm i can sell the patent to the NPE through Nash
                            keep
bargaining. If Vnpe > Vi           , this problem can be written as

                                                       keep 0.5
                                                                            0.5
                           pi,npe = arg max pi,npe − Vi         Vnpe − pi,npe      .                              (9)

   5 Note  how, in equilibrium, no party goes to court. Yet, the possibility of going to court generates a threat that
affects that bargaining through the outside option.


                                                          13
Hence, the equilibrium price that firm i charges the NPE is:

                                                          keep
                                                         Vi       + Vnpe
                                              pi,npe =                   ,                        (10)
                                                                  2
           keep
where Vi           is expressed in (7) and Vnpe in (25). We assume that there is a cost of contracting
with an NPE, e, that comes from a uniform distribution as e ∼ U [0, κ ]. There will be a sale
between i and the NPE if and only if there is a potential surplus that is bigger than the cost,
            keep
pi,npe − Vi        > e. Therefore, the probability of sale can be written as

                                                                         keep
                                                              pi,npe − Vi
                                            Pr (sale) =                                           (11)
                                                                     κ


3.3    Model Predictions

In this section, we generate a number of important comparative statistics that we later test using
micro data.6 First, we focus on the determinants of the probability of a patent sale to the NPE in
(11). Our first result relates to the NPE’s role as a stick-up artist, and describes how patent sale
relates to litigation risk and firm size.



Prediction 1        The NPE is more likely to buy patents from small firms:

                                                   β 0 ( qi ) α                  Ωj
                                                                                   
                                  ∂
                                     Pr (sale) = −                π (1 − d i ) +
                                 ∂qi                   2κ                        2
                                                < 0.

Moreover, this effect is more pronounced for litigation-prone patents:

                                 ∂2                 β 0 ( qi )        Ωj
                                                                                         
                                      Pr (sale) = −                      + π (1 − d i )
                                ∂α∂qi                  2κ             2
                                                 < 0.

This follows from the fact that small firms have a harder time defending themselves in court (i.e.,
small β i ). As a result, the NPE purchases patents from small firms in order to enforce their patent
rights in the case of infringement. Thus, the NPE purchases more often from smaller firms, and
at even more so for litigation-prone patents.


      Next, we focus on the NPE as a middleman, which reallocates innovations to reduce the
distance to the owning firm.

  6 We   write out the math for the proofs more complete in Appendix D


                                                          14
Prediction 2     The likelihood of a patent sale increases as the distance of the patent from the initial
innovating firm increases:

                                      ∂              αβ i π + (1 − α) π
                                         Pr (sale) =
                                     ∂di                     2κ
                                                    > 0.

Moreover, this effect is more pronounced for large firms, i.e.,

                                          ∂2                β0 (qi )απ
                                                Pr (sale) =
                                        ∂di ∂qi                 2κ
                                                            > 0.

The intuition for this result is that patents that are a poor fit with the inventing firm will not
be well-utilized. The inventing firm will therefore consider selling it in the secondary market
through the NPE. This is especially true for large firms. Because large firms have greater court
capability, they are more likely to use the NPE to reduce distance. Thus, the impact of distance
on probability of sale is more pronounced for large firms.

   Our model has clear predictions on the sale price of a patent that was expressed in (10). We
now turn to these predictions.

Prediction 3    The NPE pays more for large firms’ patents:

                                                                              Ωj
                                                            h                      i
                                   ∂pi,npe     β 0 ( q i ) α π (1 − d i ) +   2
                                           =
                                    ∂qi                       2
                                           > 0.

The equilibrium price of a patent is determined through Nash bargaining as described in (9).
Since legal strength and resources are increasing in firm size, the outside option of a patent is
higher for large firms. Hence, large firms receive a higher price for their patents.

   Next, we focus on the link between sale price and patent distance.

Prediction 4    The acquisition price decreases as patent distance to the seller increases:

                                        ∂pi,npe    [αβ i + 1 − α] π
                                                =−
                                         ∂di               2
                                                <0

The intuition for this result is similar to its counterpart on patent sale probability. Distant patents
are less valuable to the original inventor, which lowers the outside value of the patent. This
reduces the price that is asked by the seller.

                                                       15
      We now turn to the licensing side.

Prediction 5 The average price that a licensing firm pays to the NPE decreases as distance to the licensee
increases.

                                                    ∂pnpe,k   Ω
                                                            =− k
                                                     ∂dk       2
                                                              < 0,

      The intuition here is straightforward. More distant patents are worth less to licensees, so they
have a lower willingness to pay.


3.4      The NPE and Overall Innovation

How does the existence of an NPE affect incentives to innovate? The NPE influences both down-
stream (firm j) and upstream innovation (firm i). While the overall effect is not obvious, in this
section we study each of these in turn.


3.4.1     Downstream Entry into the Market

Here we consider the endogenous innovation decision of a downstream firm j and endogenize
infringement probability, α, which we took as exogenous in the previous section. Our analysis
proceeds in two steps. First, we consider a market without an NPE; then, we examine the change
in innovation rates when an NPE enters the market.


The Case without an NPE               In the above model, parameter α captured the probability that a
downstream firm j infringes firm i’s patent. In reality, this can happen because (i) the down-
stream firm is a non-innovator and simply produces a "me-too" product with probability φ, or
(ii) because the downstream firm made an attempt to innovate a brand-new product with en-
dogenous probability µ j but fell short of being sufficiently non-obvious and ended up infringing
i’s patent with probability τ. Therefore α has two components:

                                              α=        φ          + τµ j
                                                       |{z}          |{z}
                                                   non−innovator     innovator

where φ captures the probability that a non-innovating and τµ j an innovating downstream j
infringes i.7
      We focus now on the endogenous innovation decision µ j . Recall that the incremental profit of
firm j from adding a new technology to its portfolio is simply Ω j . Products produced with this
new technology may infringe an existing patent with probability τ, and when there is no NPE in
the market, there will be a side settlement between firm i and j with expected price E( pi,j ). There
  7 In   Section 6, we will make the necessary assumptions to ensure that α ∈ [0, 1].


                                                           16
                                                         ξ
                                                       µj
is a convex cost to innovation c(µ j ) =               ηξ    where ξ > 1 governs the convexity of the cost function.
Therefore the innovation decision is simply
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                     ξ
                                                                                                   µj 
                                       µ j τ (Ω j − E( pi,j )) + (1 − τ )Ω j −
                                                                           
                            max                                                                            .
                             µj                                                                    ηξ 

This implies that, when there is no threat of an NPE, the equilibrium innovation decision is

                                               no −npe                              1
                                                             = η (Ω j − τ E[ pi,j ] ] ξ −1 .
                                                              
                                           µj


The Case with an Active NPE Consider now the case of an NPE in the market. This time,
inventor i has the option of using the NPE in the market. Thus, the expected price j will pay is
equal to:
                 E( p.,j ) = Pr(i uses NPE) × pnpe,j + [1 − Pr(i uses NPE)] × E[ pi,j ]

paid by j in the case of a conflict. Therefore, the maximization problem becomes
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                     npe ξ 
                                                                                                       
                             
                             
                                   npe
                                                                                                    µj         
                                               τ (Ω j − E( p.,j )) + (1 − τ )Ω j −
                                                                               
                      max
                       npe
                                  µj                                                                               .
                       µj    
                                                                                                    ηξ        
                                                                                                               

In equilibrium, the innovation rate is simply

                                                 npe                          1
                                                       = η (Ω j − τ E( p.,j ) ] ξ −1 .
                                                        
                                               µj

                                                                                                 npe           no −npe
Now, we can focus on the change in the innovation rate ∆µ j ≡ µ j                                        − µj            with and without
an NPE in the market. The change in innovation rate is simply

                                       1
                                               h                        ξ −1 1                       1 i
                       ∆µ j = η ξ −1                Ω j − τ E( p.,j )              − Ω j − τ E( pi,j ) ξ −1
                                                                                    


   When E( p.,j ) > E( pi,j ) the NPE decreases downstream innovation. We do indeed find this to
be the case in almost all specifications of our calibration exercise in Section 6.


3.4.2   Upstream Innovation

We have already shown how NPEs can decrease innovation incentives of downstream firms. We
now look at the innovation incentives of upstream firms. Firm i’s innovation decision problem
will look similar to j’s problem. We start in the case without the NPE:
                                                               (                     ξ
                                                                                         )
                                                                             µ
                                                       max         µi Vkeep − i
                                                        µi                   ηξ

                                                                     17
   which implies
                                                                          ξ −1 1
                                                        µi = ηVkeep

When there is an NPE, the maximization problem becomes

                                                                                                 npe
                                   (                                                                     )
                                                                                            (µ )ξ
                                                                                           − i
                                                                                     
                            max
                             npe
                                       µi η max E[ pi,npe − e], E[Vkeep ]                                    ,
                             µi                                                               ηξ

   yielding
                                    npe                                    1
                                  µi      = η max E[ pi,npe − e], E[Vkeep ] ξ −1 .

   The existence of an NPE in a market increases the outside option for the original producer of
                                                                                                                 npe      no −npe
the patent. Hence, if we denote the change in innovation effort of firm i as ∆µi ≡ µi                                  − µi         ,
then we can show that
                                                                  1                 1
                         ∆µi = η [max(E[ pi,npe − e], E[Vkeep ])] ξ −1 − η E[Vkeep ] ξ −1
                                                                       

                              ≥ 0,

which follows from the fact that (by i’s revealed preference)
                                                                                 
                                       max[E[ pi,npe − e], E[Vkeep ]] ≥ E[Vkeep ]




3.4.3   Overall Innovation

The paramount policy question is how NPEs impact overall innovation in the market. While the
existence of an NPE in the market provides additional innovation incentives to the upstream firm
i, it may induce enough of a reduction in downstream innovation by firm j to be a net negative
force on innovation on the whole. Consider i and j’s innovations, both with and without the
NPE. Note that with an active NPE i’s innovation rate increases while j’s downstream innovation
is generally negative though uncertain.8 The change innovation rate to adding the NPE is

                                               npe      no −npe          npe          no −npe
                                  ∆µ ≡ (µ j          − µj         ) + ( µi      − µi            ) ≶ 0.
                                       |              {z          } |            {z             }
                                                     (−/+)                          (+)


We note here the ambiguous effect on overall innovation. Therefore, we approach this question
in two ways. First, in Section 5, we look at follow-on innovation for patents that go to the NPE.
Then, in order to characterize the general equilibrium effects and understand the numerical
properties of this result and our model in general, we do a calibration exercise in Section 6.

  8 This   is detailed further in Appendix D.6


                                                                  18
3.5     Final Remarks on the Theory

In the model above, we focused on various predictions of impacts on patent sales and pricing.
Given the extensive discussion on NPE’s and patent litigation, we explore how patent litigation
risk affects patent sale probability and prices. Through the lens of our model, litigation risk
affects the likelihood of a sale as follows:
                                                                                           
                              β npe − β i Ω j                               Ω k (1 − d k ) 
                                         
                ∂ Pr (sale)
                            =                 + [ 1 − β i ] π ( 1 − d i ) −                 /2κ
                    ∂α       
                               |      2         {z                       } |       2
                                                                                  {z      }
                                                                                            
                                                                                                    (12)
                                              Stick −up Artist                 Middleman

                            ≶ 0.

Note that the impact of litigation has both positive and negative impacts on the likelihood of a
sale. The overall sign depends on the specific role of the NPE. If the dominant role of the NPE
is to defend a firm’s patent rights in court, then increased litigation risk increases the likelihood
of a sale. However, if the dominant role of an NPE is to allocate innovations more efficiently in
the market (through lower dk or higher Ωk ), then higher litigation risk has a negative impact on
sales. This is because the higher litigation risk mitigates the NPE’s ability to allocate innovations
to a better user for production. The net effect depends on the exact magnitudes of these two
forces; therefore, the link between litigation risk and patent sale is ambiguous.
      Likewise, the link between litigation risk and the expected licensing fee that the NPE would
charge or the price that the NPE would pay to purchase the patent depends on the magnitude
of the two roles of the NPE. For instance, the expected licensing fee is E( pnpe,. ) = αpnpe,j + (1 −
α) pnpe,k . Then the impact of the increased litigation risk on licensing fee is

                                   ∂E( pnpe,. )
                                                = β npe Ω j − (1 − dk )Ωk /2
                                                                        
                                      ∂α                                                            (13)
                                                ≶ 0.

      The impact of litigation risk on the acquisition price is

                                 β i + β npe Ω j − 2 [1 − β i ] π (1 − di ) − Ωk (1 − dk )
                                           
                     ∂pi,npe
                             =                                                             .
                      ∂α                                    4                                       (14)
                             ≶ 0.

As these expressions indicate, our model predicts that the direct impact of litigation risk on
patent sale and price is ambiguous and depends on the exact magnitudes of the NPE’s two roles.


Summary of Predictions          We summarize the predictions of the model as follows:

Prediction 1 The NPE is more likely to buy patents from small firms. Moreover, this likelihood is more
pronounced for litigation-prone patents.

                                                       19
Prediction 2 The likelihood of a patent sale increases as distance to the initial innovating firm increases.
Moreover, this effect is more pronounced for large firms.

Prediction 3 The NPE pays more for large firms’ patents.

Prediction 4 The acquisition price decreases as patent distance to the seller increases.

Prediction 5 The average price that any licensing firm will pay to the NPE decreases as distance to the
licensee increases.


Summary of Ambiguous Results Multiple features of the model were agnostic regarding the
effect of the NPE. These will be further explored in the empirical analysis in Section 5 and the
calibration in Section 6.

    1. The NPE has an ambiguous effect on overall innovation.

    2. Increases in litigation risk have an ambiguous effect on the probability of sale.

    3. Increases in litigation risk have an ambiguous effect on the NPE licensing fee.

    4. Increases in litigation risk have an ambiguous effect on the price the upstream firm sells to
      the NPE.


4    Data and Variables
This research is made possible by the use of confidential data obtained from large NPEs covering
tens of thousands of patents. This includes several unique measures on NPE business activities:
individual patent-level licensing revenue, licensing agreements, characteristics of assignees that
sell to NPEs, and characteristics of firms that license from NPEs. A data use agreement places
some mild restrictions on what we may disclose about the data, including sources, exact number
of patents, and non-normalized revenue figures. However, there are no restrictions on the types
of analyses we may perform, nor is pre-approval needed for any findings. Since there are a
number of different data sources and a large amount of derived variables, we provide substantial
further detail in the Appendix A.
    The NPEs usually acquire patents in small groups from individuals or firms who are almost
always the original assignees. The patents are generally purchased outright, although in rare
occasions there can be subsequent compensation or rights to future revenue. Almost all of the
NPEs’ revenues derive from subsequent licensing of patents. Patents are usually licensed for
multiple years in large portfolios. Patent-specific revenues are determined from licensing deals
based on the prominence that each patent played in the licensing negotiation. Occasionally, the
NPEs litigate over infringement claims, although this leads to a small share of overall revenues.

                                                    20
4.1     Data Sources

We rely on five data sources for our analysis as follows:


1. Patent Application Bibliographic Data (PAB)               This database contains basic ‘front page’ data
for patents issued from 1963 to 2014. It comes from a custom extract DVD generated by Electronic
Information Products Division of USPTO. We use the following variables from this dataset:

      • Patent number: The unique patent number is assigned to each patent granted by USPTO.

      • Application date: Date of application for each patent.

      • Grant date: Date of grant for each patent.

      • Assignee number/name: An assignee number (with associated name) assigned to each
        patent granted by USPTO. Where the assignee is an individual this field is blank, we merge
        the data with INV using unique patent numbers to obtain the inventor/assignee. Since
        PAB identifiers do not account for subsidiaries, mergers or acquisitions, Appendix A.1.1
        describes an algorithm to minimize problems this may cause.

      • Patent technology class: The technology class assigned to the patent by USPTO according
        to its internal classification system, as of 12/31/2014.


2. NPE Data (ND)          This confidential data contains information on patent acquisitions, patent
licensing, and patent characteristics. The acquisition data includes unique identifiers for each
acquired portfolio, patent acquisition date, and amount paid. The licensing data includes the
licensee name, licensing date, and primacy of patent. The patent characteristics include citations,
claims, expiration date, and technology category.


3. Lex Machina (LM) From the Lex Machina database, we use number of times that a patent is
asserted in court, number of infringements found in each case, findings of invalidity, total dam-
ages awarded, and case beginning and end dates. The database includes only USPTO granted
patents and covers cases filed after 1999.


4. U.S. Patent Citation Data (USCIT)             U.S. Patent Citation Data includes U.S. patent citations
for utility patents issued from 1975-2014. Each observation is a citing-cited pair. The database
is based on information from a custom extract DVD generated by the Electronic Information
Products Division of the USPTO.
      Non-utility patents were eliminated from the cited patent list. Citing patents include all types
of patents. In addition, cited U.S. patent applications were removed from the file due to the fact
that citations to sources other than U.S. utility patents are often reported haphazardly.             9

  9 We   complement our citation data with the citation data located at http://www.patentsview.org/web/. The main


                                                        21
5. The Careers and Co-Authorship Networks of U.S. Patent Inventors (INV)                           Extensive infor-
mation on the inventors of patents granted in the United States is obtained from Lai et al. (2009)’s
updated dataset. These authors use inventor names and addresses as well as patent character-
istics to generate unique inventor identifiers, so we use this to complement the PAB. This data
set is mainly used to retrieve assignee identifiers for individually owned patents as the PAB does
not specify any assignee number for individually owned patents.


4.2    Variables and Summary Statistics


           Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for NPE and Comparable USPTO Patents
                                             Panel 1: NPE Patents                   Panel 2: USPTO Patents
   Variables                               Mean       Median         Sd             Mean       Median         Sd
                                            —Original Variables —
   Log Originating Entity Size               5.01        4.97       2.82             6.96         7.53       2.82
   Individual Inventor                       0.06         0         0.23             0.01          0         0.10
   Forward Citations                         31.1        11.3       60.0             18.1         5.4        41.2
   Backward Citations                        22.7        8.0        52.6             14.5         6.0        38.2
   Age                                       13.6        14.0        5.2             10.8         10.0        6.0
   Claims                                    19.2        17.0       14.9             18.5         17.0      1300
   Sale Indicator                            100         100          0               1.4          0         11.6
                                            —Derived Variables —
   Litigation Risk                           1.17        1.03       0.86             0.88         0.77       0.73
   Distance to Originating Entity            0.33        0.27       0.27             0.30         0.27       0.22
   Hotness                                   31.4        25.0       29.8             26.5         16.7       29.5
   Lifetime Revenue                          200         37.5       1950             n/a          n/a        n/a
Notes: Panel 1: Patent-level data from 1987 - 2014 includes all patents in NPE dataset. Panel 2: Patent-level data from
1987 - 2014 includes all patents granted by USPTO in IPC3 categories with at least one patent in the NPE data. USPTO
data is weighted by NPE patent distribution across IPC3 classes. Individual Inventor is one if there is a single listed
inventor and no assignee. Please see text and Appendix A.2 for detail on variable construction.


      Table 1 reports patent-level summary statistics both for NPE-acquired patents and the com-
parable universe of patents applied for from the USPTO during the same years, 1987 - 2014.
“Comparable universe” means the data in the second panel is weighted so that the distribution
of IPC3 technology classes is the same as for the NPE data in the first panel.10 The table intro-
duces various variables that we use in order to understand what impacts the decision to sell to
NPEs, license from NPEs, and the prices at which patents are sold and licensed. As the NPEs
reason is to identify the citing entity characteristics for the event study.
  10 IPC3 refers to the 3-digit International Patent Classification code used to classify patents into technology cate-

gories.


                                                          22
buy multiple patents in deals, the normalized mean and standard deviation of acquisition price11
at the deal level are $1.54 million and $3.54 million, respectively.

                                 Figure 3: Originating Entity Size Distribution


                          .2
                          .15
                       Density
                         .1
                          .05
                          0




                                 0      2          4            6            8         10
                                                   Originating Entity Log Size

                                                NPE Patents               Patent Universe




Notes: Originating entity size is defined as the log patent portfolio size of the originating firm at the time of NPE
patent acquisition.


    We define log originating entity size as the log of the number of patents (including subse-
quently granted applications) in the entity’s portfolio at the time of the patent’s grant. Individual
inventor indicates that the patent was registered to a single inventor not at a firm. A comparison
of means for NPE-owned and all USPTO patents shows that NPE patents come from smaller
entities than average. Figure 3, which shows the distribution of originating entity size for NPE
and all patents, provides more details on this comparison. We note in Figure 3 that the typical
patent sold to NPEs comes from a much smaller patent portfolio than average. This should not
be surprising as we saw in Section 3 that smaller firms have more to gain from the NPEs’ larger
network and legal resources relative to large firms. We also see that individual inventors are
much more heavily represented in patents that are sold to NPEs. This illustrates clearly the role
of NPEs in buying patents from small firms and independent inventors.
    Backward citations are the number of patent references in the patent application and forward
citations are the number of times a patent is cited in subsequent applications. In order to compare
patents of different ages, both forward citations and revenue are estimated for the entire lifetime
of the patent. We calculate lifetime citations by inflating the total citations already received by
the ratio of the total mean citations of the same technology class divided by the mean for the

  11 These   values are normalized for confidentiality purposes, per our data use agreement.


                                                           23
average patent of the same age and technology class. We employ an analogous approach for the
lifetime revenue calculation, based on current realized revenue, with the addition that revenues
are normalized so that the annual mean is 10. Further detail on the normalization procedures
can be found in Appendix A.2.

    NPE-held patents include slightly more claims than average, but there is a much larger dis-
parity for forward and backward citations. The average patent sold to NPEs has over 70 percent
more lifetime forward citations and 57 percent more backward citations than average. Since for-
ward citations and backward citations are among the most commonly-used proxies for patent
value, and NPEs presumably target high-value patents, these findings should not be surprising
(although see Abrams and Sampat (2019) and Abrams et al. (2018) for evidence that citations
may be a poor proxy for value, especially in this context). The average age of the patent is 13.64
years (as of 2014, measured from application date) compared to 10.84 years for the universe and
were acquired by NPEs at 8.24 years.

    We construct a patent distance metric, first introduced in Akcigit et al. (2016) and described
in more detail in Appendix A.2.4, as a measure of technological similarity of two patents. Using
this metric, we calculate the average distance between a patent and the patent portfolio of its
originating firm. In both the NPE and USPTO data, the distribution of distance is slightly right-
skewed and somewhat higher for NPE-held patents, with a mean of 0.33, compared to 0.30 for
all patents.

    Litigation Risk is a measure of the likelihood that a patent will be litigated. We adopt the
model in Lanjouw and Schankerman (2001), with small modifications, to produce this index
(see Appendix A.2.5 for greater detail). Patents acquired by NPEs have a higher probability of
being litigated. NPE-held patents also cite more recent patents, which is captured by the hotness
variable. Hotness is defined as the share of backward citations to patents that are at most three
years older than the patent itself. NPE-held patents have a 18.3% higher average hotness than
the universe. Lastly, the lifetime revenue is normalized to 200 following a similar procedure to
citations, discussed in greater detail in Appendix A.2.3.

    In the appendix, we report additional summary statistics. In particular, B.1 reports acquisition-
level summary statistics on all acquisitions through which the NPEs acquired patents for over a
decade beginning in the 2000s and B.2 reports patent-licensee level summary statistics.




5   Estimation and Results

Our model has many implications that can be tested with the data. In this section, we report the
results from several different empirical analyses aimed at doing so.

                                                 24
5.1     Patent Sale (Predictions 1 and 2)

We first examine which factors relate to the likelihood of a patent sale using the following speci-
fication:


                           Patent Salei,j,t = α + β × Xi,j,t + ψ × Zi,j,t + γ j + ηt + ei,j,t                          (15)

      Patent Salei,j,t is a dummy variable that is “1” if patent i in technology category j, with
application year t is ever sold to an NPE and “0” otherwise.12 Xi,j,t is a vector consists of the
main variables of interest: Log Entity Size, Distance to Innovating Entity, Litigation Risk, Firm Size
× Litigation Risk, Firm Size × Distance. In addition, Zi,j,t contains control variables: Total Claims,
Lifetime Forward Citations, Backward Citations, and Hotness Index. In the same specification, γ j is a
set of technology category dummies, measured at three-digit IPC level; ηt is a set of application
year dummies and ei,j,t is the error term. Robust standard errors are clustered at innovating
entity level. The results are reported in Table 2 which effectively tests predictions 1 and 2 of the
model.

                        Table 2: The Determinants of the Patent Sale Decision
                                                          (1)              (2)                  (3)                 (4)
      Dependent Variable:                                Sale             Sale                 Sale                Sale
                                                      Indicator        Indicator            Indicator           Indicator
      Originating Entity Size                          -0.145**         -0.146**             -0.157**            -0.164**
                                                        (0.020)          (0.020)              (0.020)             (0.019)
      Litigation Risk                                                     0.034                0.048               0.054
                                                                         (0.045)              (0.044)             (0.043)
      Entity Size × Litigation Risk                                     -0.066**             -0.066**            -0.055**
                                                                         (0.018)              (0.018)             (0.019)
      Distance to Originating Entity                                                         0.426**              0.794**
                                                                                              (0.087)             (0.110)
      Entity Size × Distance                                                                                     0.283**
                                                                                                                  (0.025)
      IPC-3 Controls                                     Yes               Yes                  Yes                 Yes
      Application Year Control                           Yes               Yes                  Yes                 Yes
      R-squared                                         0.011             0.012                0.012               0.013
*, **. Significant at 5% and 1% level respectively.
Notes: Linear probability model with patent sale to NPE as binary dependent variable. Sample contains all U.S.
patents granted 1987 - 2014. Distance measure is calculated with respect to innovating entity. Robust standard
errors clustered by originating entity in parentheses. Note that probability of sale is multiplied by 100 for greater
legibility. In addition to application year and class controls, we also control for the individual inventor indicator, total
claims, lifetime forward citations, backward citations, and hotness. Please see the text and Appendix A.2 for variable
definitions and normalization.



  12 Here   we use a linear probability model but find similar results with a probit and logit.


                                                            25
      Column 1 shows that the probability of a patent sale to an NPE is decreasing in firm size,
and the effect is statistically significant across all specifications. In addition to being statistically
significant, the magnitude is economically important as well. A one standard deviation increase
in log firm size decreases the probability of sale by 0.409 percentage points, which is 30% of the
mean. Moreover, column 2 shows litigation risk as insignificant, a result that is compatible with
the ambiguous effect of litigation risk on patent sale in the model in Equation 12. The interaction
term (Firm Size × Litigation Risk) is negative, which implies that litigation risk becomes a relatively
more important factor among small firms for patent sale. The findings of the effect of firm size
on probability of sale and the interaction term on litigation risk confirm prediction 1.
      In column 3, we focus on the relationship between patent distance and probability of a patent
sale. The estimated positive coefficient on the distance variable indicates that patents that are
more distant to the originating firm are more likely to be sold. In column 4, we introduce the
interaction of distance with firm size. The positive coefficient indicates that changes in distance
have a larger effect on probability of sale for large firms. The two coefficients discussed in
columns 3 and 4 confirm prediction 2. Note that a standard deviation increase in distance (0.224)
increases the probability of sale by .18 percentage points, which is 13.1% (= 0.224 × 0.794/1.36).
Then, considering the interaction term (Firm Size × Distance), we see for larger firms this effect is
even more pronounced.


5.2     Acquisition Price (Predictions 3 and 4)

We perform a second set of regressions designed to test the implications of our theory regarding
patent acquisition prices. We estimate the OLS model specified below using NPE deal-level data.
      Our specification is similar to Equation 15, with dependent variable Log Acquisition Pricei,j,t ,
which is the log normalized acquisition price for deal i in year t. Xi,j,t is a vector consisting
of the main variables of interest, taken as means at the deal level, Distance, Firm Size, Litigation
Risk, Firm Size × Litigation Risk, and Firm Size × Distance. Zi,j,t is a vector consisting of control
variables, again taken as means at the deal-level: Total Claims, Lifetime Forward Citations, Backward
Citations, Hotness, and Deal Size. Similar to Table 2, γ j is a set of technology category dummies,
taken as the mode of the deal at the three-digit IPC level; ηt is a set of transaction year dummies,
and ei,t is the error term, where we use robust standard errors.
      Columns 1-3 in Table 3 document that NPEs pay more to larger firms which confirms predic-
tion 3 of the model. In columns 2 and 3, we find that NPEs pay less the more distant a patent is to
the innovating firm, verifying prediction 4. The magnitudes are economically important as well.
In column 3, we see a 1% increase in the size of an inventing firm increases the acquisition price
by 0.103%. A standard deviation increase in distance (0.27) decreases acquisition price by 33.3%
(= −123.18 × 0.27). Litigation risk on its own is insignificant. This is consistent with Equation
14, which predicted an ambiguous effect of litigation risk on price. However, litigation risk has a
more negative effect on price for larger firms, who may be more likely to use NPEs for distance

                                                   26
                         Table 3: The Determinants of Patent Acquisition Price
                                                         (1)                     (2)                       (3)
       Dependent Variable:                            Log Price              Log Price               Log Price
       Originating Entity Size                         4.419**                 8.518**                10.333**
                                                       (1.407)                 (1.480)                  (1.617)
       Distance to Originating Firm                                          -104.582**              -123.180**
                                                                              (11.531)                 (12.798)
       Litigation Risk                                                                                   -5.955
                                                                                                        (7.810)
       Firm Size × Litigation Risk                                                                      -3.331*
                                                                                                        (1.683)
       Firm Size × Distance                                                                           -17.306**
                                                                                                        (4.598)
       IPC-3 Controls                                    Yes                     Yes                      Yes
       Transaction Year Control                          Yes                     Yes                      Yes
       Application Year Control                          Yes                     Yes                      Yes
       R-squared                                        0.266                   0.305                    0.313
*, **. Significant at 5% and 1% level respectively.
Notes: OLS regressions with Log Price as dependent variable. Acquisition deal-level data includes all NPE patent
acquisition deals in U.S. Distance measure is calculated with respect to innovating entity. Robust standard errors
clustered by modal IPC3 in parentheses. Note that acquisition price is multiplied by 100 for greater legibility. In
addition to year and class controls, we also control for total claims, lifetime forward citations, backward citations,
hotness, and deal size. Please see the text and Appendix A.2 for variable definitions and normalization.

reduction purposes.


5.3     Licensing Fee (Prediction 5)

We next examine the determinants of the licensing fee paid to NPEs in the following specification:


            Log Licensing Feei,l,j,t = α + β × Xi,j,t + ψ × Zi,j,t + Γ × Wi,l,j,t + γ j + ηt + ei,l,j,t          (16)

      Our dependent variable Log Licensing Feei,l,j,t is the log normalized licensing fee received
for patent i, from licensee j, in year t. Since this specification concerns prices paid at the licensing
level, we have an additional index l and variables of interest Wi,l,j,t that were not present in Sec-
tions 5.1 and 5.2. The variable of interest in vector Xi,j,t is Litigation Risk. Zi,j,t is a vector including
entity-level and patent-level controls, which are Total Claims, Backward Citations, Hotness, Lifetime
Forward Citation, and Application Year. γ j is a set of IPC3 technology class dummies and ηt are
transaction year dummies. Wi,l,j,t contains variables of interest related to licensee l for patent i
such as Distance to Licensee , Licensee Size, Licensee Size × Distance, and Licensee Size × Litigation
Risk. Robust standard errors are clustered at licensee level and results are reported in Table 4.
      Table 4, column 1 shows that distance has a negative relationship with the log licensing fee,
though only significant at the 10% level. This effect becomes more significant when we control

                                                         27
                            Table 4: The Determinants of Patent Licensing Fee
                                                            (1)                     (2)                     (3)
      Dependent Variable:                                  Log                     Log                     Log
                                                        Licensing               Licensing               Licensing
                                                           Fee                      Fee                     Fee
      Distance to Licensee                               -117.491               -101.587*               -101.525*
                                                         (62.124)                (39.375)                (39.327)
      Licensee Size                                                              32.672**                32.680**
                                                                                  (8.806)                 (8.801)
      Licensee Size × Distance                                                     3.027                   3.074
                                                                                 (10.009)                (10.001)
      Litigation Risk                                                                                     4.946**
                                                                                                          (1.283)
      Licensee Size × Litigation Risk                                                                      0.480
                                                                                                          (1.183)
      IPC-3 Controls                                        Yes                     Yes                     Yes
      Transaction Year Control                              Yes                     Yes                     Yes
      Application Year Control                              Yes                     Yes                     Yes
      R-squared                                            0.064                   0.211                   0.211
*, **. Significant at 5% and 1% level respectively.
Notes: This table reports results of OLS regressions with Log Licensing Fee as dependent variable. Patent-Licensee-
Year level data includes all NPE licensing transactions. Distance measure is calculated with respect to licensee. Robust
standard errors clustered by licensee in parentheses. Note that licensing fee is multiplied by 100 for greater legibility.
In addition to year and class controls, we also control for total claims, lifetime forward citations, backward citations,
hotness, and deal size. Please see Appendix A.2 for variable definitions and normalization.

for firm size in column 2 and further controls in column 3. This is in line with prediction 5 of the
model. We also see that the licensing fee is increasing in litigation risk and firm size.
      The magnitude is economically important too. Using column 3 as our reference, we find a
standard deviation increase in distance (0.33) decreases the fee by 33.5% (= 101.5 × 0.33). We also
see that an increase of 1% in licensee firm size increases licensing fee by 0.327%. Litigation risk
also plays an important role quantitatively. A standard deviation increase in litigation risk (0.86)
increases the licensing fee by 4.25 % (= 0.86 × 4.946%). In the model, we found an ambiguous
effect of litigation risk on the licensing fee as in Equation 13. A positive, but modest effect of
litigation risk on log licensing fee is compatible with legal resources being an important feature
of the NPEs’ business model.


5.4    Downstream Innovation

We use forward (subsequent) citations received by the focal patent to proxy for downstream
innovation. In order to understand the effect of NPE patent acquisitions on patent citations, we
want to build a matching set of patents that were not acquired by NPEs and follow their citation
patterns. As a first step in our research design, we match NPE patents with those in the USPTO

                                                           28
universe by exactly matching on their application year and number of forward citations prior to
NPE-acquisition period and the technology category (IPC at three digit level) via coarsened exact
matching algorithm (CEM).13 These matched pairs of patents constitute the main sample for the
event study.
    To probe the validity of our design, we test whether there is any effect of NPE acquisition
before the event occurs. Our strategy is similar to Jaravel et al. (2018), in terms of testing for
event pre-trends by looking at a full set of leads and lags (k = −5, ..., 5, excluding -1) for matched
and treated patents (Lik ). Our dependent variable is the number of forward citations received by
patent i at time t. The dynamic effects associated with lags are denoted as { β(k )}5k=−5 . Second,
we include a period event dummy After that is equal to 1 post event and is common to real and
placebo acquired patents (after). The predicted effect is denoted by β All . Lastly, we add three
distinct sets of fixed effects: age fixed effects (ait ), transaction year fixed effects (ηt ) and patent
fixed effects (αi ).
    We estimate the following specification with OLS:14

                        5                                        20                        2014
          Yi,t =       ∑      β k 1{ Lit =k} + β All × A f ter + ∑ λ j 1{ageit = j} +      ∑       ηm 1{t=m} + αi + ei,t   (17)
                      k =−5                                     j =1                      m=1998


We combine all NPE patents together with placebo patents and estimate the model using spec-
ification 17. Figure 4a plots the β’s which indicate the number of forward citations relative to
year of NPE acquisition. We see a relative decline over time in the number of citations after
acquisition.
    In order to further understand the fall in citations, we split the NPE sample into top and
bottom value decile and combine them with the placebo patents in Figure 4b.

    F-test for Pretrends We can formally test the hypothesis that point estimates are the same
before and after NPE acquisition. The null hypothesis is:

           be f ore                                                             a f ter
         Ho           : β −5 = β −4 = β −3 = β −2                            Ho           : β5 = β4 = β3 = β2 = β1

    Our results indicate that we cannot reject the hypothesis that the point estimates are all the
same before NPE acquisition, but we can after NPE acquisition. Briefly, Table 5 indicates that
there are no pretrends but an effect after NPE acquisition.
    The interesting finding in Figure 4a is the decline in follow-on innovation after the patent is
acquired by an NPE. We next examine the temporal pattern of citations for the top and bottom
decile of value, with the results reported in Figure 4b. The decline in citations is most pronounced
for high value patents but not at all apparent for low value patents. The magnitude of the decline
is 1.05 over five years, which is sizable, given the mean number of citations for high value patents
  13 The details regarding matching algorithm can be found at http://gking.harvard.edu/files/gking/files/cem-stata.pdf.
  14 Adding
          the fixed effects above generates a collinearity problem. We follow the literature and drop the first age
dummy as well as the coefficient on the -1 period with (which shows up as 0).


                                                                 29
                                                          Figure 4: Event Studies




                          .1
                  Forward Citations
                       -.1-.2
                          -.3    0




                                       -5                                  0                                 5
                                                              Distance to event (in years)

                                                 Reg coef-Forward Citations           lower 95% CI/upper 95% CI

                                            (a) Forward Citations Relative to NPE Acquisition
                          .5
                   Forward Citations
                  -1    -.5
                          -1.5    0




                                       -5                                  0                                  5
                                                              Distance to event (in years)

                                                 Reg coef-Bottom Value Decile          lower 95% CI/upper 95% CI
                                                 Reg coef-Top Value Decile             lower 95% CI/upper 95% CI

                 (b) Forward Citations Relative to NPE Acquisition by Value Decile

Notes: Figure (4a): This figure reports results from a regression of the annual forward citations on event dummies
relative to the year of acquisition of a patent by an NPE. The regression makes use of a balanced panel of patent-level
data (5 years before and after acquisition year) from 1998-2014 for NPE-acquired patents, placebo patents and
includes controls for patent, age, and year fixed effects. Robust standard errors are clustered at NPE acquired patent
level as error bars. Figure (4b): This figure reports a similar analysis for NPE-acquired patents located at top and
bottom value decile, placebo patents, and includes controls for patent, age, and year fixed effects. Robust standard
errors are clustered at NPE acquired patent level as error bars.




                                                                        30
                    Table 5: Testing For Dynamic Effects, P values from F-test
                                           Panel A(β)            Panel B(βtop )
                           Be f ore
                     For H0                   0.43                    0.83
                           A f ter
                     For H0                 0.00001                 0.00001
Notes: This panel reports the p-values of F-tests for equality of the β Real k coefficients from specification 17, before
                                                                Be f ore        A f ter
and after NPE acquisition, as specified by the hypotheses H0               and H0         .

over five years is 9.61. This suggests that downstream innovative activity slows down with the
acquisition of a patent by NPEs. Given our study design, it seems likely that the effect of NPE
acquisition on downstream citations is causal. A pure selection effect would predict an increase in
forward cites among the most valuable patents after NPE acquisition. The decline of downstream
innovation and the impact of NPEs on overall innovation is something we explore further in the
next section.




6    Numerical Analysis

So far, we have seen that the empirical results lend support for the model introduced in Section
3 and the model’s predictions on prices and likelihood of sale. An important question remains:
what is the overall effect of NPEs on innovation in the economy? To answer this question, we
calibrate our model as described in this section.
    In order to ensure that probability of infringement remains between 0 and 1, we consider
the following form for the probability j infringes i: τ = (1 − φ)λ, where φ is the probability of
non-innovator infringement and λ ∈ [0, 1]. Since our data does not contain direct information
on the balance sheet of downstream firms j and k, we identify their financial returns by setting
Ωk = Ω j = Ω and target some informative moments using the prices at which NPEs buy and
license patents (see Section 6.1). Moreover, we target the mean β = E[ β i ] legal strength/legal
resources of firm i. This leaves our model with the following 10 parameters to be calibrated:

                                        Θ ≡ [η, κ, νi , Ω, π, φ, λ, β, β npe , ξ ]


    We calibrate our parameters in two steps. For three of the parameters, we do an external cal-
ibration without simulating the model. For the rest of the parameters, we pick seven informative
empirical moments M E and minimize the distance between model-simulated moments M(Θ)
and their empirical counterparts by searching over the parameter space Θ, using a simulated
annealing algorithm, as follows:
                                                    7
                                             min ∑ ( MiE − Mi (Θ))2 .
                                               Θ
                                                   i =1


                                                           31
6.1     Identification

Here we describe the identification of each parameter. The externally calibrated parameters
(η, ξ, νi ) are chosen as follows:

 1,2. R&D cost parameter and convexity of cost function, η and ξ: These parameters are taken from
        (i ) the external innovation parameter calibrated in Akcigit and Kerr (2018) and (ii ) a large
        literature summarized in Akcigit and Kerr (2018) that estimates the innovation production
        function to be a quadratic.

   3. Mean distance to innovating entities, νi : This parameter is the mean distance of patents within
        firms that sell to the NPE. Note that distance is measured as distance to innovating entity.
        It is calculated from NPE data, using the universe of upstream firms.

      The internally calibrated parameters are:

   1. Profit of licensing entity, Ω:    This parameter is a proxy for the value of a patent to the
        potential licensee before distance adjustment.

   2. Profit of innovating entity, π:   This parameter is a proxy for the value of a patent to the
        inventing entity before distance adjustment.

   3. Probability of winning in court (innovating entity), β: This parameter captures the strength of
        the innovating entity in court. In particular, it captures the probability that the innovating
        entity wins an infringement case.

   4. Probability of winning in court (NPE), β npe : This parameter captures the strength of NPE in
        court. In particular, it captures the probability that NPE wins an infringement case.

   5. Max. search cost, κ: i will pull a search cost ∼ U [0, κ ] and κ is the maximum value.

 6,7. Probability producer infringement and downstream infringement probability, φ, τ:    This deter-
        mines the probability of an infringement by a non-innovating producer or downstream
        innovator.

      Next, we describe the moments that we use to identify the internally calibrated parameters.
The reader should note that all these moments are jointly targeted.

 M1 . Price upstream producer sells to NPE: This comes from NPE acquisition cost data. This price,
        together with the next moment M2 , informs us about the legal strength of the upstream
        producer β and NPE β npe .

 M2 . Price NPE sells to downstream producer or outside producer: This comes from NPE revenue data
        and is solved in terms of its ratio to acquisition cost. The two prices (M1 and M2 ) together
        inform us about the legal strength (β and β npe ) of upstream producer and NPE.

                                                  32
M3 . Correlation between the distance of upstream to NPE and price: This moment informs us about
        the profit size π of the upstream producer.

M4 . Correlation between the price sold and bought from NPE: For this moment, we compute the
        correlation between the acquisition cost and the lifetime revenue. This informs us about
        the profit size of the downstream producer Ω.

M5 . Innovation intensity of the downstream innovator: This is taken as the percentage of patents in
        the NPE set that are cited by downstream innovators. This informs us about the probability
        of innovator infringement τ.

M6 . Probability of sale to NPE: The probability of a sale is taken as the average probability of
        reassignment in the patent class (IPC4) where NPEs are most active. This informs us on the
        maximum search cost of producer to finding NPE κ.

M7 . Proportion of infringement from non-innovators: Since this informative moment is not readily
        available in the data, we try three alternative values for this target. In our benchmark esti-
        mation in Section 6.2.1, we assume that 50% of all infringements come from non-innovators,
        i.e., we set φ/α = 0.5. In sections 6.2.2 and 6.2.3, we try two other extremes by setting
        φ/α = 0 and 1, respectively, and re-estimate all other parameters in each case.


6.2     Calibration

The next three sub-sections evaluate the three conditions on the source of infringement (φ/α ∈
{0, 0.5, 1}). Because we do not know the proportion of infringement that comes from firms
innovating versus firms not innovating, we examine the conditions of the model under three
different scenarios discussed in our targeting moments. First, we set φ/α = 0.5 as our benchmark.
There is some evidence for this in the literature. Kempf and Spalt (2018) find that in class-action
SEC filings they define as meritorious, about half of these filings target highly innovative firms.
We then check for two extremes in order to explore the sensitivity of the results. In particular, the
second value we take is φ/α = 0 (no infringement from non-innovators) and the third is φ/α = 1
(all infringement from non-innovators). For any given set of calibrated values φ/α ∈ {0, 0.5, 1},
we further explore the behavior of the model by changing φ and β npe while keeping all other
parameters at their calibrated values in Figures 5, 6, and 7.


6.2.1    Case 1: Innovators contribute to half of the infringement, φ/α = 0.5

This section is our benchmark section for thinking about infringement. We assume half of the
infringement comes from innovators, i.e. φ/α = 0.5. We thus target this value in our calibration.
The matched moments are described in Table 6, and the estimated parameters together with their
descriptions are provided in Table 7.

                                                  33
                                        Table 6: Moments
   Moment                                                                        Data       Model
   1. Price upstream producer sells to NPE                                         1           1
   2. Average price NPE sells to downstream                                      1.54        1.52
   3. Correlation between distance of upstream to NPE and price                  -0.07      -0.07
   4. Correlation between price sold and bought from NPE                         0.37        0.31
   5. Innovation intensity of downstream innovator                               0.74        0.76
   6. Probability of sale to NPE (reassignment rate in NPE’s top class)          0.23        0.22
   7. Proportion of infringement from non-innovators                             0.50        0.50




                                   Table 7: Parameter Values
Parameter                 Description                 Value             Main Identification
                                 — Panel A. External Calibration —
     ξ             Curvature of R&D cost                 2            Akcigit and Kerr (2018)
     η                 R&D cost scale                  0.25           Akcigit and Kerr (2018)
     νi       Mean distance of upstream to NPE         0.30             NPE Distribution
                                  — Panel B. Internal Calibration —
    Ω             Return of licensing entity          3.50             Correlation of prices
    π            Return of innovating entity          0.11        Correlation between pi and di
     φ      Probability non-innovator infringement 0.36                  Share of infringers
     τ          Downstream infringement risk          0.47 R&D intensity of j and share of infringers
     β       Probability of upstream firm winning 0.36                  Correlations, Prices
   β npe     Probability of NPE winning in court 0.99                          Prices
     κ                 Max. Search Cost               2.35                    Pr(sale)
                            Notes: All parameters are estimated jointly.
   Table 6 shows that the model replicates the empirical moments very well. Note the negative
correlation between distance and price, indicating the role of NPEs in buying (and paying less
for) more distant patents to the innovating firm. When it comes to parameter values, of particular
interest is the difference between β and β npe ; we see that the likelihood of winning in court is
almost three times larger for NPEs than the average firm, which highlights the stick-up artist role
of NPEs. The second role of NPEs as benign middleman is evident from the sizable value of Ω,
which captures the greater returns from allocating patents to a better user k.
   In Figures 5a and 5b, we take the estimated values (from targeting φ/α = 0.5) and shift
the parameter values of proportion of infringement from non-innovators (φ in Figure 5a), and
the legal strength of the NPEs (β npe in Figure 5b). In Figure 5a, the y-axis contains the total
innovation effort in the economy, i.e., µ = µi + µ j . The dotted red line plots the total innovation
effort when there is no NPE, and the solid blue line shows the same total innovation effort for

                                                 34
the case where the economy features an active NPE. When the solid line is above the dotted line
this indicates that, for the corresponding value of φ, the economy with NPEs produces more
innovation compared to an economy without any NPEs, and vice versa. In Figure 5b, we track
innovation of i (solid line) and downstream innovation of j (red dotted line) as legal strength of
the NPEs changes.

                      Figure 5: Upstream and Downstream Innovation with and without NPE, target
                                                      φ/α = 0.5

                               Avg total innovation with change in producer infringement rate                               Upstream and downstream response to change in NPE legal strength
                     1.1
                                                                                                                           0.13
                                                                                   7 with NPE                                                                                         7i
                                                                                   7 no NPE                                                                                           7j

                    1.05
                                                                                                                           0.125                                                            0.82



                      1
 Innovation Level




                                                                                                    Innovation Level (i)




                                                                                                                                                                                                   Innovation Level (j)
                                                                                                                            0.12

                                    Innovation down w/ NPE                  Innovation up w/ NPE
                    0.95


                                                                                                                           0.115                                                            0.81

                     0.9



                                                                                                                            0.11
                    0.85




                     0.8                                                                                                   0.105                                                            0.8
                           0             0.2           0.4           0.6            0.8         1                                  0     0.2         0.4           0.6      0.8            1
                                                               ?                                                                                           - npe



                (a) Change in innovation with change in φ                                                   (b) Change in innovation with change in β npe
Notes: These figures report changes of innovation in response to the listed parameters, at values calibrated for
φ/α = 0.5 Figure (5a): This figure illustrates the response of overall innovation to changes in the rate of non-innovator
infringement, φ. There is a vertical dashed line at the estimated value of φ. Figure (5b): This figure illustrates the
upstream and downstream innovation rate response to a change in the legal strength of the NPE, β npe .


                    These exercises allow us to evaluate the different worlds under which the NPEs’ role can
be more or less productive. Figure 5a shows that at the estimated parameter values (φ = 0.36,
noted by the vertical dashed line), we see a small decline in the aggregate rate of innovation,
1 percentage point with NPEs. Even though the average number is informative, decomposition
of the effect shows that upstream innovators benefit from NPEs in comparison to downstream
innovators. More specifically, at the estimated parameter value, there is a 1.8 percentage point
(13.6%) increase in the innovation rate of upstream firms while there is a 2.8 percentage point
(3.6%) decline in the innovation rate of downstream firms.

                    In Figure 5b, we can clearly see the heterogeneous impact of NPEs on i and j when we

                                                                                                   35
plot the changes in the innovation rate as a function of the legal strength of the NPE, β npe , for
the specified value of φ/α = 0.5. Here we note that as the legal capacity of NPEs increase j’s
innovation will briefly go up when β npe < β, as j is more likely to face a weaker legal adversary,
but overall we see i and j’s innovation move in the expected direction. This speaks to a very basic
conclusion that serves as the foundation for the rest of our analysis. The NPEs’ legal strength
will have a positive impact on i’s innovation, since it increases the return to a patent if there is
any infringement, and a negative impact on j’s, since j has to pay more in case it infringes an
existing patent which might be defended by an NPE.


6.2.2                      Case 2: All infringements come from innovators, φ/α = 0

In this section, we target a moment in our calibration assuming all infringement comes from
innovators, i.e. φ/α = 0. In order to save some space, the estimated parameters together with
their descriptions and the calibrated moments are provided in Appendix C.
                     In the following figures, we again shift the parameter values of probability of infringement
from non-innovators φ and the legal strength of the NPE, β npe .


                    Figure 6: Upstream and Downstream Innovation with and without , target φ/α = 0
                           Avg total innovation with change in producer infringement rate
                                                                                                                                Upstream and downstream response to change in NPE legal strength
                    1.15
                                                                                                                            0.145                                                             0.82
                                     7 with NPE                                                                                                                                           7i
                                     7 no NPE                                                                                                                                             7j
                     1.1
                                                                                                                             0.14                                                               0.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                      Innovation Level (j)
                                                                                                     Innovation Level (i)




                    1.05                     Innovation down w/         Innovation up w/
                                             NPE                        NPE
 Innovation Level




                                                                                                                            0.135


                      1


                                                                                                                             0.13                                                               0.76
                    0.95



                                                                                                                            0.125                                                               0.74
                     0.9




                    0.85                                                                                                     0.12                                                               0.72
                           0          0.2         0.4             0.6       0.8             1                                       0       0.2         0.4             0.6     0.8            1
                                                        ?                                                                                                     -
                                                                                                                                                                  npe



                    (a) Change in innovation with change in φ                                           (b) Change in innovation with change in β npe
Notes: These figures report changes of innovation in response to the listed parameters, at values calibrated for
φ/α = 0. Figure (6a): This figure illustrates the response of overall innovation to changes in the rate of non-innovator
infringement, φ. There is a vertical dashed line at the estimated value of φ. Figure (6b): This figure illustrates the
upstream and downstream innovation rate response to a change in the legal strength of the NPE, β npe .




                                                                                                36
                     The overall changes in innovation efforts in response to the underlying changes in φ and β npe
look very similar to Figures 5a and 5b. Just like in Case 1, the overall innovation effort declines
when there are NPEs in the market. The effect when there are no non-innovating infringers is
more pronounced, as innovation drops by 4 percentage points. This is again due to the fact that
NPEs discourage follow-on innovations when there is an associated risk of infringement.


6.2.3                         Case 3: Innovators contribute to none of the infringement, φ/α = 1

In this section, we target values such that all of the infringement comes from non-innovators, i.e.
φ/α = 1. The estimated parameters together with their descriptions are provided in Appendix
Table B3 and the matched moments are described in Appendix Table B4.


Figure 7: Upstream and Downstream Innovation with and without NPE, target φ/α = 1

                              Avg total innovation with change in producer infringement rate                                Upstream and downstream response to change in NPE legal strength
                   1.05
                                                                                                                          0.15                                                                0.85
                                 7 with NPE                                                                                                                                          7i
                                 7 no NPE                                                                                                                                            7j


                     1


                                                                                                                                                                                              0.84
                                                                                                   Innovation Level (i)




                                                                                                                                                                                                     Innovation Level (j)
Innovation Level




                   0.95                                                                                                   0.14



                                                                                                                                                                                              0.83

                    0.9




                                                                                                                          0.13                                                                0.82
                   0.85                                                                                                          0      0.2         0.4           0.6       0.8           1
                          0           0.2           0.4          0.6          0.8              1
                                                                                                                                                          - npe
                                                           ?


                    (a) Change in innovation with change in φ                                                     (b) Change in innovation with change in β npe
Notes: These figures report changes of innovation in response to the listed parameters, at values calibrated for
φ/α = 1. Figure (7a): This figure illustrates the response of overall innovation to changes in the rate of non-innovator
infringement, φ. There is a vertical dashed line at the estimated value of φ for this targeted value. Figure (7b): This
figure illustrates the upstream and downstream innovation rate response to a change in the legal strength of the NPE,
β npe .



                     We see from Figures 5a, 6a, and 7a that when most infringement comes from non-innovating
firms, i.e. φ ≈ 1, NPEs have an overall positive impact on innovation. This makes intuitive sense

                                                                                               37
because here NPEs increase ex-ante incentives of upstream firms but doesn’t reduce downstream
innovation. However, as we can see from Figures 5a and 6a, if most infringement is due to
innovators (φ ≈ 0), then NPEs have an overall negative impact on innovation. Further research
on the proportion of infringement due to firms in the process of innovating versus copycats could
help us clarify which world we are in.15
    Our results from these three exercises indicate that the implications of the effect of NPEs on
overall innovation boil down to the following question: how prevalent are non-innovating firms
in infringement? If most of the infringement is due to non-innovators, the NPEs’ role is that of
protecting innovators and will tend to increase innovation. If most of the infringement comes
from innovators, the NPEs could slow overall innovation, although not by a great deal according
to our calibration. Our results provide preliminary evidence on these distinguishing factors in a
general equilibrium setup. Further research should focus on the degree to which infringers are
solely producers or in fact innovators themselves.


7    Conclusion

What do non-practicing entities do, and how do they impact innovation and technological
progress? Despite the heated debates on this issue in both academic and policy circles, the
direct evidence on their business models is quite limited. In this paper, we attempt to answer
these questions both empirically and theoretically.
    On the theoretical side, the model provides new insights into how NPEs operate. In line
with standard approaches, the model allows for NPEs to purchase patents and license them
to other firms without using those patents for production. Our model highlights two crucial
roles for the NPEs: First, they can purchase patents that are more litigation-prone and use them
to threaten other firms to extract more licensing revenue. While this is commonly associated
with “trolling,” there is a positive contribution of this role: NPEs create value by defending
the intellectual property of small firms who do not have sufficient means to defend their patents.
While this protection incentivizes small firms to innovate more, the same action discourages large
firms who might be infringing on small firm patents. The second role of the NPEs have been as
middleman in the market for patents, which suffer deeply from informational asymmetry. By
having access to the full broker network around the country, NPEs can allocate patents to better
users.
    The elements in our model allow us to come up with a number of relevant and testable
implications. We are able to evaluate these predictions by examining transaction-level data from
large NPEs for the first time. We find that NPEs buy non-core patents from smaller originating
entities, and especially litigation-prone patents. They pay more for patents that come from large
  15 Also note that the innovation from j, µ , is very unresponsive to changes in β
                                            j                                       npe . This is because in targeting
φ/α = 1 (and matching φ/α = 0.97) we get only a very small probability that j will infringe i as the targeted value for
τ = 0.03.


                                                          38
firms and for those that are more core to the seller’s business. On the licensing side, NPEs attain
higher fees for those patents that have smaller distance to the licensee. We also find that citations
to NPE-held patents decline around the time of acquisition. This effect is not significant for low
value patents, but is most pronounced for those with higher value.
   In our final exercise, we calibrate the model to attempt to estimate a net effect of NPEs on
innovation. A crucial component of the model is the amount of patent infringement due to inno-
vators and that due to producers who do not innovate. If a large amount of infringement comes
from non-innovating producers, NPEs have a positive effect on innovation. If most infringement
comes from downstream producers, NPEs generate a net negative effect.
   We believe that both the framework and new facts put forth in this paper can shed light on the
debate of the role of NPEs for overall innovation. The welfare and innovation consequences of
NPEs is a policy issue that continues to be relevant and much additional work is needed on this
crucial topic. Our paper suggests further exploration is warranted. For instance, one important
aspect noted in this paper is the degree to which infringement comes from producing entities as
opposed to those who both produce and innovate. Another area is the degree to which infringe-
ment truly hampers the capability of small firms to protect their technology. We hope this paper
can help provide a foundation for further research on these topics as intellectual property and its
secondary market remain central to discussions of innovation.




References
Abrams, D. S., U. Akcigit, and J. Grennan: 2018, ‘Patent Value and Citations: Creative Destruction
  or Strategic Disruption?’. Working Paper.

Abrams, D. S. and B. Sampat: 2019, ‘Drug Patent Citations and Value’. Working Paper.

Acemoglu, D., U. Akcigit, H. Alp, N. Bloom, and W. Kerr: 2018, ‘Innovation, Reallocation, and
  Growth’. American Economic Review 108(11), 3450–91.

Aghion, P. and P. Howitt: 1992, ‘A Model of Growth Through Creative Destruction’. Econometrica
  60(3), 323–351.

Ahmadpoor, M. and B. Jones: 2017, ‘The Dual Frontier: Patentable Inventions and Prior Scientific
  Advance’. Science 357(6351), 583—587.

Akcigit, U., M. A. Celik, and J. Greenwood: 2016, ‘Buy, Keep, or Sell: Economic Growth and the
  Market for Ideas’. Econometrica 84(3), 943–984.

Akcigit, U., J. Grigsby, and T. Nicholas: 2017, ‘The Rise of American Ingenuity: Innovation
  and Inventors of the Golden Age’. Technical report. National Bureau of Economic Research
  WP23047.

                                                 39
Akcigit, U. and W. R. Kerr: 2018, ‘Growth through Heterogeneous Innovations’. Journal of Political
  Economy 126(4), 1374–1443.

Allison, J. R., M. A. Lemley, and J. Walker: 2009, ‘Extreme Value or Trolls On Top?The Character-
  istics of the Most-Litigated Patents’. University of Pennsylvania Law Review 158.

Allison, J. R., M. A. Lemley, and J. Walker: 2011, ‘Patent Quality and Settlement Among Repeat
  Patent Litigants’. Georgetown Law Journal 99(6777), 12.

Ashtor, J. H., M. J. Mazzeo, and S. Zyontz: 2013, ‘Patents at Issue: The Data behind the Patent
  Troll Debate’. George Mason Law Review 21, 957.

Benhabib, J., J. Perla, and C. Tonetti: 2014, ‘Catch-up and Fall-back through Innovation and
  Imitation’. Journal of Economic Growth 19(1), 1–35.

Bessen, J. E. and M. J. Meurer: 2014, ‘The Direct Costs from NPE Disputes’. 99 Cornell Law Review
  387.

Bloom, N., M. Schankerman, and V. R. John: 2013, ‘Identifying Technology Spillovers and Product
  Market Rivalry’. Econometrica 81(4), 1347–1393.

Bloom, N. and J. Van Reenen: 2002, ‘Patents, Real Options and Firm Performance’. The Economic
  Journal 112(478), C97–C116.

Blundell, R., R. Griffith, and J. Van Reenen: 1999, ‘Market Share, Market Value and Innovation in
  a Panel of British Manufacturing Firms’. Review of Economic Studies 66(3), 529–554.

Caballero, R. and A. Jaffe: 1993, ‘How High are the Giants’ Shoulders: An Empirical Assessment
  of Knowledge Spillovers and Creative Destruction in a Model of Economic Growth’. NBER
  Macroeconomics Annual 8(1), 15–86.

Chatterjee, S. and E. Rossi-Hansberg: 2012, ‘Spinoffs and the Market for Ideas’. International
  Economic Review 53(1), 53–93.

Chien, C.: 2014, ‘Startups and Patent Trolls’. Stanford Technology Law Review 17:461.

Cohen, L., J. M. Golden, U. G. Gurun, and S. D. Kominers: 2017, ‘Troll Check: A Proposal for
  Administrative Review of Patent Litigation’. Boston University Law Review 97, 1775.

Cohen, L., U. G. Gurun, and S. D. Kominers: 2016, ‘The Growing Problem of Patent Trolling’.
  Science 352(6285), 521–522.

Cohen, L., U. G. Gurun, and S. D. Kominers: 2018, ‘Patent Trolls: Evidence from Targeted Firms’.
  Management Science. forthcoming.

Cotropia, C. A., J. P. Kesan, and D. L. Schwartz: 2014, ‘Unpacking Patent Assertion Entities
  (PAEs)’. Minnesota Law Review 1571, 99.

                                                40
Czarnitzki, D. and A. A. Toole: 2011, ‘Patent protection, Market Uncertainty, and R&D Invest-
  ment’. The Review of Economics and Statistics 93(1), 147–159.

Eaton, J. and S. Kortum: 1996, ‘Trade in Ideas: Patenting and Productivity in the OECD’. Journal
  of International Economics 40(3), 251—278.

Feldman, R. and M. A. Lemley: 2015, ‘Do Patent Licensing Demands Mean Innovation?’. Iowa
  Law Review 101:137.

Feng, J. and X. Jaravel: 2017, ‘Crafting Intellectual Property Rights: Implications for Patent As-
  sertion Entities, Litigation, and Innovation’. LSE Working Paper.

Fischer, T. and J. Henkel: 2012, ‘Patent Trolls on Markets for Technology: An Empirical Analysis
  of NPEs Patent Acquisitions’. Research Policy 41, 9.

Galasso, A. and M. Schankerman: 2015, ‘Patents and Cumulative Innovation: Causal Evidence
  from the Courts’. Quarterly Journal of Economics 130(2), 317–369.

Galasso, A., M. Schankerman, and C. J. Serrano: 2013, ‘Trading and Enforcing Patent Rights’.
  RAND Journal of Economics 44.

Garicano, L., C. Lelarge, and J. Van Reenen: 2016, ‘Firm Size Distortions and the Productivity
  Distribution: Evidence from France’. American Economic Review 106(11), 3439—3479.

Graham, S., A. Marco, and R. Miller: 2015, ‘The USPTO patent examination research dataset: A
  window on the process of patent examination’.

Griffith, R., S. Redding, and J. Van Reenen: 2003, ‘R&D and Absorptive Capacity: Theory and
  Empirical Evidence’. Scandinavian Journal of Economics 105(1), 99–118.

Griffith, R., S. Redding, and J. Van Reenen: 2004, ‘Mapping the Two Faces of R&D: Productivity
  Growth in a Panel of OECD Industries’. Review of Economics and Statistics 86(4), 883–895.

Grossman, G. M. and E. Helpman: 1991, ‘Quality Ladders in the Theory of Growth’. Review of
  Economic Studies 29(4), 43–61.

Haber, S. H. and S. H. Werfel: 2015, ‘Why Do Inventors Sell to Patent Trolls? Experimental
  Evidence for the Asymmetry Hypothesis’. Stanford University Working Paper.

Haber, S. H. and S. H. Werfel: 2016, ‘Patent Trolls as Financial Intermediaries? Experimental
  Evidence’. Economics Letters 149, 64–66.

Hall, B. H., A. B. Jaffe, and M. Trajtenberg: 2001, ‘The NBER Patent Citations Data File: Lessons,
  Insights and Methodological Tools’. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no:8498.

                                                41
Henderson, R., A. Jaffe, and M. Trajtenberg: 1998, ‘Universities as a Source of Commercial Tech-
  nology: A Detailed Analysis of University Patenting, 1965Ð1988’. Review of Economics and
  Statistics 80(1), 119–127.

Jaffe, A. and M. Trajtenberg: 1999, ‘International Knowledge Flows: Evidence From Patent Cita-
  tions’. Economics of Innovation and New Technology 8(1-2), 105–136.

Jaravel, X., N. Petkova, and A. Bell: 2018, ‘Team-Specific Capital and Innovation’. American
  Economic Review 108, 1034–1073.

Kempf, E. and O. Spalt: 2018, ‘Litigating Innovation: Evidence from Securities Class Action
  Lawsuits’. University of Chicago, Booth School of Business Working Paper.

Khan, B. Z.: 2014, ‘Trolls and Other Patent Inventions: Economic History and the Patent Contro-
  versy in the Twenty-first Century’. George Mason Law Review 21, 825.

Khan, B. Z.: 2015, ‘Inventing Prizes: A Historical Perspective on Innovation Awards and Tech-
  nology Policy’. Business History Review 89(4), 631–660.

Kiebzak, S., G. Rafert, and C. E. Tucker: 2016, ‘The Effect of Patent Litigation and Patent Assertion
  Entities on Entrepreneurial Activity’. Research Policy 45(1), 218–231.

Klette, T. and S. Kortum: 2004, ‘Innovating Firms and Aggregate Innovation’. Journal of Political
  Economy 112(5), 986–1018.

Konig, M., J. Lorenz, and F. Zilibotti: 2016, ‘Catch-up and Fall-back through Innovation and
  Imitation’. Theoretical Economics 11(3), 1053–1102.

Kortum, S.: 1997, ‘Research, Patenting, and Technological Change’. Econometrica 65(6), 1389—
  1419.

Lai, R., A. D’Amour, and L. Fleming: 2009, ‘The Careers and Co-authorship Networks of US
  Patent-holders, since 1975’. Unpublished Working Paper, Harvard University.

Lamoreaux, N. R. and K. L. Sokoloff: 1999, ‘Inventors, Firms, and the Market for Technology
  in the Late Nineteenth and Early Twentieth Centuries’. Learning by Doing in Markets, Firms,
  and Countries. ed. by N. R. Lamoreaux, D. M. G. Raff, and P. Temin, pp. 19–60. University of
  Chicago Press.

Lanjouw, J. and M. Schankerman: 2001, ‘Characteristics of Patent Litigation: A Window on
  Competition’. RAND Journal of Economics 32, 1.

Lemley, M. A. and R. Feldman: 2016, ‘Patent Licensing, Technology Transfer, and Innovation’.
  American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 106(5), 188–92.

                                                 42
Lentz, R. and D. T. Mortensen: 2008, ‘An Empirical Model of Growth through Product Innova-
  tion’. Econometrica 76(6), 1317–1373.

Lu, J.: 2012, ‘The Myths and Facts of Patent Troll and Excessive Payment: Have Non-Practicing
  Entities (NPEs) Been Overcompensated?’. Business Economics 47:4.

Marco, A. C. and R. Miller: 2017, ‘Patent Examination Quality and Litigation: Is There a Link?’.

Nicholas, T.: 2013, ‘Are Patents Creative or Destructive?’. Antitrust Law Journal 79, 405–421.

Pènin, J.: 2012, ‘Strategic Uses of Patents in Markets for Technology: A Story of Fabless Firms,
  Brokers and Trolls’. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 84(6334), 1.

Perla, J. and C. Tonetti: 2014, ‘Equilibrium Imitation and Growth’. Journal of Political Economy
  122(1), 52—76.

Reitzig, M., J. Henkel, and F. Schneider: 2010, ‘Collateral Damage for R&D Manufacturers: How
  Patent Sharks Operate in Markets for Technology’. Industrial and Corporate Change 19, 3.

Risch, M.: 2012, ‘Patent Troll Myths’. Seton Hall Review 42:457.

Rivette, D. and K. Klein: 2000, ‘Discovering New Value in Intellectual Property’. Harvard Business
  Review.

Schwartz, D. L. and J. P. Kesan: 2014, ‘Analyzing the Role of Non-Practicing Entities in the Patent
  System’. Cornell Law Review 99:2.

Serrano, C.: 2010, ‘The Dynamics of Transfer and the Renewal of Patents’. RAND Journal of
  Economics 41(4), 686—708.

Serrano, C.: 2018, ‘Estimating the Gains from Trade in the Market for Patent Rights’. International
  Economic Review 41(4), 686—708. forthcoming.

Shrestha, S. K.: 2010, ‘Trolls or Market-Makers?’. An Empirical Analysis of Nonpracticing Entities.
  Columbia Law Review 110, 1.

Simonds, W. E.: 1871, Practical Suggestions on the Sale of Patents. Connecticut: Self-Published.

Toole, A. A. and C. Turvey: 2009, ‘How Does Initial Public Financing Influence Private Incentives
  for Follow-on Investment in Early-stage Technologies?’. Journal of Technology Transfer 34, 43–58.

Tucker, C.: 2014, ‘Patent Trolls and Technology Diffusion : The Case of Medical Imaging’. Work-
  ing Paper.




                                                 43
A       Data and Variable Descriptions




A.1       Data Cleaning and Merging

A.1.1      Company Name Cleaning

In order to aggregate patents produced by or sold to the same entities properly, it is critical to
have a way to clean company names, which we discuss here. Our approach is similar to that
used in the NBER Patent Database Project (PDP), but we extend past the 2006 end date of that
data set.16
       Company identifiers used by the USPTO are known to contain serious flaws. The most recent
efforts to harmonize the company names do not take many issues into account. In particular, the
same firms are assigned to different identifiers whenever there is a change to their legal status
(e.g. “MONSANTO TECHNOLOGY LLC”, “MONSANTO TECHNOLOGY LLP”).
       In order to tackle the flaws generated by USPTO identifiers, we employ a conservative com-
pany name cleaning algorithm, so that assignee identifier flaws are minimized. The main idea
behind the cleaning algorithm is to clean all unnecessary company indicators and company type
abbreviations. If the resulting string variables are the same, the algorithm assigns the same as-
signee identifier to each modified string. The same algorithm is used to clean licensee names in
ND.
       The algorithm can be summarized as follows:
       1.All letters of the string are made upper case.
       2.Any part of the string coming after a first comma is deleted.
       3.All non-alphanumeric characters are deleted.
       4.The first 3 characters of the string are deleted if it starts with “THE”.
       5.The company indicators such as CO, CORP, LLC, etc are removed.
       6. If the resulting string has zero length, the original string is used. (e.g. “ABCO, INC” ,
“COCO,INC”)


A.1.2      Data Merging

The PAB, LM, INV, and ND datasets are merged on patent number.17 We keep only utility patents
and drop those with application dates before 1987.18 We keep patents assigned to individuals if
the number of listed inventors is one. This is due to the difficulty in calculating portfolios for
  16 We would like to thank Murat Alp Celik for sharing his cleaning algorithm.
  17 We complement our data with recently announced citation and claim decomposition data. It can be found at the
following link: http://www.patentsview.org/download.
  18 More than 99 percent of NPE patents were applied for after 1987. This is the main reason that we focus on

post-1987 patents.


                                                       44
ever-changing assignee groups of multiple inventors. Thus, small, unincorporated groups are
omitted from the analysis.
   We keep only patents in technology categories (three-digit IPC) where the NPEs operate. We
merge USPTO classes and IPC classes and use IPC classes in our analysis.19 Each patent in PAB
is matched with harmonized assignee identifiers.20 The company name cleaning algorithm is
used on assignee and licensee names from the ND data. We match licensees with PAB data and
keep those for which there is patent data. We drop patents with missing distance to originating
entity and litigation risk from the acquisition deals.


A.2       Variable Construction

A.2.1     Lifetime Citations

We construct a lifetime forward citation variable for each patent to account for the fact that
patents are different ages, and therefore have differing amounts of time to accumulate citation.
   In order to construct this measure, the mean forward citations-patent age relationship is
constructed for each technological category. We calculate lifetime citations by inflating the total
citations already received by the ratio of the total mean citations of the same technology class
divided by the mean for the average patent of the same age and technology class. While this
procedure will understate the number of lifetime citations for any patent that has zero in our
data set, the mean number of lifetime cites should still be correct.
   The procedure is applied to all patents granted after 1976 using technology categories in Hall
et al. (2001). Note that we limit our attention to patents with application year after 1987 in the
final analysis.


A.2.2     Acquisition Price

The patents are purchased in bundles of firms at a given cost. We deflate this cost to real 2010
dollars. For our deal-level analysis, e.g. Table 3, some patent bundles combine patents that are
not part of our analysis with those that are (e.g. we do not use international patents). In this
case, we adjust the acquisition cost by the revenue weights representative of the overall outside
and inside sample. For instance, if international patents are on average worth 1/5 of a US patent
in the sample, we assign in the deal 5/6 of the cost to the patent in the sample for every 1/6
assigned to international patent.


A.2.3     Lifetime Revenue

As with citations, it is necessary to calculate a single revenue number so that we may compare
patents of different ages. We begin with per-patent annual nominal revenue numbers and use the
 19 See   http://www.uspto.gov/web/patents/classification for further information.
 20 Found at http://www.uspto.gov/web/offices/ac/ido/oeip/taf/data/misc/data_cd.doc/assignee_harmonization/cy2014



                                                      45
CPI to deflate them to real 2010 dollars. For each technology category, a mean revenue-patent
age relationship is constructed. The lifetime revenue of a patent is estimated by inflating the
observed cumulative revenue by the ratio of the mean lifetime revenue to the mean cumulative
revenue for patents of the same age (by technology category). We then normalize all revenue
amounts so that total lifetime revenue is 200 in order to maintain the confidentiality.
   Occasionally, patents generate licensing revenue after expiration (since they may still generate
income from prior infringement). In this case, no normalization procedure is used and the
observed real revenue is simply summed. Since patents may also generate revenue prior to grant
(in anticipation of grant), we begin observing revenue at the first filing date (which is the same
as application date for 90 percent of patents). That is, patent age is defined as the difference
between revenue generation year and first filing year. If a patent realizes revenue while classified
as abandoned, lapsed, or inactive, it is simply added to the normalized real revenue.

A.2.4   Distance

In order to quantify the distance between two technology classes, we define distance as in Akcigit
et al. (2016), using the first 2 digit IPC to denote a technology class:
                                                        T
                                               #( X Y )
                               d( X, Y ) ≡ 1 −     S , with 0 ≤ d( X, Y ) ≤ 1.
                                               #( X Y )
                  T
   where #(X          Y ) denotes the number of patents that cite technology classes X and Y together,
          S
and #(X       Y) denotes the number of patents which cite X or Y or both.
   Also following Akcigit et al. (2016), we construct a patent-to-entity distance metric. The
distance of a patent p to an entity f ’s patent portfolio is calculated by averaging the distance of
p to each patent in entity f ’s patent portfolio as follows.

                                                                                        1ι
                                                         1
                                    dι ( p, f ) ≡ 
                                                      || Pf ||    ∑
                                                                  0
                                                                          d( X p , Yp0 )ι 
                                                                 p ∈ Pf

   Where 0 < ι < 1, and where 0 ≤ dι ( p, f ) ≤ 1. Note that Pf represents the set of all patents
that were invented by entity f prior to patent p, || Pf || denotes the cardinality of the set, and
d( X p , Yp0 ) measures the distance between technology classes of patents p and p0 .
                  2
   We set ι =     3   for our baseline results. Using the measure above, we constructed two different
distance measures: distance to originating entity and distance to licensee.

A.2.5   Litigation Risk

To estimate the likelihood a patent may be involved in litigation, we use the linear probability
model developed in Lanjouw and Schankerman (2001):


                                 I Litigatedi,j,t = ζ + ηi + δt + φ × COi,j,t + ei,j,t            (18)

                                                             46
    Where the dependent variable is a dummy variable equaling 1 if the patent is ever litigated
or a complaint is ever filed, and 0 otherwise, and (i,j,t) represent patent, technology category,
and application year, respectively. ηi is a firm fixed effect and δt the application year fixed effect.
COi,j,t is a vector of covariates, and ei,j,t is the error.
    Our model is motivated by Lanjouw and Schankerman (2001), but we include the following
additional variables: examiner backward and forward citation percent, growth of technology cat-
egories, and entity fixed effects. We omit indicator variables for entity types (such as individual
inventors, foreign firms operating in the U.S., and firms operating in the U.S., which were in the
original model).
    We estimate the model on the full dataset and then predict litigation risk for each patent.
Robust standard errors are clustered at originating entity level.


B     Additional Tables and Figures

B.1   Deal-level Summary Statistics

Table A1 reports deal-level summary statistics on all deals through which the NPEs acquired
patents from 2003 - 2014. Compared to Table 1, which reported patent level statistics, the average
entity size is substantially smaller, indicating that the acquisitions from smaller firms are more
numerous and have a smaller average deal size. In fact, deals from individual inventors represent
17% of total deals, over an order of magnitude higher than the share of individual inventors in the
patent universe. Deals with individual inventors and small firms accounts combined accounts
for fully two-thirds of the total acquisition deals. Only 5% of patent acquisition deals are struck
with large originating firms.
    The mean number of forward citations is substantially higher in Table A1 than Table 1, while
age is lower, indicating that smaller firms are likely selling newer, more highly cited patents.
Larger firms are most likely selling NPEs larger numbers of older, less-cited patents. Deal size
is right-skewed, with a small number of very large deals driving the mean up substantially; the
median acquisition deal involves only 4 patents. Age here is defined as the acquisition date minus
application date, and has a mean of just over 7 years. The deal acquisition price is normalized so
that the mean is 200. We first divide the acquisition prices of the deals by the number of patents
involved. Then, we normalize this value so that mean is 200. Finally, we multiply the normalized
values per deal with the number of patents involved to construct normalized acquisition prices
for each deal.


B.2   Patent-level Summary Statistics

Table A2 reports patent-licensee-year level summary statistics derived from NPE licensing deal
data from 2008 to 2014. The licensee is the ultimate end-user of the patent; most patents in the
dataset have multiple licensees. It is immediately apparent that the mean distance to licensee is

                                                      47
                      Table A1: Patent Acquisition Deal Summary Statistics
      Variables                                       Mean         p25         p50         p75              Sd
      Distance to Originating Entity                   0.32           0        0.29        0.53          0.28
      Originating Patent Portfolio Size               762.56        2.31       6.54       200.40       2896.74
      Log Originating Patent Portfolio Size            3.07         0.84       1.88        5.30          2.76
      Litigation Risk                                 13.22        8.57       11.61       15.43          8.73
      Individual Inventor                              0.17           0          0           0           0.37
      Total Claims                                    22.09        14.72        20          27          11.44
      Lifetime Forward Citations                      42.68        10.13      21.28       46.31         66.74
      Backward Citations                              20.11         6.34      10.57       20.67         30.98
      Hotness                                         30.68        13.46      27.94       42.90         22.59
      Deal Size                                       23.10          2           4          13          98.84
      Age                                              7.09           4        7.11         10           4.27
      Log Acquisition Price                            5.91         4.99       5.85        6.74          1.27
Notes: Acquisition deal-level data from 2003 - 2014 includes all NPE patent acquisition deals in the U.S.

about 50% larger than the mean distance to originating entity (Table 1 and A1). This may lead
one to believe that the reallocation of patents from originator to licensee via NPEs is inefficient,
insofar as it increases the mean patent distance and thus usefulness of a patent to a firm. This
conclusion would be unjustified, as the distance metric is an increasing function of firm size
(Figure B1), and the mean licensee size is several times larger than originating entity size. The
correct comparison would be the mean empirical distance to licensee (0.47) versus the mean
distance for a randomly chosen set of patents in the licensee’s portfolio. The mean distance for
the randomly chosen patents to the licensee portfolios is 0.64, which shows that the NPE-licensed
patents have substantially smaller distances from the licensees than average.
    Returning to Table A2, we see that, as with originating entity size, the licensee size is also
right-skewed. Licensee size is the number of patents (including subsequently granted applica-
tions) in the licensee’s portfolio at the time of the licensing deal. Because data in Table A2 is
aggregated at the patent-licensee-year level, a direct comparison with Tables 1 and A1 is com-
plicated, but most of the variable means are similar. Patent age, with a mean and median of
around 12, is defined as the duration between application date and licensing date. We have seen
some suggestive findings from the summary statistics; we now make use of regressions to further
investigate the impact of NPEs on innovation markets.




B.3    Additional Figures

We noted in the discussion of Table A2 how the distance measure is correlated with firm size.
Here we plot a scatter of the relationship to illustrate it is indeed the case.

                                                         48
                        Table A2: Licensing Transaction Summary Statistics
      Variables                                          Mean                 p25    p50    p75         Sd
      Distance to Licensee                                0.47            0.23       0.45    0.71       0.30
      Distance of Random Patent to Licensee              64.35            33.38     76.77   93.49      33.34
      Licensee Patent Portfolio Size                    5095.57            64        867    5347      9120.51
      Log Licensee Patent Portfolio Size                  6.19            4.16       6.77    8.58       3.01
      Litigation Risk                                    11.85            6.93      10.40   14.62       8.61
      Individual Inventor                                 0.06              0          0       0        0.25
      Total Claims                                       19.30             10         17      24       15.22
      Lifetime Forward Citations                         31.34            3.46      11.34   32.86      60.32
      Backward Citations                                 22.64              4          8      17       52.40
      Hotness                                            32.07            2.56        25      50       29.97
      Age                                                11.98              8         12      15        5.15
      Log Licensing Fee***                                8.25            6.28       8.04   10.33       2.48
Notes: Patent-Licensee-Year level data includes all NPE licensing transactions from 2008 - 2014. Please see the text
and Appendix A.2 for variable definitions and normalization.




                            Figure B1: Distance and Originating Entity Size
                                100
                                80  60
                            Distance
                          40    20
                                0




                                         0              5                           10
                                                    Originating Entity Size




Notes: This figure shows the relationship between firm size and mean patent distance for patents sold to NPEs. Larger
firms on average sell more distant patents.

C     Calibration

Here we report the calibrated values for when we targeted φ/α = 0 and φ/α = 1. The figures
from our selected exercises can be found in Section 6, Figures 6 and 7.

                                                          49
                      Table B1: Parameter Values, target φ/α = 0
Parameter                 Description                  Value       Main Identification
                           — Panel A. External Calibration —
    η       R&D cost scaling for external innovation    0.25      Akcigit and Kerr (2018)
    ξ               Convexity of R&D cost                2        Akcigit and Kerr (2018)
  E[di ]     Expected distance of upstream to NPE       0.30            NPE Distribution
  E[dk ]    Expected distance of downstream to NPE      0.50      Taken in uniform[0,1]
                            — Panel B. Internal Calibration —
   Ω               Profit of Licensing Entity           3.80       Correlation of prices
    π              Profit of Innovating Entity          0.11   Correlation between pi and di
    φ          Probability producer infringement         0      Pr producer infringement
    τ          Probability innovator infringement       0.88    Pr producer infringement
    β          Probability of Winning (Upstream)        0.34        Correlations, Prices
  β npe      Probability of Winning in Court (NPE)      0.94                   Prices
    κ                  Max. Search Cost                 2.25                Pr(sale)
                         Notes: All parameters are estimated jointly.


                           Table B2: Moments, target φ/α = 0
    Moment                                                                Data          Model
    Price upstream producer sells to NPE                                   1              1
    Average Price NPE sells to downstream                                 1.54           1.54
    Correlation between distance of upstream to NPE and price             -0.07         -0.07
    Correlation between price sold and bought from NPE                    0.37           0.37
    Innovation intensity of downstream innovator                          0.74           0.74
    Probability of sale to NPE                                            0.23           0.23
    Proportion of infringement from non-innovators                         0             0.01




                                                50
                      Table B3: Parameter Values, target φ/α = 1
Parameter                 Description                  Value       Main Identification
                           — Panel A. External Calibration —
    η          inverse external R&D cost scaling        0.25      Akcigit and Kerr (2018)
    ξ               Convexity of R&D cost                2        Akcigit and Kerr (2018)
  E[di ]     Expected distance of upstream to NPE       0.30            NPE Distribution
  E[dk ]    Expected distance of downstream to NPE      0.50      Taken in uniform[0,1]
                            — Panel B. Internal Calibration —
   Ω               Profit of Licensing Entity           3.36       Correlation of prices
    π              Profit of Innovating Entity          0.09   Correlation between pi and di
    φ          Probability producer infringement        0.75    Pr producer infringement
    τ          Probability innovator infringement       0.03    Pr producer infringement
    β          Probability of Winning (Upstream)        0.38        Correlations, Prices
  β npe      Probability of Winning in Court (NPE)       1                     Prices
    κ                  Max. Search Cost                 2.28                Pr(sale)
                         Notes: All parameters are estimated jointly.


                           Table B4: Moments, target φ/α = 1
    Moment                                                                Data          Model
    Price upstream producer sells to NPE                                   1             1.02
    Average Price NPE sells to downstream                                 1.54           1.50
    Correlation between distance of upstream to NPE and price             -0.07         -0.07
    Correlation between price sold and bought from NPE                    0.37           0.28
    Innovation intensity of downstream innovator                          0.74           0.82
    Probability of sale to NPE                                            0.23           0.21
    Proportion of infringement from non-innovators                         1             0.97




                                                51
D     Theoretical Appendix

This section more explicitly derives the predictions of the model. We first write out some objects
and prices in the economy that we will reference in our derivations.

                                                                                 keep
                                                                pi,npe − Vi
                                                 Pr (sale) =                                                (19)
                                                                       κ

                                                                   keep
                                                              Vi          + Vnpe
                                                   pi,npe =                                                 (20)
                                                                          2

                                                                    β npe Ω j
                                                        pnpe,j =                                            (21)
                                                                       2

                                                              Ω k (1 − d k )
                                                   pnpe,k =                                                 (22)
                                                                    2

                                                                                βi Ωj
                                              pi,j = β i π (1 − di ) +                                      (23)
                                                                                  2

                                                     prod
                                                   Vi       = π (1 − d i ) .


                              keep                             prod
                            Vi       = αpi,j + (1 − α) Vi
                                                          Ωj                                                (24)
                                                            
                                     = αβ i π (1 − di ) +      + (1 − α ) π (1 − d i ) .
                                                          2


                                             Vnpe = αpnpe,j + (1 − α) pnpe,k                                (25)


D.1    Derivation of Prediction 1

The NPE is more likely to buy patents from small firms. Moreover, this effect is more pronounced for
litigation-prone patents


                                                β 0 ( qi ) α                  Ωj
                                                                                
                               ∂
                                  Pr (sale) = −                π (1 − d i ) +      < 0.
                              ∂qi                   2κ                        2

    With probability of sale given in Equation 19, we plug in Equation 20. In order to fully
characterize, we then use Equations 24 and 25:

                                      keep
                           Vnpe − Vi             αpnpe,j + (1 − α) pnpe,k − αpi,j − (1 − α) π (1 − di ) .
           Pr (sale) =                       =
                                2κ                                         2κ

                                                               52
    Plug in Equations 21, 22, and 23 to get the probability of sale as a function of exogenous
variables with respect to i.


                        β npe Ω j                                                                  βi Ω j
                                    + (1 − α) Ωk (12−dk ) − α β i π (1 − di ) +
                                                                                                           
                    α      2                                                                         2          − (1 − α ) π (1 − d i )
      Pr (sale) =                                                                                                                          (26)
                                                                            2κ

                                                                      β 0 ( qi ) Ω j
                                                                                      
            ∂                          α β 0 ( q i ) π (1 − d i ) +          2                αβ0 (qi ) Ω j
                                                                                                                          
               Pr (sale) = −                                                               =−               + π (1 − d i )
           ∂qi                                             2κ                                   2κ       2
    We then take the derivative with respect to litigation risk:

                                     ∂2                 β 0 ( qi )            Ωj
                                                                                                            
                                          Pr (sale) = −                          + π (1 − d i )                    < 0.
                                    ∂α∂qi                  2κ                 2

D.2    Derivation of Prediction 2

The likelihood of a patent sale increases as distance of the patent from the initial innovating firm increases.
Moreover, this effect is more pronounced for large firms


                                            ∂              αβ i π + (1 − α) π
                                               Pr (sale) =                    > 0.
                                           ∂di                     2κ



                                                ∂2                β0 (qi )απ
                                                      Pr (sale) =            > 0.
                                              ∂di ∂qi                 2κ

    Both of these follow from derivatives of Equation 26 with respect to distance and firm size.


D.3    Derivation of Prediction 3

The NPE pays more for large firms’ patents:


    Here we write out the acquisition price from Equation 20 which plugs in Equations 21, 22, 24
and 25, which are the values that determine the price:

                                                  Ωj                                                   β npe Ω j
                                                                                                                   + (1 − α) Ωk (12−dk )
                          h                            i
                      αβ i π (1 − di ) +          2        + (1 − α ) π (1 − d i ) + α                    2
           pi,npe =                                                                                                                        (27)
                                                                              2
    Now we simply take derivative with respect to qi which shows up through β i

                                                                                              Ωj
                                                                    h                              i
                                          ∂pi,npe      β 0 ( q i ) α π (1 − d i ) +           2
                                                  =                                                     > 0.
                                           ∂qi                            2

                                                                   53
D.4    Derivation of Prediction 4

The acquisition price decreases as patent distance to the seller increases:


    See Equation 27 and take the derivative with respect to distance for i, di –


                                      ∂pi,npe    [αβ i + 1 − α] π
                                              =−                  <0
                                       ∂di               2

D.5    Derivation of Prediction 5

The average price that a licensing firm pays to NPEs decreases as the distance to the licensee increases


    Recall Equation 22:

                                                        Ω k (1 − d k )
                                             pnpe,k =                  .
                                                              2
    The prediction immediately follows from differentiation with respect to dk .


D.6    Ambiguous effect on firm j’s innovation

Here we show how the NPE has an ambiguous effect on firm j’s innovation. Recall:

                                       1                      1                  1
                            ∆µ j = η ξ −1 [ Ω j − τ E( p.,j ) ξ −1 − Ω j − τ pi,j ξ −1 ]
                                                                   



                                      1                1         1           1
                            ∆µi = η ξ −1 E[ pi,npe − e] ξ −1 − η ξ −1 E[Vkeep ] ξ −1

    To show the ambiguous effect on µ j , it is sufficient to show that for some parameters pnpe,j >
pi,j and for other parameters pnpe,j < pi,j and show that even in these cases i visits the NPE with
positive probability. Recall E( p.,j ) = Pr(i uses NPE) × pnpe,j + [1 − Pr(i uses NPE)] × E[ pi,j ]
    Plugging in the values for pnpe,j and pi,j , we want to show uncertainty over the relationship
between:
                                                              βi Ωj   β npe Ω j
                                     β i π (1 − E[di ]) +           ≶
                                                                2        2
    We see that for β i = 0 and β npe > 0 one side of the inequality is confirmed (j will innovate
less with the NPE). For β npe < β i , the other side of the inequality is confirmed (j will innovate
more with the NPE).
    We lastly verify there are cases where i goes to the NPE with positively probability even if
                                                keep
β npe < β i . This can occur when Vnpe > Vi            rewritten as:

              β npe Ω j            Ω k (1 − d k )                      Ωj
                                                                         
            α           + (1 − α )                > αβ i π (1 − di ) +      + (1 − α ) π (1 − d i )
                 2                       2                             2

                                                         54
   Assume β npe = 0 and β i > 0. Note that for certain values of Ωk (1 − dk ) the inequality of the
above equation will still hold:

                          Ω k (1 − d k )                      Ωj
                                                                
                 (1 − α )                > αβ i π (1 − di ) +      + (1 − α ) π (1 − d i )
                                2                             2
   When di → 0 and dk > 0 we see the result holds for small α. The intuition for this is that i
may choose to visit the NPE due to its distance reduction role even if the NPE is worse in court
capability. Thus j will observe less potential interference. This will only hold for low values of
β npe , which we do not find in our calibration.




                                                    55
