                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        RELINQUISHING RICHES:
    AUCTIONS VS INFORMAL NEGOTIATIONS IN TEXAS OIL AND GAS LEASING

                                       Thomas R. Covert
                                      Richard L. Sweeney

                                      Working Paper 25712
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25712


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           March 2019, Revised October 2019




Both authors declare they have no interests, financial or otherwise, that relate to the research
described in this paper, nor do they have any current ties, directly or indirectly to the energy
industry. We thank participants at numerous seminars, as well as Piotr Dworczak, Aaron Flaaen,
Timothy Fitzgerald, Ryan Kellogg, Peter Maniloff, and Cythina Lin Lawell for helpful
comments. Yixin Sun, Eric Karsten, Devin McNulty and Grace Park provided excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Thomas R. Covert and Richard L. Sweeney. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Relinquishing Riches: Auctions vs Informal Negotiations in Texas Oil and Gas Leasing
Thomas R. Covert and Richard L. Sweeney
NBER Working Paper No. 25712
March 2019, Revised October 2019
JEL No. D44,L13,Q35

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper compares outcomes from informally negotiated oil and gas leases to those awarded via
centralized auction. We focus on Texas, where legislative decisions in the early twentieth century
assigned thousands of proximate parcels to different mineral allocation mechanisms. We show
that during the fracking boom, which began unexpectedly decades later, auctioned leases
generated at least 40 percent larger upfront payments and 60 percent more output than negotiated
leases did. These results suggest large potential gains from employing centralized, formal
mechanisms in markets that traditionally allocate in an unstructured fashion, including the
broader $3 trillion market for privately owned minerals.


Thomas R. Covert
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
thomas.covert@chicagobooth.edu

Richard L. Sweeney
Economics Department
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
sweeneri@bc.edu




Code for replication is available at https://github.com/rlsweeney/public_cs_texas
1       Introduction
Asset owners often need to identify and choose between potential contracting partners to
monetize their asset’s value. For example, companies that are the target of acquisition may
have multiple potential acquirers, and research institutions looking to commercialize intel-
lectual property often decide among several interested parties. Many land transactions also
look like this. How should an owner go about this process? Decades of economic theory
have characterized the relative performance of different formal transaction mechanisms, like
simultaneous bidding in auctions, bargaining following an auction, and pure sequential bar-
gaining (Bulow and Klemperer, 1996, 2009; Roberts and Sweeting, 2013). However, in the
real world, many important assets are allocated via informal, unstructured processes, and
little is known about how they perform relative to theoretical benchmarks.
     In this paper, we directly measure the gains from using a centralized, theoretically high-
performing mechanism, relative to using informal, decentralized transactions, in the market
for mineral leases in Texas. We study a large class of lands initially set aside for public
use under the Texas Constitution, on which legislative decisions made nearly one hundred
years ago determined whether leases signed during the recent shale boom transacted using
an auction or an informal “negotiation.”1 All of the minerals within these lands belong to
the State. On some of these parcels, the State allocates mineral leases using a first price
auction. However, on other parcels, the Texas Relinquishment Act of 1919 grants today’s
private surface owners the right to negotiate terms with oil and gas companies on behalf
of the State, in exchange for half of the revenues they generate. Conversations with many
parties involved in Texas leasing confirm that these negotiated leases for public minerals
represent a useful analogue to the broader universe of negotiated leases for private minerals
in the United States.
     Our empirical strategy compares auctioned and negotiated leases that lie in narrowly
defined geographic areas, which transact at approximately the same time. Within these
location and time bins, the resource quality is the same, the information about its production
potential is constant, and, as we argue in Section 4, the allocation mechanism is as good
as randomly assigned. Using detailed data from almost thirteen hundred leases for publicly
owned minerals in Texas between 2005 and 2016, we find that auctioned leases sell for 36
log points more than similar negotiated leases do. This result is robust to a wide range
of controls and sample restrictions, and is not caused by differences in the likelihood that
auctioned and negotiated parcels have a successful transaction. The economic significance
    1
     Throughout the paper we use the term negotiation to refer to the informal search, bargaining and
solicitation process that lessors use to award drilling rights on private land. We describe what is known
about this process in Section 2.


                                                   2
of these results is large: on average, negotiated lesses would have generated $133,000 more
up front revenue had they transacted using an auction.
    In principle, this improvement in up front seller revenues could simply reflect a transfer
from buyers to sellers. However, one theoretically appealing feature of a well designed auction
is that it should allocate an asset to its highest value user. Using the same empirical strategy,
we look for evidence of such allocative efficiency gains by comparing subsequent output across
auctioned and negotiated leases. We find that auctioned leases produce 46 log points more
output than negotiated leases. Combined with the fact that they also have slightly higher
royalty rates, we estimate that, on average, auctions increase total seller revenue by about
$351,000 per lease. Moreover, we show that while auctions allocate minerals to different
firms, both the payment and output differences hold within firm, suggesting that firm-lease
“match” plays an important role in determining lease outcomes, and that auctions generate
better matches than negotiations do. As we discuss in Section 7, the fact that the optimal
partner varies from lease to lease implies that the gains from attracting additional bidders
and from using a formal mechanism to select between them are large in this setting.
    These results contribute to a small empirical literature which compares the performance
of auctions to alternative mechanisms in real world settings. Roberts and Sweeting (2013)
find that a sequential mechanism performs better than a simultaneous bid auction in tim-
ber sales, and Gentry and Stroup (2018) find that the two mechanisms perform similarly
in corporate takeovers.2 Salz (2017) estimates large returns from the use of intermediaries,
who organize auctions on their client’s behalf, in the highly decentralized market for waste
collection in New York City. In each of these papers, only one mechanism is observed in the
data. To predict what would happen under a different mechanism, the authors estimate the
distribution of preferences and costs using a structural model, and then compute counter-
factual market outcomes under alternative mechanisms. In contrast, we observe the results
of auctions and informal negotiations on otherwise identical objects, transacting at the same
time. As a result, we can estimate the causal effects of mechanism choice on welfare relevant
outcomes by directly comparing observable measures of these outcomes, like seller revenue
and lease output.
    A direct comparison between auctions and negotiations is useful because real-world nego-
tiations are messy. Conversations with industry participants suggest that informal mineral
lease transactions are heterogenous, with aspects of sequential negotiation coexisting with
   2
     There is also a corporate finance literature on mergers and acquisitions comparing auctioned and nego-
tiated outcomes. Subramanian (2007) finds that “Go-shop” deals, in which private equity target firms are
explicitly allowed to solicit outside bids following a negotiated acquisition offer, sell at higher prices than
“No-shop” deals do. In contrast, Boone and Mulherin (2007) find that auctioned takeover deals transact at
roughly the same prices as negotiated deals do.



                                                      3
costly landowner search effort (Hortaçsu and Syverson, 2004; Allen et al., Forthcoming;
Cuesta and Sepulveda, 2018), bilateral bargaining (Backus et al., 2015, 2018; Larsen, 2018)
and even take-it-or-leave-it behavior on the part of some buyers. The informality and hetero-
geneity in this market make it unlikely that the forces driving our results would be captured
by any specific formal model of negotiations. Thus, we do not interpret the evidence in this
paper as validating or rejecting any existing theoretical comparisons between auctions and
specific alternative mechanisms.3 Instead, our contribution is to demonstrate the magnitude
of the gains from using a formal, implementable, theoretically attractive mechanism, in a
real world setting. In that sense our paper is similar to Larsen (2018). Using data from
bilaterally bargained vehicle transactions, he finds that the difference in welfare between
actual bargaining behavior and “second best” mechanisms achievable under incomplete in-
formation is much larger than the Myerson and Satterthwaite (1983) welfare loss arising
from incomplete information itself.
    We also contribute to the large literature on the economics of oil and gas leasing in the
United States. Early work by Kenneth Hendricks and Robert Porter on the performance
of auctions for mineral leases in the US Gulf of Mexico focused on the empirical relevance
of common values and information asymmetries (Hendricks and Porter, 1996, 1988). They
showed that US government auctions captured approximately 100% of the ex ante surplus in
symmetric information environments, but considerably less in asymmetric information envi-
ronments. Recent work on mineral lease auctions has sought to separately identify affiliation
from synergies between neighboring parcels (Kong, 2017), measure bidder uncertainty about
competition (Kong, 2016), and evaluate the choice of “security” sold by the winning bidder
to the auctioneer (Bhattacharya et al., 2018). An important distinction between this paper
and the existing literature is that our results speak to the performance of the private leasing
market, which constitutes approximately three quarters of all mineral rights in the United
States (currently worth over $3 trillion).
    Finally, our paper contributes to a large literature on the costs and benefits of the shale
boom. There is now robust evidence of large negative externalities from fracking (Muehlen-
bachs et al., 2015; Currie et al., 2017). These costs, most of which are local, must be evaluated
against the (ideally local) benefits generated by the use of fracking. Previous literature on
the landowner benefits of fracking were limited to analyzing partial or indirect measures of
landowner revenues, due to the fact that bonus payments are not publicly recorded (Brown
et al., 2016; Feyrer et al., 2017; Bartik et al., 2017). In our setting, we directly observe the
full set of payments received by mineral owners, including bonus payments and royalty rev-
   3
   Indeed, our results are consistent with a variety of theoretical comparisons between simple auctions and
more complicated alternatives. We explore these interpretations in Section 7.



                                                    4
enue. We find that bonus payments represent more than seventy percent of total landowner
revenue earned to-date for the average lease, and by construction, they are the entirety of
landowner revenues for the two thirds of leases that are never drilled. The fact that local
payments could be made substantially larger through a more formal allocation process sug-
gests that feasible changes to the way this market operates could meaningfully shift the local
cost-benefit ratio of this technology shock.
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we describe the mineral leasing
process and provide background information on our natural experiment in Texas. Section 3
discusses the data we use and the filtering criteria we apply to it. Section 4 describes our
empirical strategy and identification argument, and Sections 5 and 6 present the results. In
Section 7 we discuss possible mechanisms for our results, before concluding in Section 8.


2       Background
In this section, we first describe the contract structure of a mineral lease, the market institu-
tions for leasing, and the dimensions along which some leases may end up being more or less
productive (Section 2.1). Then, in Section 2.2, we describe the history of land and mineral
ownership in Texas, where a unique natural experiment motivates our empirical strategy.


2.1      Mineral Exploration and Production in the United States
The US Energy Information Administration estimates that at the end of 2017, oil and gas
companies in the United States had proved reserves of 42 billion barrels of oil and 464 trillion
cubic feet of natural gas. As of December 31, 2017, these reserves were worth more than
$4.5 trillion.4 Although more than three quarters of these deposits lie in land owned by
private individuals (Fitzgerald and Rucker, 2016), landowners must partner with oil and gas
exploration and production companies (E&P) to transform their reserves into revenue.
    Partnerships between land owners and E&P companies are formalized through mineral
lease agreements, which are contracts with three key elements: a primary term before which
the lessee (the E&P company) must begin drilling; a royalty rate providing the lessor (the
landowner) with a share of any realized drilling revenues; and an upfront bonus payment to
secure the right to explore.5 Many leases also include delay rentals, which are payments the
    4
     According to EIA data, oil prices were $66.73 per barrel (Brent) and natural gas prices were $3.69 per
million BTU (Henry Hub).
   5
     This contract structure has important incentive implications, as positive royalty rates provide incentives
for lessees to drill later in the contract, and finite primary terms provide incentives for lessees to drill earlier
in the contract. See Herrnstadt et al. (2018).



                                                         5
lessee must make to the landowner in the event that drilling has not begun by the start of
intermediate milestone events during the primary term. Finally, some leases have additional
contractual clauses regarding operations, cleanup and other landowner protections (Vissing,
2017).6
    Lessees frequently elect not to drill any wells before the conclusion of the primary term,
and even when they do, realized drilling does not always result in economically viable quan-
tities of production. As a result, most leases never receive any royalty revenues, so bonus
payments are a particularly important aspect of landowner welfare. Despite their conceptual
importance in this market, little is known about the distribution of bonus payments, because
they are usually not recorded in the mineral leases filed in county registries.
    Mineral leases are typically initiated by E&P companies, rather than by landowners. An
E&P company will conduct background research and decide to acquire drilling rights in a
particular geographic location. During this acquisition phase, E&P’s often work through
intermediaries known as “landmen.” One reason that E&P companies use landmen is that
a given firm’s need for new mineral leases may vary over time, and the skills necessary to
find landowners, verify their claim to mineral interests, and convince them to lease can be
too expensive for an E&P company to consistently maintain in-house. E&P companies can
also use landmen to sign leases on their behalf, keeping the E&P company’s identity secret
from potential lessors and from competing firms.
    In addition to negotiating leasing terms, the decision of which firm to partner with is
important. During the recent shale boom, there were thousands of E&P companies operating
in Texas, including more than 100 that drilled at least 1 well per month. Compared to other
capital intensive businesses, the oil and gas industry in America is not concentrated, with
the 50 largest firms drilling about half of all wells drilled in Texas. The largest firm, XTO
Energy, drilled fewer than 5% of all new wells.7 Given the large number of firms, one might
expect a fairly homogenous industry. However, there are many reasons why a landowner
might expect different E&P companies to produce substantially more or less output, and
royalties, than others.
    Many sources of heterogeneity among E&P companies are “vertical” in nature, in that
some firms have either consistently lower costs or higher productivity than others. There
are wide differences in firm size and observable measures of firm sophistication among the
set of active firms in the US onshore E&P business. Indeed, some of the largest companies
in the world, like Exxon and Chevron, compete for leases against thousands of privately
held E&P companies with fewer than 500 employees. Beyond observable differences in firm
  6
      We study these “lease addenda” formally in Appendix C.
  7
      XTO Energy is a subsidiary of Exxon Mobil, acquired in 2010.



                                                    6
size and sophistication, there is heterogeneity across E&P companies in their decisions to
hire external service contractors to perform drilling and completion services or to maintain
these capabilities in house. There is also evidence for heterogeneity across firms in their
engineering designs of hydraulic fracturing treatments, which are necessary for all leases in
this setting (Covert, 2015). Finally, it is possible that some firms may simply be able to
process post-acquisition lease information more effectively, and in doing so, more efficiently
select which of their leases to drill.
    In addition to these vertical differences in E&P company quality, there are also many
potential sources of horizontal heterogeneity across firms, which may make some better at
developing a particular piece of land than others. For example, firms who already control
acreage in one area may be able to develop drilling plans that minimize the number of wells
necessary to extract minerals, relative to firms who have less existing nearby acreage hold-
ings. Firms who own hydrocarbon transportation infrastructure close to a given parcel may
experience cost advantages in developing that specific parcel, but not other parcels further
away from this infrastructure. Similarly, firms with formation-specific knowledge about ge-
ology or efficient engineering choices will be able to produce more (or less expensively) than
firms with less context-specific knowledge.


2.2     Texas Permanent School Fund
Private mineral rights are a uniquely American phenomenon. When individuals outside of
the United States purchase surface rights to a piece of land, local or central governments
retain ownership and authority over the minerals underground. Because Texas was originally
a Spanish colony, early land transactions in Texas followed a similar pattern: when a private
individual bought land, the King of Spain retained the mineral rights.
    After declaring independence in the mid 19th century, the Republic of Texas appropriated
millions of acres of unsettled land for public use and the Texas Constitution of 1876 allocated
half of this land to benefit public schools. The rules for transactions on the 8 million acres
of land, largely in West Texas, contained in this “Permanent School Fund” (PSF), were
formalized in 1895. When PSF land was sold to private citizens, Texas, following its colonial
tradition, retained the rights to exploit minerals beneath the surface. The surface owner’s
remedy for damages resulting from any mineral exploration and development was a payment
of just $0.10 per acre, per year.
    When oil was discovered in Texas at the turn of the 20th century, surface owners on PSF
land argued that this compensation was inadequate.8 To stave off “armed rebellion” by these
   8
     Although small quantities of oil were observed in Texas prior to that point, recovery in large quantities
had proved elusive prior to the massive gusher well at Spindletop in 1901. This well is largely cited as the


                                                      7
surface owners against state lessees, the Texas legislature passed the Relinquishment Act of
1919 (Shields, 1981). This law, amended and reinterpreted through more than a decade of
subsequent litigation, appointed the surface owner as the minerals leasing agent of the State.
The arrangment continues to this day, provided that the surface owner’s parcel had been
acquired from the PSF by 1931.9 As a result, when an E&P company wants to develop a
Relinquishment Act (RAL) parcel, it must negotiate a lease with the surface owner, as if the
surface owner owned the minerals outright. Once the surface owner and the E&P company
reach an agreement, they submit the lease to the Texas General Land Office (GLO) for final
approval. If approved, the lessee remits half of the bonus and royalty payments to the State.
In exchange for acting as the State’s agent, the surface owner gets to keep the other half.
    Concurrent with the settlement of the Relinquishment Act, Texas passed the Sales Act
of 1931. Under this Act, subsequent land sales out of the PSF transferred nearly all mineral
rights to the surface owner, under what became known as the “Free Royalty” system. When
an E&P company wants to develop a Free Royalty parcel, it negotiates directly with the
parcel’s owner, and neither party needs to seek State approval for the lease. While the
surface owner keeps all of the bonus and royalty payments that she is able to bargain for,
the firm must make an additional royalty payment, equal to a 1/16th share of output, to the
State. Because the State doesn’t retain any bonus interest, administrative bonus data for
Free Royalty leases do not exist.
    The State continued to sell PSF land under the Free Royalty system until the 1970’s,
when the OPEC oil embargo and federal oil regulations prompted wide ranging changes to
mineral management in Texas. Beginning in 1973, the State explicitly retained full mineral
interests in all remaining PSF lands. The State continued to sell surface rights to PSF land,
but the Texas General Land Office (GLO) manages mineral leasing in these and other unsold
PSF parcels. Unlike leases on RAL parcels, or leases on the broader population of private
land, the state awards leases on PSF parcels in which it has retained full mineral rights using
an auction. Bidders compete for leases with a fixed primary term and royalty rate, so the
cash bids are analogous to the bonus payment on a negotiated lease.


3     Data
From the Texas General Land Office, we obtained data on the universe of oil and gas leases
signed between 2005 and 2016 on PSF lands where the State of Texas retained full or partial
mineral rights. This includes leases on RAL parcels, sold by the State prior to 1931, and
advent of the oil age in the United States (Yergin, 2008).
   9
     The Texas Supreme court finalized their interpretation of the Relinquishment Act on June 29, 1931.


                                                    8
parcels that were sold after 1973 or still belong to the State.10 Our initial dataset includes the
shape, location, size, effective date, bonus payment, primary term and royalty rate for 4,071
RAL leases and 646 State auction leases. For all leases that eventually result in drilling, we
observe monthly payments for gas and oil royalties remitted to the state, up through March,
2019. We use this royalty payment data to both measure the output that a lease generates,
and also determine which leases were drilled, without having to spatially match drilling data
to leases. We combine the royalty revenue data with output price11 information to infer
monthly oil and gas production for drilled leases.
    We spatially intersect this lease-level dataset with a parcel map of all lands in the PSF. We
acquired this map from P2Energy Solutions, a private contractor hired by the State of Texas
to match historical records of PSF parcel information to GIS representations of those parcels.
The map identifies which mineral category each PSF parcel belongs to: Relinquishment Act,
Free Royalty or minerals fully retained by Texas. We use this map of parcels to measure
differences in the likelihood of a successful lease across negotiation (RAL) and auction (non-
RAL) parcels in Section 5.2.
    The GLO uses first price, sealed bid auctions to allocate its non-RAL leases. GLO
conducts two to four centralized auctions per year, each of which includes hundreds of parcels
from the PSF and other publicly owned land funds in Texas. For every parcel that is
nominated by an E&P company, we observe a “bid notice” describing the parcel itself, the
date that the auction will be held, and the reserve price. Following the auction, we observe
the name of each bidder who bid above the reserve, as well as their bid.


3.1     Sample Selection and Initial Comparisons
We impose a number of restrictions on these data to obtain our final sample. First, we restrict
the sample to leases lying on top of a shale formation, as our empirical strategy leverages
the unexpected shock to the value of land from the fracking boom which occurred decades
after the Relinquishment Act.12 We then exclude leases smaller than 10 acres or bigger
than 1,000 acres, as parcels in the original Texas Permanent School Fund are never more
than 1,000 acres, and GLO rarely auctions leases that cover more than one parcel. We also
remove leases where the minerals are negotiated by multiple parties, due to bequeathment
subsequent to privatization. Finally we exclude a small number of leases with missing or
inconsistent information. We provide additional information on these restrictions, as well
  10
     The State did not retain primary mineral ownership on Free Royalty lands sold between 1931 and 1973.
As a result, the state does not track full payment information on these parcels.
  11
     We use the Henry Hub price for natural gas royalties and the WTI price for oil royalties.
  12
     We use the EIA’s definition of shale formations in Texas, shown shaded in yellow in Figure A.1.



                                                   9
as an associated waterfall table with the number of leases surviving each cut, in Appendix
B.1. The resulting dataset of 846 negotiated leases and 428 auctioned leases is summarized
in Table 1. Figure 1 demonstrates the distribution of lease types over time.


Table 1: Lease Summary Statistics by Type

                                   Negotiation (N = 846)              Auction (N = 428)
Variable                          mean       sd min           max mean       sd min       max Difference p-value
Land Characteristics
  Acres                             0.28   0.26   0.01        0.99   0.36   0.24   0.01    0.73    -0.08     0.00
  Shape Quality                     0.94   0.14   0.10        1.00   0.96   0.10   0.28    1.00    -0.01     0.05
  Multiple Parcels                  0.05   0.22   0.00        1.00   0.03   0.16   0.00    1.00     0.03     0.02
  Shale Thickness                   3.18   1.27   0.15        5.98   3.79   1.21   0.10    5.84    -0.60     0.00
Lease Characteristics
  Bonus                             1.10   1.19   0.04    10.41      2.19   2.64   0.02   15.40    -1.09     0.00
  Term                              3.85   1.16   1.00     5.00      4.75   0.66   3.00    5.00    -0.90     0.00
  Contracted Rentals                0.22   0.47   0.00     2.82      0.32   0.54   0.02    2.27    -0.10     0.00
  Royalty Rate                      0.24   0.02   0.19     0.25      0.25   0.01   0.20    0.25    -0.01     0.00
Lease Outcomes
  Drilled                           0.38 0.49 0.00    1.00           0.33 0.47 0.00    1.00         0.06     0.05
  Output                            0.22 0.53 0.00    4.67           0.23 0.51 0.00    3.17        -0.01     0.72
  Lease Production Revenue          7.93 18.95 0.00 153.49           8.76 20.61 0.00 169.18        -0.83     0.49
  Realized Rentals                  0.08 0.21 0.00    2.25           0.15 0.33 0.00    2.27        -0.07     0.00
  Total Seller Revenue              3.13 5.03 0.04 43.37             4.49 5.83 0.03 44.44          -1.37     0.00
 Units: acres are reported in thousands; shale thickness is reported in thousands of feet and is not available for
leases overlying the parts of the Eagle Ford shale, nor for any leases overlying the Haynesville and Barnett shales
(176 negotiation leases and 28 auction leases); bonus, lease revenue, and total seller revenues are all reported in
thousands of nominal dollars per acre; output is reported in thousands of barrels of oil equivalent per acre; term
is reported in years; contracted delay rentals and realized delay rentals are reported in thousands of dollars per
acre. Definitions: shape quality is the ratio of the lease’s size to the size of the convex hull containing it; we
define a lease as “drilled” if it ever reports a royalty payment; output is the BTU-weighted discounted sum of oil
and gas production observed on the lease, through March 2019, lease production revenue is the monetary value
of this production at contemporaneous prices, and seller revenue is the sum of bonus payments, realized delay
rentals, and the mineral estate’s royalty share of lease revenues.




                                                         10
Figure 1: Sample Leases by Year and Type




    In the cross section, auctioned leases are larger, have slightly “more convex” shapes, and
are less likely to cover more than one legally defined piece of land, although the differences in
these measures are small. They also generate substantially higher bonus payments (per acre)
and pay slightly higher royalty rates and delay rentals, while auctioned leases have longer
primary terms. Auctions are slightly less likely to be drilled, produce equivalent amounts
of output and associated lease revenue, and the difference in total revenues (the sum of
bonus payments, royalty income on production, and realized delay rentals) is slightly larger
than the difference in bonus payments. Figure 1 shows that auctions are not consistently
prevalent over time. In particular, there are relatively few auctions in 2009 (when oil prices
temporarily crashed during the financial crisis) and in 2012 (when gas prices reached lows
not seen in a decade). Appendix Figure A.1 shows that auctioned and negotiated leases are
also not evenly distributed across space, except possibly in West Texas, where the Permian
Basin shale play has recently experienced a surge in leasing activity. These differences in
timing and location underscore the importance of flexibly controlling for these factors in our
empirical specifications below.


4     Empirical Strategy
We use the variation in leasing mechanisms employed on parcels initially placed in the
Permanent School Fund in 1895 to measure how auctions affected lease outcomes, relative
to informal negotiations, during the recent fracking boon. In the ideal experiment, we would
have randomized mechanism type, auction or informal negotiation, among a population of

                                               11
private mineral owners on top of shale formations, on the eve of the fracking boom. In
practice, our sample consists of leases signed between 2005 and 2016 on PSF lands where
the State retained a mineral interest. Within this sample, mechanism type is determined not
by randomization, but by the date on which the parcel underlying each lease was first sold
by the State. As we argue below, variation in privatization dates is unlikely to be correlated
with unobservable determinants of lease outcomes in the modern shale era.
    In addition to the fact that leases are quasi-experimentally assigned between the two
mechanisms, our comparison of auctioned and negotiated leases in PSF lands is appealing
because the two types of leases are similar on all other important contracting dimensions.
Both types of leases are buyer initiated, with an E&P company approaching a landowner or
nominating a parcel to the State. The language in the two types of contracts is extremely
similar because the State requires RAL surface owners to use a standard lease document,
whose structure is nearly identical to the lease contract the State uses in its auctions.13
Finally, on RAL leases, the State of Texas, rather than the private surface owner, represents
the mineral estate in legal matters against lessees. Thus, contractual disputes that occur
after a firm signs a lease are between that firm and the State, regardless of which leasing
mechanism is used. For these reasons, the property right that E&P companies buy in RAL
leases is effectively identical to what they buy in auctioned leases.
    With that background in mind, we estimate several versions of the following regression,

                                  Yi = τ Auctioni + Xi β + δLi ,Ti + i                                  (1)

where Yi is a lease outcome of interest and Auctioni is an indicator that is equal to one if the
lease was allocated by auction. Xi includes controls for the lease’s size and contract details.
In some specifications, we also condition on detailed information about how the surface is
used, how far the lease is from other potentially valuable features like water and roads, and
the quality of the shale rock underlying the lease.
    All of our specifications include direct controls for the two primary determinants of lease
outcomes: where leases are and when they transact, which we write as δL,T in equation 1.
Leases on parcels with better mineral resources may transact at higher prices, attract more
investment and produce more output. Similarly, leases that transact during periods of high
output prices or increased technological progress may earn higher prices or generate better
post-leasing outcomes. To ensure that differences in resource quality across space do not
  13
    This is in stark contrast to the broader private mineral leasing market, where contractual terms vary
considerably (Timmins and Vissing, 2017). Bajari et al. (2009) suggest that for complex projects, negotiation
may allow flexible contracts that improve ex post value generation. Here, the standardized nature of the
lease contracts limits scope for this channel to generate differences across the two mechanisms.



                                                     12
confound our comparisons, we include fixed effects for 10 mile by 10 mile square “grids” that
contain a lease’s centroid. Figure 2 provides a map with hundreds of leases in one of the
most concentrated regions of our data, in the southwest portion of the Permian Basin shale
play. Dotted lines show the boundaries of the 10 mile by 10 mile grids we use in many of
our fixed effect specifications. Most of the grids shown in this map contain both kinds of
leases, and in many grids, auctioned and negotiated leases are direct neighbors. To account
for time varying unobservable determinants of lease outcomes, we also include fixed effects
for the year-quarter of a lease’s transaction. In some specifications, we restrict comparisons
to leases in the same grid and year-quarter.

Figure 2: Example of Sample Lease Type Overlap




    There is no a priori sense in which a given fixed effect specification correctly controls for
the effects of location and time on lease outcomes, and, as Figure 2 demonstrates, the grid
boundaries we draw are quite arbitrary. We thus estimate several fixed-effects specifications
which vary the size of the grids and the extent to which we interact the fixed effects for time
and space. We also non-parametrically control for location and time using a novel application
of the double/debiased machine learning techniques (DML) developed in Chernozhukov et
al. (2018).14 Both of these strategies ensure we are making comparisons between leases with
 14
      Specifically, we estimate a Robinson (1988) style partially linear specification of equation 1. We follow


                                                       13
similar mineral quality that transact at similar times. To interpret estimates of τ in equation
1 as the causal effect of auctioning vs. negotiating a lease, we must thus assume that the
allocation mechanism is independent of any residual determinants of lease outcomes, those
that remain after conditioning on location, time, and other observable characteristics.
    To understand this assumption, recall that the transaction mechanism for a lease is de-
termined by the time at which the State of Texas sold the PSF parcel beneath it. Figure 3
shows a timeline of this process. All parcels sold out of the PSF prior to 1973 transferred
mineral negotiating rights to the buyer: Relinquishment Act lands until 1931, and Free Roy-
alty lands thereafter. However, the state only retained an interest in the minerals underlying
Relinquishment Act parcels. Because we observe the full payment structure on present day
leases on these lands, but not for leases on parcels sold under the Free Royalty system, leases
on Relinquishment Act parcels represent our “control” group. By 1973, the State of Texas
ended the practice of selling the rights to minerals when it sold PSF land. Leases on these
subsequent land sales, as well as leases on parcels that still belong to the PSF, are awarded
using a formal auction, and thus make up our “treatment” group. In light of this history,
our identification assumption thus requires that whether or not a parcel was sold before 1973
(so that its leases are negotiated), and, conditional on that, whether it was sold before 1931
(so that we observe those leases), are both uncorrelated with residual determinants of value
in the shale era.

Figure 3: Lease Assignment Timeline

                                 Assignment Period                                      Sample Period
    PSF created
      (1896)              RAL                     Free Royalty                     Auctions
                       (negotiated)               (negotiated)
                                Relinquishment                  Free Royalty            Shale boom
                               Act finalized (1931)           sales end (1973)          (late 2000’s)


   One threat to the validity of these assumptions is the possibility that the State of Texas
and/or buyers of PSF land had knowledge about which parcels, within narrowly defined
geographic areas, would be better or worse for eventual shale development. For example, if
land buyers prior to 1973 knew where the “good” parcels were, they might rationally have
the procedures recommended in Chernozhukov et al. (2018) (equation 3.5, theorem 3.2, definition 3.3, and
equation 4.4), finding the value of θ = (τ, β) that minimizes the “cross-fitted” empirical analogue of

                             E [(Y − γ(L, T ) − θ(D − δ(L, T ))) (D − δ(L, T ))]

where D = (Auction, X), γ(l, t) = E [Y | L = l, T = t], δ(l, t) = E [D | L = l, T = t] and we estimate the
functions γ(·) and δ(·) using random forests. For more details, see Appendix A.7.

                                                     14
acquired them quickly, leaving only “bad” parcels for future auctions. Similarly, if the State
of Texas had equivalent knowledge and wished to retain “good” parcels for their eventual
participation in mineral lease auctions during the shale era, RAL and Free Royalty parcels
would be worse, on average. We view both of these scenarios as unlikely. The primary
determinants of better vs. worse parcels in the modern shale era are characteristics of the
shale rock beneath these parcels, including how thick the rock is and the concentration of
hydrocarbons within it. However, the assignment process is complete by 1973, decades before
even the approximate locations of major shale deposits were known or the technology capable
of exploiting it was invented. For this reason, it is reasonable to assume that negotiated and
auctioned leases overlie rock that is similarly valuable in the modern shale era. Moreover,
since the RAL to Free Royalty transition occurred in 1931, decades before the negotiation
to auction transition in 1973, the fact that we can’t observe leases on Free Royalty parcels
is similarly innocuous.
    Though we can’t directly test assumptions about the distribution of unobserved quality,
we can test whether land sold during the different eras depicted in Figure 3 is similar on
observable measures of quality. Table 2 presents a series of balance tests using the entire
sample of parcels that overlie shale formations in the PSF. We begin by projecting the best
available measure of shale resource quality, shale thickness, onto indicators for whether the
parcel was sold during the Free Royalty period or whether the minerals were retained by
the State, along with location fixed effects. The excluded category is RAL parcels. The
small point estimates and precise standard errors in this first regression suggest that within
a geographic area, the three types of parcels overlie similarly thick shale rock. This is not
surprising, since the locations of thicker vs. thinner parts of shale plays were not known
until long after 1973.
    We also check whether the three parcel types differ on surface characteristics that are
useful for oil and gas development and were known at the time that the mechanism type
was determined. Unlike shale rock quality, it is possible that parcels would differ along
surface dimensions, because RAL and Free Royalty purchasers explicitly acquired surface
rights for economic use during the pre-shale era. Some surface characteristics might be
simultaneously valuable to both pre-shale surface use and shale-boom drilling. For example,
bigger parcels or parcels with more convex shapes could be more valuable to agriculture, by
making mechanical plowing more efficient, as well as shale development, by making efficient
well spacing easier. Similarly, parcels with better access to water could be more valuable
in irrigated agriculture, and also more useful in shale development, because water is a key
input in the hydraulic fracturing process. The next four models in Table 2 estimate similar
regressions, using parcel size, shape and distance to water as the outcome variable. Both


                                             15
         Table 2: Parcel comparison: Land in the PSF Overlying Shale Formations

                                Thickness        Acres         Shape        Water         Rivers
                                    0.013         -0.087       -0.011         0.184        0.051
            Auction
                                  (0.055)        (0.016)      (0.006)       (0.413)       (0.073)
                                   -0.013         -0.077       0.000         -0.177        0.001
            Free Royalty
                                  (0.041)        (0.016)      (0.005)       (0.374)       (0.057)
            Average                3.147          0.296        0.960        12.089         0.621
            N                      2,461          3,488        3,488        3,488          3,488
            R2                     0.895          0.441        0.416        0.812          0.543
          Definitions: Thickness is the thickness of the shale formation in thousands of feet, and is
         not available for parts of the Eagle Ford shale, nor for any of the Barnett and Haynesville
         shales. Acres is the size of the parcel, in thousands of acres. Shape Quality is the ratio
         of parcel size to the size of the convex hull containing the parcel. Water is the distance
         in thousands of meters from the parcel’s centroid to the nearest freshwater lake, pond,
         marsh or reservoir and Rivers is the distance in thousands meters to the nearest river or
         stream. All models include fixed effects for the 10 mile grid containing the centroid of
         the parcel, and standard errors are clustered at the grid level.



auction and Free Royalty parcels are smaller than RAL parcels. Because of this, all of our
lease level regressions flexibly control for lease acreage. Auctioned parcels are also somewhat
less convex than Free Royalty and RAL parcels, but the difference is small relative the average
PSF parcel shape and unlikely to be economically significant. Finally, all three parcel types
are similarly close to standing sources of water and to rivers and streams.


5      Seller Revenue Results
We begin by investigating the impact of auctions on seller revenues, estimating several ver-
sions of equation 1 with the natural logarithm of bonus payments as the dependent variable.
Table 3 presents the results. All models include controls for primary term, royalty rate and
acres.15 In column 1, we include fixed effects for the year-quarter of the lease’s effective date
and for the 10-mile square grid containing the lease’s centroid. The interpretation of this
estimate is that auctioned leases generate 36 log points more in bonus payments than similar
negotiated leases, and this difference is precisely estimated.16 In column 2, we interact the
  15
     Note that we do not condition on contracted delay rental payments here because they are mechanically
correlated with bonus payments for both types of leases. Instead, we include realized delay rental payments
as a component of total seller revenues in Section 6. In Appendix A.5 we also formally measure the differences
in contracted and realized delay rentals using the framework in equation 1.
  16
     Note that in percentage terms, this difference considerably larger than 36%, as exp(0.36) − 1 ≈ 43%. In
appendix A.3, we repeat these regressions in levels, with the dollar value of the bonus payments (per acre)
as the left-hand side variable.


                                                     16
grid indicators with year of sample indicators, to account for the fact that different locations
in Texas were developed at different times in our sample. Even with these interactive fixed
effects, the estimated auction coefficient is stable, with auctions paying 36 log points more,
and is still precisely estimated. This model, which compares leases for minerals that are
located at roughly the same place and which transact at roughly the same point in time, is
our main specification.

               Table 3: Bonus Payments and Mechanism Type

                                (1)          (2)          (3)        (4)         (5)
                                 0.36        0.36          0.37      0.37        0.52
                 Auction
                                (0.07)      (0.08)        (0.12)    (0.08)      (0.05)
                 Grid            10           10           10        20          DML
                 Time             Q         GY,Q          GYQ       GY,Q         DML
                 N              1,274       1,274         1,274     1,274        1,274
                 R2             0.866       0.953         0.973     0.917
                The dependent variable in each regression is the natural logarithm of the
               bonus payment per acre. In columns 1-4, the size of the location bins,
               in miles, are indicated in the “Grid” row, while the structure of the time
               controls (“Q” for quarter of sample, “GY,Q” for grid-by-year plus quarter
               of sample, and “GYQ” for grid-by-quarter of sample) are indicated in the
               “Time” row. Standard errors are clustered by grid in columns 1-4. Column
               5 uses a double/debiased machine learning routine, as recommended in
               Chernozhukov et al. (2018). All models include a spline in acres and linear
               terms for term length and royalty rate. The average negotiated bonus
               payment is $1,096 per acre.



    In the remaining columns we investigate the sensitivity of these results to alternative
time-space controls. In column 3, we include location-quarter-of-sample fixed effects to
impose more stringent limits on which leases can be compared over time. To ensure that
our results are robust to different choices of spatial controls, in column 4 we use 20 mile
grids instead of 10 mile grids. In both cases, the resulting estimates are nearly identical
to the results in column 2. Finally, in column 5, we replace the grid and time fixed effects
with a non-parametric control for the lease’s location and time using random forests in a
double/debiased machine learning model (DML). Across all of these specifications, we find
consistent evidence that bonus payments are substantially larger in auctions than they are in
negotiations. Even at the lower end of these estimates, the implications for seller revenue are
large. For an RAL lease of average size, switching to an auction would generate a $133,000
larger up-front bonus payment.




                                                     17
5.1     Robustness
As we discussed in Section 4, our key identifying assumption is that land that was initially
owned by the state but sold by 1931 is similarly valuable for today’s hydrocarbon exploration
as land from the same allocation that was not sold as of 1973. While we believe it is
unlikely that the timing of early land transactions would be correlated with the productivity
of shale formations that were unknown until the early 2000’s, our empirical specifications
include flexible spatial controls to account for any differences in geology across leases governed
by the two mechanisms. Moreover, Table 2 shows that the two types of land are also
indistinguishable along observable measures of quality that were known at the time the
mechanism type for a parcel was determined. However, even if the two parcel types were
similar at the time the mechanism type was determined, by construction, they have been
exposed to a different history of surface ownership. RAL surface owners have had at least
85 years to develop their surface rights, while State auction parcels were privatized no more
than 40 years ago, if ever. To the extent that surface investments help or hinder shale
development, they would generate differences across parcel types in their value during shale
boom, even if a parcel’s leasing mechanism (negotiation or auction) was as good as randomly
assigned.
    To ensure that such differences do not confound our estimates, we estimate a series
of additional specifications that include measures of surface quality related to subsequent
surface investment. Using our lease shape files, we compute the quality of the lease’s shape
as the ratio of its area to the convex hull containing it and determine whether the lease
spans more than one distinct parcel. Next, we measure the distance of each lease to road
infrastructure using GIS data from the Texas Department of Transportation. Finally, we
compute the most common surface coverage characteristics of a lease using the National
Land Cover Database.17 In Table 4, we confirm that the bonus results above are robust to
including these characteristics as controls at the lease level. Model 1 repeats the grid-year
fixed effect model from Table 3, with additional controls for measures of surface quality, like
the convexity of the lease’s shape, an indicator for whether the lease spans multiple parcels,
the distance from the lease to roads and water infrastructure, and satellite measures of the
lease’s landcover. Column 2 estimates the same specification using the DML method to
control for location and time. Columns 3 and 4 repeat these specifications, but include the
thickness of the shale underlying the parcel as well. Across all of these specifications, we
continue to find that auctions pay significantly more than negotiations do.18
  17
     Appendix Table A.1 demonstrates that leases the parcels underlying our sample leases are statistically
indistinguishable along these surface measures.
  18
     We also estimate overlap-weighted treatment effects in Appendix A.4.


                                                    18
    Table 4: Bonus Payments and Mechanism Type: Robustness

                                 (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)
                                 0.37        0.51          0.37      0.45        0.47       0.62
      Auction
                                (0.08)      (0.05)        (0.08)    (0.05)      (0.11)     (0.07)
      Estimate                  G10Y        DML           G10Y      DML         G10Y        DML
      Surface Controls           Yes         Yes           Yes       Yes         No          No
      Thickness Controls         No          No            Yes       Yes         No          No
      Private Only               No          No            No        No          Yes         Yes
      N                         1,274       1,274         1,070     1,070       1,073       1,073
      R2                        0.954                     0.954                 0.956
     The dependent variable in each regression is the natural logarithm of the bonus payment. Surface
    controls include shape regularity, a dummy variable for whether the lease spans multiple parcels,
    surface cover measures, and distance to roads and water sources. In columns 3 and 4, the sample
    excludes leases overlying parts of the Eagle Ford Shale and leases overlying the the Haynesville
    and Barnett shales, for which there is no thickness information available. In columns 5 and 6,
    the sample is restricted to leases with private surface ownership. Columns 1, 3, and 5 use fixed
    effects for year-by-10-mile grid, as well as quarter of sample, with standard errors clustered by
    grid. Columns 2, 4 and 6 use a double/debiased Machine Learning routine to control for location
    and time, as recommended in Chernozhukov et al. (2018). All models include a spline in acres,
    and linear terms in term length and royalty rate.



    One remaining potential confounder, which is observably different across the two groups
of leases, is surface ownership. The Relinquishment Act specifically allows a subset of private
surface owners to perform negotiations, so all of our negotiated leases have private surface
ownership. In contrast, some auctions occur on PSF parcels that were never sold, and as a
result, have state surface ownership. Private surface ownership itself could reduce the value
of a negotiated lease if, for example, private surface owners have houses or livestock on their
property, or if E&P companies simply face additional constraints on drilling near private
citizens, relative to leases where the state controls the surface. If these constraints made
negotiated leases more difficult to develop, E&P companies would rationally pay less to lease
them, but this difference in payment would not be caused by the difference in mechanisms.
If this were the case, it would violate our exclusion restriction, as the difference in bonuses on
RAL lands would come from the fact that they have private surface owners, not the manner
in which they were allocated.
    To ensure that our results are not driven by differences in private surface rights, we
restrict our analysis to parcels where the state does not own surface rights. This constitutes
leases on land that the State sold to private individuals after 1973, and excludes leases on
land that still belong to the PSF. If there are additional costs to developing leases with
private surface ownership, we would expect the difference in bonus payments between these


                                                     19
leases and leases on RAL parcels to be smaller than the overall difference we observe, when
including the full set of auction leases. Columns 5 and 6 of Table 4 present our main
bonus regressions specifications re-run on this restricted sample. Despite the fact that these
regressions exclude slightly more than half of all auctioned leases, the estimates are still
consistent with the results in Table 3: both point estimates are statistically significant at
conventional levels, and they comfortably lie within the confidence intervals for the estimates
in columns 2 and 5 of Table 3. We therefore reject the concern that negotiated leases earn
lower bonus payments because they are associated with private surface ownership.
    Finally, surface owners of RAL parcels sometimes negotiate additional contractual pro-
visions which deviate from the standard RAL lease, and it could be the case that these
additional contractual demands compensate RAL lessors for the lower bonus payments they
receive. To test this hypothesis, we collected and digitized data on the auxiliary clauses
embedded in each RAL lease. As we document in Appendix C, we find no evidence that
variation in the number of additional contractual demands or the relative landowner vs. E&P
company “friendliness” of those contractual demands can explain the differences in bonus
payments that we observe. Even after conditioning on these additional contractual char-
acteristics, auctioned leases still pay considerably higher bonus payments than negotiated
leases do.


5.2    Extensive Margin Considerations
The results in Table 3 show that auctioned transactions occur at substantially higher prices
than negotiated transactions. However, this is a comparison between successful transactions,
and not all attempted transactions are successful: auctions fail if they attract no bids at or
above the posted reserve price, and negotiations analogously fail when surface owners demand
lease terms that exceed the willingness to pay of their contracting partners. When attempted
transactions fail, the short-run welfare of landowners and their potential contracting partners
is effectively zero. If failures are common, and differentially likely across the two mechanisms,
the true seller gains from auctions could be quite different from the observable revenue
difference conditional on leasing. Thus, to correctly interpret our revenue differences, we
must first check for the presence of differences across mechanisms in the probability of a
successful transaction.
    For auctioned leases, we can directly compute the probability of a successful transaction,
because we observe the list of parcels that go up for auction, as well as the subsequent bids.
Among GLO auctions on PSF land, 44% of nominated parcels failed to receive a qualifying
bid. So on a per potential transaction basis, failure is quite common. The GLO often offers


                                               20
to sell these failed parcels again in future auctions, to the point that 73% of all observed
nominated parcels transact at some point in our sample. Given that auctions don’t always
clear, even after repeated attempts at transaction, it could be the case that the difference in
seller revenues we observe on successful transactions could be offset by a higher likelihood
of transaction among RAL negotiations.
    Unlike auctions, we don’t observe attempted RAL negotiations that fail, so we observe
neither the likelihood of “nomination” nor the probability of successful transaction, condi-
tional on being nominated. However, we can still characterize the total extensive margin
differences between auctions and negotiations, inclusive of both differences in nomination
and transaction success, by comparing the number of parcels that could ever have a trans-
action under a given mechanism, with the number of those parcels on which we actually
observe a lease.
    We first visualize the rate at which auction and negotiation parcels are leased over time
in Figure 4. Using the same sample as Table A.1, we compute the fraction of auction and
negotiation parcels within each 10-mile grid that have been leased at least once by the start
of a given month, and plot the average across grids for each month between January 2005
and December 2016. Visually, the arrival rate of a parcel’s first successful transaction is
comparable across the two mechanisms, providing initial evidence that differences in the
nomination process or probability of a successful transaction are unlikely to be important.
    To ensure that differences across parcels in size, shape quality, land cover characteristics,
or distance to infrastructure don’t mask differences in the likelihood of a successful lease, we
also report estimates of parcel-level regressions in Table A.6. The left-hand-side variable is
a dummy indicating that at least one lease occurs during our sample period (2005-2016). In
the first four columns, which compare auctioned and negotiated parcels in our entire sample
using both fixed-effect and DML methods, we find no evidence that parcels which lease by
negotiation are any more likely to lease than parcels which lease by auction, consistent with
Figure 4. In columns 5 and 6, we restrict to the sample of parcels over which we have
shale thickness information, and in this subsample, there is a small but precisely estimated
difference in the likelihood of leasing, but it favors auctions, not negotiations. Given these
results, it does not appear that the larger seller revenues we observe in successful auctions
are offset by a lower likelihood of transaction. If anything, parcels governed by auctions are
somewhat more likely to transact.




                                               21
Figure 4: Time to First Lease for Auction and RAL Parcels




Average across 10 square mile grids of the fraction of parcels that have leased at least once since January
2005, by parcel type.




     Table 5: Likelihood of Leasing and Mechanism Type

                                  (1)        (2)            (3)       (4)        (5)         (6)
                                 0.008       0.007          0.010     0.009      0.033       0.031
       Auction
                                (0.019)     (0.015)        (0.018)   (0.016)    (0.017)     (0.015)
       Grid                        10        DML            10       DML          10         DML
       Surface Controls           No          No            Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes
       Thickness Controls         No          No            No        No          Yes         Yes
       N                         1,763       1,763         1,763     1,763       1,202       1,202
       R2                        0.810                     0.813                 0.537
      The dependent variable equals 1 if a parcel was ever leased and 0 otherwise. Surface controls
     include shape regularity, a dummy variable for whether the lease spans multiple parcels, surface
     cover measures and distance to roads and water sources. In columns 5 and 6, the sample excludes
     parcels overlying parts of the Eagle Ford shale and parcels overlying the Haynesville and Barnett
     shales, for which there is no thickness information available. Columns 1, 3 and 5 use fixed
     effects for 10-mile grids with standard errors clustered by grid, while columns 2, 4 and 6 use a
     double/debiased machine learning routine, as recommended in Chernozhukov et al. (2018). All
     models include a spline in the size of the parcel in acres.




                                                      22
6      Allocative Efficiency Results
One potential explanation for the large difference in bonus payments between auctions and
negotiations is that auctions select more productive firms, and these firms are correspond-
ingly willing to pay more for the option to drill. As we discussed in Section 2.1, there are
many sources of productivity differences across E&P companies. Auctions could select better
firms by attracting more bidders than negotiations do, or by simply better identifying the
best bidder from the same set that participate in negotiations. 19 Alternatively, auctions
and negotiations might select equally productive firms, but the absence of formality in the
negotiation process allows negotiation winners to pay less than they would in an auction.
Under this explanation, we’d expect auctioned and negotiated leases to produce at similar
levels, and the difference in bonus payments that we observe would simply reflect a shift in
the division of surplus. To distinguish between these two theories, we measure the differences
in realized output between auctioned and negotiated leases.
    We begin by looking at differences in production revenues, as recorded in GLO ad-
ministrative data. Lessees make monthly royalty payments to the GLO. We divide these
payments by the associated royalty rate to infer the total revenues generated by a lease
during a month, then discount the observed stream of monthly revenue back to the lease’s
effective date. Though our data covers all production between January, 2005 and March,
2019, leases are expected to produce output for 20 years or more, so the discounted sum of
realized revenue is right censored, even for the earliest cohort of leases. To limit the bias
generated by this censoring, we focus on leases whose primary term has concluded by the
end of our royalty data, so that all leases are at least properly categorized as having drilling
or not. We also include the same temporal controls as in the bonus regressions, to ensure
that we are making comparisons between auctioned and negotiated leases that are similarly
censored.
    The first row of panel (a) in Table 6 presents these results. The model specifications
in each column are identical to those in Table 3, showing the effects of mechanism type on
each output measure, under various spatial, temporal, and surface characteristic controls.
Across these specifications, auctioned leases produce $3,500 to $6,100 more in discounted
lease production revenue, per acre. Though the point estimates are somewhat imprecise in
specifications with finer fixed effects or additional covariates, they are consistently large, and
represent an economically significant difference in output, relative to the average discounted
production revenues from negotiated leases of $8,308 per acre.
  19
    Initial misallocation may not be remedied through subsequent reassignment due to assymetric informa-
tion (Brehm and Lewis, 2019).



                                                  23
Table 6: Lease Output, Lease Revenue and Mechanism Type
(a) Linear Regression Models

                                    (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
                                     4.54        3.52        4.07        3.85        6.13        3.68
  Auction - Lease Revenue
                                    (1.81)      (2.05)      (3.81)      (1.82)      (1.84)      (2.13)
  R2                                0.524       0.766       0.853       0.612                   0.749
                                     0.12        0.11        0.12        0.12        0.15        0.11
  Auction - Output
                                    (0.04)      (0.05)      (0.10)      (0.04)      (0.04)      (0.05)
  R2                                0.512       0.752       0.833       0.598                   0.711
  Grid                               10           10          10          20        DML          10
  Time                                Q         GY,Q        GYQ         GY,Q        DML         GY,Q
  Extra                              No          No          No          No          No          Yes
  N                                 1,175       1,175       1,175       1,175       1,175        974

(b) Pseudo-Poisson Regression Models

                                    (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
                                     0.44        0.46        0.48        0.36        0.60        0.46
  Auction - Lease Revenue
                                    (0.16)      (0.18)      (0.26)      (0.20)      (0.19)      (0.16)
                                     0.48        0.55        0.56        0.46        0.60        0.54
  Auction - Output
                                    (0.15)      (0.19)      (0.27)      (0.22)      (0.17)      (0.18)
  Grid                               10          10           10          20        DML          10
  Time                                Q         GY,Q        GYQ         GY,Q        DML         GY,Q
  Extra                              No          No          No          No          No          Yes
  N                                 1,093        738         613         944        1,175        618

 The dependent variables are the discounted sum of oil and gas production revenue (Lease Revenue) and
discounted barrels of oil equivalent (Output), both in thousands. In the top panel, the estimates come
from linear regression models, while in the bottom panel, they come from pseudo-poisson quasi-maximum
likelihood models. In both panels, the estimates use fixed effects in columns 1-4 and 6, where the size of
the location bins, in miles, are indicated in the “Grid” row, and the structure of the time controls (“Q”
for quarter of sample, “GY,Q” for grid-by-year plus quarter of sample, and “GYQ” for grid-by-quarter of
sample) are indicated in the “Time” row. For these models, standard errors are clustered by grid. In both
panels, column 5 uses a double/debiased machine learning routine, as recommended in Chernozhukov et
al. (2018). All models except for column 5 in the bottom panel include a spline in acres, and linear terms
in term and royalty rate. The DML models in the bottom panel include acres, term and royalty rate as
covariates in the random forest routines. “Extra” controls include shape regularity, a dummy variable
for whether the lease spans multiple parcels, surface cover measures, distance to roads and water sources,
and the thickness of the shale formation. The sample includes all leases whose primary term ends before
March, 2019. In the fixed effect models of columns 1-4 and 6 in the bottom panel, the leases from grids
and/or time periods with no variation in output are dropped, as the outcome is completely determined.
The average negotiated lease generates $8,308 in lease revenue per acre, and 233 of discounted barrels of
oil equivalent per acre.




                                                     24
    Although landowners ultimately care about production revenues (the product of quan-
tities and prices), E&P companies have little ability to influence the prices at which these
commodities sell. As a result, variation in output may better capture the traditional no-
tion of productivity differences between auction and negotiation winners than variation in
revenues does.20 In consideration of this, we divide our product specific production revenue
data by contemporaneous oil and gas prices, and define output as the sum of these two
series, weighing gas production by its energy content in barrels of oil equivalent terms.21
We then estimate the same set of specifications using output per acre as the left hand side
variable, which we report in the second row in the top panel of Table 6. Across specifica-
tions, auctioned leases produce 110 to 150 additional discounted barrels of oil equivalent,
per acre. These estimates are also more precise than the revenue estimates, because they do
not include the variation coming from variation in prices over time.
    The statistical imprecision in some of these estimates may be driven by the fact that the
distribution of both output and revenue, even normalized by lease size, is incredibly skewed.
For leases that are ever drilled, the difference between the 10th and 90th percentiles of output
per acre spans more than three orders of magnitude. If all leases were drilled, a natural
solution to this skewness would be to estimate differences in revenue and output across leases
in relative terms, by using the natural logarithm of these terms as the dependent variables.
However, as described above, fewer than half of leases are ever drilled, and as such generate
zero revenue and output in the real sense (i.e., this is not just a selection problem).22 In this
situation, adding a small constant to these zeros to facilitate the logarithmic transformation
is unlikely to be innocuous. To make relative comparisons which respect this skewness, and to
control for variation across cohorts in the extent of right-censoring, which we expect to have
proportionate effects,23 we also estimate pseudo-poisson regression models, which effectively
project the logarithm of the expected value of revenue (or output) onto mechanism type,
covariates, and location and time:

                    log E [Y | Auctioni , Xi , Li , Ti ] = τ Auctioni + Xi β + δLi ,Ti .

   The bottom panel of Table 6 presents the same specifications estimated using pseudo-
poisson regression models. Because pseudo-poisson models are not identified within grids
  20
      For a review of this literature, see Syverson (2011).
  21
      We assume 1 thousand cubic feet of natural gas production is equivalent to 0.1767 barrels of oil produc-
tion, per EIA guidelines here: https://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.php?id=45&t=8
   22
      Appendix Table A.7 estimates the effects of mechanism type on the likelihood that a lease is drilled.
The results are noisy, but suggest large increase on this extensive margin.
   23
      Log or poisson style models will exactly control for censoring under an assumption that lease output
declines at a constant proportional rate over time, a common assumption in petroleum engineering called
“Arps decline curve analysis.”

                                                     25
and grid-time combinations that have no variation in output, the fixed-effect estimates drop
data from some grids and times. As a result, the pseudo-poisson estimates in different fixed
effect specifications are derived from slightly different samples, most of which are smaller
than what we report in the top panel. In spite of this, across specifications, we find consistent
and mostly precisely estimated evidence that auctioned leases produce more than negotiated
leases do. Whether we use lease revenue or output as the outcome, auctions produce 36 to
60 log points more than negotiated leases do. These results do not depend on how we control
for location and time, nor whether we include additional covariates.
    The combined effects of higher bonus payments and more production imply that auctions
generate substantially more net benefit for sellers than negotiations do. We measure this in
Table 7, which shows regressions of the sum of bonus payments, realized delay rentals and
discounted royalty revenues onto the same right hand side variables as in Table 6. Auctions
generate $1,200 to $2,200 more revenue per acre for landowners than the negotiations do.
Under our main specification (column 2), this difference is worth about $351,000 for the
average RAL lease. These results show that auctions have an economically enormous impact
on sellers.

         Table 7: Total Seller Revenue and Mechanism Type

                           (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)
                           1.49        1.24         1.53        1.39         2.25        1.27
            Auction
                          (0.47)      (0.57)       (1.04)      (0.49)       (0.47)      (0.58)
            Grid           10           10          10          20          DML           10
            Time            Q         GY,Q         GYQ         GY,Q         DML         GY,Q
            Extra          No          No           No          No           No          Yes
            N             1,175       1,175        1,175       1,175        1,175        974
            R2            0.568       0.795        0.873       0.653                    0.780
          The dependent variable is the discounted present value of the sum of bonus payments,
         delay rentals paid, and production royalties, per acre. In columns 1-4 and 6, the size
         of the location bins, in miles, are indicated in the “Grid” row, while the structure of
         the time controls (“Q” for quarter of sample, “GY,Q” for grid-by-year plus quarter
         of sample, and “GYQ” for grid-by-quarter of sample) are indicated in the “Time”
         row. Standard errors are clustered by grid in columns 1-4, and 6. Column 5 uses
         a double/debiased machine learning routine, as recommended in Chernozhukov et al.
         (2018). For estimation details, see A.7. All models include a spline in acres, and linear
         terms in term length and royalty rate. “Extra” controls include shape regularity, a
         dummy variable for whether the lease spans multiple parcels, surface cover measures,
         and distance to roads and water sources. The sample includes all leases whose primary
         term ends before March, 2019.




                                                    26
6.1     Unpacking the Productivity Results
Table 6 provides evidence that auctions allocate leases to users who are more likely to drill
them, and who produce more output with them. In this section, we provide statistical ev-
idence regarding the relative contribution of vertical or horizontal productivity differences
between firms in generating these results. The motivation for this decomposition is to un-
derstand whether or not auctions are necessary to deliver the gains we estimate above. If
the gains from auctions come primarily from identifying persistently productive firms (in
the vertical sense), one can imagine relatively light-handed policy interventions which would
steer landowners towards better firms (or away from worse firms). However, if the latent firm
productivity ordering varies from parcel to parcel, it is difficult to imagine a way to achieve
higher allocative efficiency without widespread adoption of some auction-like mechanism.
    As we discussed in Section 2, there are a number of reasons to suspect that some E&P
companies are persistently more productive than others. Since the identity of the winning
firms is easily observable, we first check whether auctions and negotiations pick different
firms.24 We do this by tabulating auction and negotiation “market shares” for each of the
ten most active lessees, as shown in Table 8.25 For these especially active lessees, a firm’s
share of leases in the auction market is quite different than its share in the negotiation
market. The data soundly reject a Chi-squared test of the hypothesis that a firm’s auction
market share is the same as its negotiation market share (p < 2 × 10−16 ).26
    The net result of these differences is differential concentration in lease ownership across
the two mechanisms. Table 8 suggests that the auction market is more concentrated than
the negotiation market: the top 10 auction winners won 56% of all auctions, while the top
10 negotiators won just 45% of all negotiations. If these firms at the top are also persistently
more productive, then it would be consistent with the idea that auctions generate more
output because they select better firms.
    Having established that auctions allocate to different firms, we next ask whether vertical
differences between firms can explain our results. If auctions produce more because the
firms that win auctions produce more on both types of leases, then comparisons of output
  24
      Note that the comparison here is the frequency with which firms win, not whether some firms only
participate in auctions and others only use negotiations, as in Bajari et al. (2009). Auctions are a small
fraction of the broader minerals market in Texas, which is all negotiated and in which all auction participants
are also active.
   25
      Firm identities in our data are recorded with some error (typos, etc). We describe our process for
cleaning these names in Appendix B.
   26
      Chi-squared tests of equal proportions for the top 20 and 40 most active lesses are similarly rejected.
Moreover, these differences in market shares across the mechanism types do not simply reflect differences in
the distribution of a firm’s “interest” across basins. We replicate this exercise within leases overlying the
two largest shale basins in Texas, the Permian and the Eagle Ford, and can similarly reject a null hypothesis
of equal proportions for the top 10 most active lessees in each basin.


                                                      27
           Table 8: Top 10 Auction Winners and Negotiators

            Firm                             Leases    Auction Share      Negotiation Share
            CHESAPEAKE                         112              0.192                 0.035
            ENERGEN                             78              0.065                 0.059
            LEWIS OPERATING                     73              0.005                 0.084
            PETROHAWK                           71              0.091                 0.038
            PETRO HUNT                          68              0.007                 0.077
            CIMAREX                             59              0.042                 0.048
            ANADARKO                            53              0.044                 0.040
            DEVON                               31              0.061                 0.006
            BP PRODUCTIONS                      30              0.000                 0.035
            RANGE PRODUCTION                    30              0.047                 0.012
            ALL OTHERS                         669              0.446                 0.565



within a firm should reveal no difference between auction and negotiations. Table 9 reports
estimates of our main regressions, with and without fixed effects for the identity of the firm
that wins the lease. Even after conditioning on firm identity, bonus payments, output and
lease revenue are all still larger, by a similar magnitude, on auctioned leases than negotiated
leases. If anything, these within-firm comparisons are even larger than than our baseline
comparisons.

             Table 9: Effects of Firm Composition and Mechanism Type on
             Lease Outcomes

                          Bonus     Bonus      Output      Output    Revenue     Revenue
                            0.36     0.39       0.107       0.182        3.52      5.30
              Auction
                           (0.08)   (0.11)     (0.049)     (0.106)      (2.05)    (3.41)
              Firm FE       No        Yes        No         Yes          No        Yes
              N            1,274     1,274      1,175      1,175        1,175     1,175
              R2           0.953     0.970      0.752      0.831        0.766     0.854
              The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of the bonus payment
             (columns 1 and 2), discounted barrels of oil equivalent per acre (columns
             3 and 4), or discounted lease revenue per acre (columns 5 and 6). In columns
             2-6, the sample includes all leases whose primary term ends before March,
             2019. All specifications include fixed effects for 10-mile grids-by-year and
             quarter-of-sample, as well as controls for royalty rate, term, and a spline in
             acres.



   Given that the differences between auctions and negotiations exist in comparisons within
the same firm, we conclude that the source of the output effect must be due to horizontal


                                                      28
differences, or “match.” How plausible are idiosyncratic match shocks, which vary across
potential firm-lease combinations, as a determinant of differences between auctioned and
negotiated leases? While we are not aware of a direct test for this hypothesis, we can use
the auction bid data to verify that the magnitude of firm-lease shocks must be large, relative
to vertical differences among firms. If a firm’s value for a parcel was mostly vertical, in the
sense that some firms were inherently more productive than others, we’d expect to see a
consistent ranking of bids between firms, across auctions. In particular, when two firms bid
in the same set of auctions, we’d expect the higher productivity firm to bid more than the
lower productivity firm in every auction. We check this in the bid data, by looking at all
pairs of firms who bid in the same auction ten or more times. Table 10 lists these pairs and
tabulates the probability that the alphabetically earlier firm (Firm A) bids higher than the
later firm (Firm B). If vertical differences across firms were more important than firm-lease
match, we’d expect to see that one firm consistently bids higher than the other. What we
observe is the exact opposite: for 11 of the 13 pairs, the fraction of the time that one firm
wins more than the other is statistically identical to a coin toss.

 Table 10: Bid ranking for top auction pairs

    Firm A                  Firm B                              Auctions    Share A > B      p-value
    CIMAREX                 ENERGEN                                    31             0.52     1.000
    CIMAREX                 CONOCO PHILLIPS                            19             0.79     0.019
    CIMAREX                 RESOLUTE                                   19             0.53     1.000
    CONOCO PHILLIPS         ENERGEN                                    19             0.37     0.359
    ENERGEN                 RESOLUTE                                   19             0.42     0.648
    COG                     RANGE PRODUCTION                           17             0.41     0.629
    CONOCO PHILLIPS         RESOLUTE                                   17             0.53     1.000
    CIMAREX                 MARSHFIELD OIL AND GAS                     12             0.67     0.388
    ENERGEN                 MARSHFIELD OIL AND GAS                     12             0.67     0.388
    299 PRODUCTION          THREE RIVERS                               10             0.70     0.344
    ADESCAPE                ENERGEN                                    10             0.00     0.002
    ADESCAPE                SEMEION                                    10             0.30     0.344
    ENERGEN                 SEMEION                                    10             0.80     0.109
 p-value from a two-sided exact test of the hypothesis that the share of auctions in which Firm A bids
 more than Firm B is equal to 0.5, at a 95% level.




7     Discussion
Mineral leases that are allocated by auction generate more seller revenue and are matched
to more productive firms than otherwise identical leases that transact informally under the

                                                  29
Relinquishment Act. What features of the two transaction processes are responsible for
these differences? Unfortunately, we cannot answer this question directly. While the auction
process is comprehensively documented by an administrative body, with public records of
all submitted bids on all potential transactions, there are no records of the circumstances
that lead up to a successful negotiated transaction, nor are there any records of initiated
but failed negotiations. In lieu of sufficient transaction level detail to quantitatively evaluate
the negotiation process, we instead discuss how institutional features of this market and the
resulting differences in outcomes fit within existing mechanism comparisons considered by
the literature.
     One possibility is that transactions on RAL parcels actually use a similarly formal and
simultaneous mechanism, but these RAL “auctions” simply attract fewer bidders than GLO
auctions do. This is roughly the “non-sequential” search mechanism considered by Salz
(2017). In our setting, increased demand for GLO auctions would arise from the fact that
they are centralized. State auctions are widely publicized and routinely held, whereas a
central challenge for firms in acquiring negotiated acreage (both in RAL and private land
writ large) is identifying which land is leasable, and performing title research to determine
who actually owns it. It is thus likely that the latter mechanisms would result in fewer
participants. Note that while reduced competition in a hypothetical RAL auction would
generate a reduction in seller revenues by itself, the fact that match quality, as defined in
Section 6, also declines, suggests that the subset of bidders that participate in negotiations
must exclude the highest value buyer with positive probability.
     What little we know about the private leasing process suggests that the mechanism
is more sequential than simultaneous. The theory literature offers conflicting opinions as
to whether a sequential mechanism will perform better than a simultaneous auction. If
participation is costly, a sequential mechanism saves real resources by allowing bidders to
observe existing bids before deciding to incur entry costs. Bulow and Klemperer (2009) show
that while a sequential mechanism is thus always more efficient, an auction is usually more
profitable for the seller. However, the latter result is predicated on their assumption that a
bidder’s entry choice is independent of its value for the lease. Roberts and Sweeting (2013)
demonstrate that a similar sequential mechanism can outperform auctions if this entry choice
is instead selective, in the sense that better users of a lease are more likely to participate than
worse users. Thus, if the only difference between the informal process for RAL negotiations
and the GLO’s auctions was that auctions considered bids simultaneously, while negotiations
reviewed offers from the same set of bidders sequentially, then the increased revenues auctions
generate in our setting suggests that entry choices by E&P companies are not especially
selected.


                                                30
    While it is possible to rationalize our empirical results by assuming that negotiations
are simply auctions with fewer bidders or by assuming that negotiations follow a formal
sequential process, it is important to note that neither assumption perfectly fits this setting.
In the primary market for oil and gas leases, offers to mineral owners are initiated by the
buyer, and, anecdotally, we know that many transactions conclude before other parties
even have the opportunity to participate. Savvy leasing agents, cognizant of the relative
unsophistication of their counterparts, likely use a variety of persuasive techniques which do
not fit well within a formal mechanism design framework. Relatedly, it seems intuitive that
landowners would have a difficult time committing to (and executing) a more formal process.
In the most extensive survey of private mineral rights owners to date, only 21% of lessors in
Pennsylvania reported ever consulting with a lawyer before transacting.27 Conversely, GLO
rules require that all parcels to be auctioned be announced via public notice, with clearly
posted reserve prices. The requirement that the lease go to the high bidder is codified in
state law and easily enforceable and observable.
    How feasible would it be for landowners to hold an auction? While it is possible that the
costs associated with organizing an auction may have been large prior to the Internet era,
today there are electronic mineral auction platforms whose fees are 10% or less of the final
transaction price. Indeed, the Texas GLO now uses one such platform, EnergyNet.com, that
explicitly advertises its availability to private landowners. Given our main treatment effect
estimate in Table 3 implies a greater than 40% increase in bonus payments, this gain from
using an auction appears to far exceed the cost.28 In this specific context, it’s also possible
to imagine the Texas GLO performing these auctions on the surface owner’s behalf, and
presumably internalizing some scale economies while doing so.29


7.1     External Validity
How generalizable are these results to the broader population of mineral leases on private
land in the United States, which are also allocated in an informal, decentralized fashion?
One possible concern about predicting that the returns to auctions would be similar in other
locations is that the negotiations in our sample are particularly inefficient or uncompetitive.
If that were the case, the true causal effects of auctions, relative to negotiations, in other
  27
     Survey conducted by the Penn State Extension Marcellus Education Team and summarized in “Natural
Gas Lessors’ Experiences in Bradford and Tioga Counties, 2010” [Online version available here, accessed
3/15/2018].
  28
     Note that RAL landowners only have a 50% claim to the gain from auctions. So unless the state bore
half the costs, the effective fee from the RAL landowners perspective would be 20%, which is still far below
the estimated auction gain.
  29
     Indeed, GLO already does this when E&P firms wish to lease minerals in RAL parcels in which ownership
cannot be established, due to inheritance or property title issues.


                                                    31
mineral leasing settings would be smaller than the effects we estimate here.
    We begin by noting that the auctions against which these negotiated leases are com-
pared are not particularly competitive. In Appendix Table A.11, we tabulate the number
of auctions with 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6+ bidders, and within those groups, compute the average
bonus payment per acre and the median reserve margin. More than half of all GLO auctions
receive only 1 successful bidder, and this fact seems to be known to potential bidders, as
auctions that do receive more bids have substantially higher winning bids. The fact that
reserve margins are much lower for the vast majority of auctions with 1 or 2 realized bidders,
relative to auctions with more, suggests that either GLO has set reserve prices relatively low
or that bidders expect a low, but positive probability of competition, a phenomenon studied
in Kong (2017).
    Similarly, it is unlikely that RAL negotiations are especially bad. Although data on the
quality of negotiations in other settings is hard to come by, what little information is available
suggests that private landowners are not particularly savvy. For example, the aforementioned
Pennsylvania survey found that 79% of lessors only spoke to one E&P company before signing
a lease. They also appear relatively uninformed, with only 32% reporting to have consulted
any educational materials prior to signing.
    In contrast, Relinquishment Act lessors are likely better informed than the general private
mineral rights owner population. Although the process for RAL leasing initially mirrors that
of private leasing, with a landman approaching the surface owner with an offer and the two
parties coming to a private agreement, these agreements must be approved by the GLO
before they are finalized. During this approval process, the terms of the agreement may be
improved, with the GLO requesting, for example, a higher bonus payment or shorter primary
term. In our sample, 19% of RAL leases show some type of improvement during this approval
period: the median improvements for bonuses and royalties are 50% and 17%, respectively.
Throughout this paper, we compare realized lease terms from RAL negotiations, rather
than what the landowners would have negotiated absent state intervention, so the treatment
effects we estimate are likely to be lower bounds on the difference in revenues and allocative
efficiency we would expect from replacing informal negotiations with centralized auctions in
the broader private leasing population.


8     Conclusion
At current prices, proved US oil and gas reserves are worth approximately $4.5 trillion, and
the vast majority of these resources are owned, and managed, by private individuals. While
this arrangement has delivered substantial wealth to countless landowners, the informal

                                               32
mechanisms they use to find and bargain with their contracting partners may generate less
revenue and less efficient matches to E&P companies than would be possible under a more
formal mechanism. In this paper, we directly quantify this loss. Using rich data on a large
number of leases affected by a natural experiment, we compare outcomes under unstructured
“negotiations” to formal auctions. Our results show that auctions generate 36 more log points
in up front payments, and that auctions produce 46 more log points in output, suggesting
that auctions facilitate better matches between land and the firms that can use it most
productively. Given that landowners in this setting often have assistance from an informed
third party (the Texas GLO), these results likely provide a lower bound on the prospective
gains from using auctions in the private mineral leasing population writ large.
    A natural direction for future work would be to investigate why informal mechanisms
perform so poorly. In this paper, we lack sufficient information on the process leading up to
informal transactions, and instead rely on credible identification of the net effect of formal
vs. informal mechanisms in the “reduced form.” One approach to gaining insight about
the causes of this difference would be to perform surveys of informal mechanism users or to
conduct experimental information interventions, in mineral leasing or other settings. An-
other would be to measure similar reduced form differences in other economically important
markets where formal and informal mechanisms coexist, such as real estate, construction
procurement, and used automobile sales. In these other settings, sellers may be more or less
informed, or have different abilities to attract potential buyers. Given the sheer size of these
other markets, if even a fraction of the estimated gains in this paper translate, the gains
from policy that encourages the use of formal mechanisms would be enormous.



References
Allen, Jason, Robert Clark, and Jean-François Houde, “Search Frictions and Market
 Power in Negotiated Price Markets,” Journal of Political Economy, Forthcoming.

Athey, Susan, Julie Tibshirani, Stefan Wager et al., “Generalized random forests,”
 The Annals of Statistics, 2019, 47 (2), 1148–1178.

Backus, Matthew, Thomas Blake, Bradley Larsen, and Steven Tadelis, “Sequen-
 tial Bargaining in the Field: Evidence from Millions of Online Bargaining Interactions,”
 Working Paper 24306, National Bureau of Economic Research February 2018.

  , Tom Blake, and Steven Tadelis, “Cheap Talk, Round Numbers, and the Economics
  of Negotiation,” June 2015, (21285).




                                              33
Bajari, Patrick, Robert McMillan, and Steven Tadelis, “Auctions Versus Negoti-
 ations in Procurement: An Empirical Analysis,” The Journal of Law, Economics, and
 Organization, October 2009, 25 (2), 372–399.

Bartik, Alexander W., Janet Currie, Michael Greenstone, and Christopher R.
 Knittel, “The Local Economic and Welfare Consequences of Hydraulic Fracturing,”
 Working Paper 23060, National Bureau of Economic Research January 2017.

Bhattacharya, Vivek, Andrew Ordin, and James W Roberts, “Bidding and Drilling
 Under Uncertainty: An Empirical Analysis of Contingent Payment Auctions,” 2018. work-
 ing paper.

Boone, Audra L. and J. Harold Mulherin, “How Are Firms Sold?,” The Journal of
 Finance, March 2007, 62 (2), 847–875.

Brehm, Paul A. and Eric Lewis, “To Trade or Not to Trade: Oil Leases, Information
 Asymmetry, and Coase,” 2019. working paper.

Brown, Jason P., Timothy Fitzgerald, and Jeremy G. Weber, “Capturing rents from
 natural resource abundance: Private royalties from U.S. onshore oil & gas production,”
 Resource and Energy Economics, November 2016, 46, 23–38.

Bulow, Jeremy and Paul Klemperer, “Auctions Versus Negotiations,” The American
 Economic Review, 1996, 86 (1), 180–194.

   and , “Why Do Sellers (Usually) Prefer Auctions?,” The American Economic Review,
  2009, 99 (4), 1544–1575.

Chernozhukov, Victor, Denis Chetverikov, Mert Demirer, Esther Duflo, Chris-
 tian Hansen, Whitney Newey, and James Robins, “Double/debiased machine learn-
 ing for treatment and structural parameters,” 2018.

Covert, Thomas, “Experiential and Social Learning in Firms: the Case of Hydraulic Frac-
 turing in the Bakken Shale,” 2015. working paper.

Cuesta, José Ignacio and Alberto Sepulveda, “Price Regulation in Credit Markets: A
 Trade-off between Consumer Protection and Credit Access,” Available at SSRN 3282910,
 2018.

Currie, Janet, Michael Greenstone, and Katherine Meckel, “Hydraulic fracturing
 and infant health: New evidence from Pennsylvania,” Science Advances, December 2017,
 3 (12), e1603021.

Feyrer, James, Erin T. Mansur, and Bruce Sacerdote, “Geographic Dispersion of
  Economic Shocks: Evidence from the Fracking Revolution,” American Economic Review,
  April 2017, 107 (4), 1313–1334.

Fitzgerald, Timothy and Randal Rucker, “US private oil and natural gas royalties:
  estimates and policy relevance,” OPEC Energy Review, March 2016, 40 (1), 3–25.

                                          34
Gentry, Matthew and Caleb Stroup, “Entry and competition in takeover auctions,”
 Journal of Financial Economics, 2018.

Hendricks, Kenneth and Robert H. Porter, “An Empirical Study of an Auction with
 Asymmetric Information,” The American Economic Review, 1988, 78 (5), 865–883.

  and , “The Timing and Incidence of Exploratory Drilling on Offshore Wildcat Tracts,”
  The American Economic Review, June 1996, 86 (3), 388–407.

Herrnstadt, Evan, Ryan Kellogg, and Eric Lewis, “Royalties and Deadlines in Oil
 and Gas Leasing: Theory and Evidence,” 2018. working paper.

Hortaçsu, Ali and Chad Syverson, “Product Differentiation, Search Costs, and Com-
 petition in the Mutual Fund Industry: A Case Study of S&P 500 Index Funds,” The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 05 2004, 119 (2), 403–456.

Kong, Yunmi, “Sequential Auctions with Synergy and Affiliation Across Auctions,” 2016.
 working paper.

  , “Selective Entry in Auctions: Estimation and Evidence,” Working Paper 2017.

Larsen, Bradley, “The Efficiency of Real-World Bargaining: Evidence from Wholesale
  Used-Auto Auctions,” Working Paper 20431, National Bureau of Economic Research Au-
  gust 2018.

Li, Fan, Kari Lock Morgan, and Alan M Zaslavsky, “Balancing covariates via propen-
  sity score weighting,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 2018, 113 (521),
  390–400.

Muehlenbachs, Lucija, Elisheba Spiller, and Christopher Timmins, “The Housing
 Market Impacts of Shale Gas Development,” American Economic Review, December 2015,
 105 (12), 3633–3659.

Myerson, Roger B and Mark A Satterthwaite, “Efficient mechanisms for bilateral
 trading,” Journal of economic theory, 1983, 29 (2), 265–281.

Roberts, James W. and Andrew Sweeting, “When Should Sellers Use Auctions?,”
 American Economic Review, August 2013, 103 (5), 1830–1861.

Robinson, Peter M, “Root-N-consistent semiparametric regression,” Econometrica: Jour-
 nal of the Econometric Society, 1988, pp. 931–954.

Salz, Tobias, “Intermediation and Competition in Search Markets: An Empirical Case
  Study,” SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2961795, Social Science Research Network, Rochester,
  NY May 2017.

Shields, James D., “Leasing Lands Subject to the Texas Relinquishment Act Comment,”
  St. Mary’s Law Journal, 1981, 13, 868–886.



                                           35
Subramanian, Guhan, “Go-Shops vs. No-Shops in Private Equity Deals: Evidence and
  Implications,” Business Lawyer (ABA), 2007, 63, 729.

Syverson, Chad, “What determines productivity?,” Journal of Economic literature, 2011,
  49 (2), 326–65.

Timmins, Christopher and Ashley Vissing, “Environmental Justice and Coasian Bar-
  gaining: The role of race and income in lease negotiations for shale gas,” Technical Report,
  Working Paper 2017.

Vissing, Ashley, “One-to-Many Matching with Complementary Preferences: An Empirical
 Study of Market Power in Natural Gas Leasing,” August 2017.

Yergin, Daniel, The Prize December 2008.




                                             36
Appendix A               Additional Tables and Figures
A.1     RAL vs State Lease Locations

Figure A.1: Map of Sample Leases by Type




A.2     Parcel Characteristics Within the Leaseable RAL And Auc-
        tion Sample
Table A.1 estimates similar specifications as Table 2, but is limited to RAL and State auction
parcels that were leasable as of 2005. This is the set of parcels underlying our sample leases.
It also includes a variety of other surface characteristics that we use as “extra” covariates in
the lease regressions.




                                              37
Table A.1: Parcel comparison: Leasable Auction and RAL Land as of January 1, 2005

           Thickness Acres        Shape Water Rivers Roads Shrub Forest Cultivated Developed
              -0.029     -0.069 -0.007 0.072 0.042 -0.038 -1.810 0.201                         0.134      0.238
Auction
             (0.061)    (0.019) (0.006) (0.386) (0.089) (0.155) (1.050) (0.739)               (0.575)    (0.155)
Average       3.488      0.290    0.960     12.084   0.587     1.866   77.359    6.025        2.052       0.733
N             1,202      1,763    1,763     1,763    1,763     1,763   1,763     1,763        1,763       1,763
R2            0.895      0.454    0.469     0.824    0.531     0.426   0.913     0.793        0.627       0.897
 Definitions: Thickness is the thickness of the shale formation in thousands of feet, and is not available for parts
of the Eagle Ford shale nor for any of the Barnett and Haynesville shales, Acres in thousands, Shape Quality is
the ratio of parcel size to the size of the convex hull containing the parcel, Water is the distance in thousands of
meters from the parcel’s centroid to the nearest freshwater lake, pond, marsh or reservoir, Rivers is the distance
in thousands meters to the nearest river or stream, Roads is the distance in thousands of meters to the nearest
road, and developed high and low, cultivated and forests are land cover measures listed as fractions. All models
include fixed effects for the 10 mile grid containing the centroid of the parcel, and standard errors are clustered
at the grid level.



A.3       Additional Bonus and Output Regression Results

                 Table A.2: Bonus Payments and Mechanism Type, per Acre

                                    (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)
                                    0.78        0.83          1.02       0.75         0.92
                      Auction
                                   (0.20)      (0.28)        (0.47)     (0.25)       (0.13)
                      Grid          10           10           10         20          DML
                      Time           Q         GY,Q          GYQ        GY,Q         DML
                      N            1,274       1,274         1,274      1,274        1,274
                      R2           0.711       0.869         0.891      0.789
                  The dependent variable in each regression is the the lease’s bonus payment
                 per acre. In columns 1-4, the size of the location bins, in miles, are indi-
                 cated in the “Grid” row, while the structure of the time controls (“Q” for
                 quarter of sample, “GY,Q” for grid-by-year plus quarter of sample, and
                 “GYQ” for grid-by-quarter of sample) are indicated in the “Time” row.
                 Standard errors are clustered by grid in columns 1-4. Column 5 uses a dou-
                 ble/debiased machine learning routine, as recommended in Chernozhukov
                 et al. (2018). All models include a spline in acres and linear terms for term
                 length and royalty rate.




                                                        38
Table A.3: Bonus Payments and Mechanism Type, per Acre: Robustness

                                (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)
                                 0.83           0.91           0.84           0.87           0.98           1.16
  Auction
                                (0.28)         (0.12)         (0.28)         (0.13)         (0.49)         (0.19)
  Estimate                      G10Y           DML            G10Y           DML            G10Y           DML
  Surface Controls               Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            No             No
  Thickness Controls             No             No             Yes            Yes            No             No
  Private Only                   No             No             No             No             Yes            Yes
  N                             1,274          1,274          1,070          1,070          1,073          1,073
  R2                            0.870                         0.863                         0.880
 The dependent variable in each regression is the lease’s bonus payment per acre. Surface controls
include shape regularity, a dummy variable for whether the lease spans multiple parcels, surface
cover measures, and distance to roads and water sources. In columns 3 and 4, the sample excludes
leases overlying parts of the Eagle Ford shale and all leases overlying the Haynesville and Barnett
shales, for which there is no thickness information available. In columns 5 and 6, the sample is
restricted to leases with private surface ownership. Columns 1, 3, and 5 use fixed effects for year-
by-10-mile grid, as well as quarter of sample, with standard errors clustered by grid. Columns
2, 4 and 6 use a double/debiased Machine Learning routine to control for location and time, as
recommended in Chernozhukov et al. (2018). All models include a spline in acres, and linear terms
in term length and royalty rate.




      Table A.4: Log Total Seller Revenue and Mechanism Type

                        (1)              (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)
                        0.35           0.36           0.44           0.33           0.51            0.36
        Auction
                       (0.10)         (0.13)         (0.24)         (0.13)         (0.09)          (0.13)
        Grid             10             10            10             20              DML             10
        Time              Q           GY,Q           GYQ            GY,Q             DML           GY,Q
        Extra            No            No             No             No               No            Yes
        N               1,175         1,175          1,175          1,175            1,175          974
        R2              0.687         0.856          0.913          0.753                          0.853
       The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of the discounted present value of the
      sum of bonus payments, delay rentals paid, and production royalties. The estimates
      use fixed effects in columns 1-4 and 6, where the size of the location bins, in miles, are
      indicated in the “Grid” row, and the structure of the time controls (“Q” for quarter
      of sample, “GY,Q” for grid-by-year plus quarter of sample, and “GYQ” for grid-by-
      quarter of sample) are indicated in the “Time” row. For these models, standard errors
      are clustered by grid. Column 5 uses a double/debiased machine learning routine, as
      recommended in Chernozhukov et al. (2018). All models include a spline in acres, and
      linear terms in term and royalty rate. “Extra” controls include shape regularity, a
      dummy variable for whether the lease spans multiple parcels, surface cover measures,
      distance to roads and water sources, and the thickness of the shale formation. The
      sample includes all leases whose primary term ends before March, 2019.




                                                        39
Table A.5: Log Bonus Results on the Poisson Samples

                  (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)
                  0.33        0.35        0.41         0.37        0.49        0.38
  Auction
                 (0.06)      (0.10)      (0.16)       (0.08)      (0.05)      (0.09)
  Grid            10           10           10          20        DML           10
  Time             Q         GY,Q         GYQ         GY,Q        DML         GY,Q
  Extra           No          No           No          No          No          Yes
  N              1,093        738          613         944        1,175        618
  R2             0.855       0.951        0.971       0.910                   0.953
 The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of bonus payments, per acre. In
columns 1-4 and 6, the size of the location bins, in miles, are indicated in the “Grid”
row, while the structure of the time controls (“Q” for quarter of sample, “GY,Q” for
grid-by-year plus quarter of sample, and “GYQ” for grid-by-quarter of sample) are
indicated in the “Time” row. Standard errors are clustered by grid in columns 1-4,
and 6. Column 5 uses a double/debiased machine learning routine, as recommended in
Chernozhukov et al. (2018). For estimation details, see A.7. All models include a spline
in acres, and linear terms in term length and royalty rate. “Extra” controls include
shape regularity, a dummy variable for whether the lease spans multiple parcels, surface
cover measures, and distance to roads and water sources. In each column, the sample
is identical to the corresponding column in the bottom panel of Table 6.



Table A.6: Log Total Seller Revenues Results on the Poisson Output
Sample

                  (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)
                  0.33        0.39        0.60         0.32        0.51        0.38
  Auction
                 (0.10)      (0.18)      (0.33)       (0.13)      (0.09)      (0.18)
  Grid            10           10           10          20        DML           10
  Time             Q         GY,Q         GYQ         GY,Q        DML         GY,Q
  Extra           No          No           No          No          No          Yes
  N              1,093        738          613         944        1,175        618
  R2             0.662       0.767        0.824       0.697                   0.768
 The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of the discounted present value of
the sum of bonus payments, delay rentals paid, and production royalties, per acre. In
columns 1-4 and 6, the size of the location bins, in miles, are indicated in the “Grid”
row, while the structure of the time controls (“Q” for quarter of sample, “GY,Q” for
grid-by-year plus quarter of sample, and “GYQ” for grid-by-quarter of sample) are
indicated in the “Time” row. Standard errors are clustered by grid in columns 1-4,
and 6. Column 5 uses a double/debiased machine learning routine, as recommended in
Chernozhukov et al. (2018). For estimation details, see A.7. All models include a spline
in acres, and linear terms in term length and royalty rate. “Extra” controls include
shape regularity, a dummy variable for whether the lease spans multiple parcels, surface
cover measures, and distance to roads and water sources. In each column, the sample
is identical to the corresponding column in the bottom panel of Table 6.



                                          40
      Table A.7: Drilling

                        (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)
                        0.062         0.056        0.098         0.070        0.077         0.075
        Auction
                       (0.040)       (0.047)      (0.075)       (0.054)      (0.038)       (0.048)
        Grid             10            10            10          20           DML           10
        Time              Q          GY,Q          GYQ          GY,Q          DML          GY,Q
        Extra            No           No            No           No            No           Yes
        N               1,175        1,175         1,175        1,175         1,175         974
        R2              0.407        0.672         0.761        0.518                      0.660
       The dependent variable is equal to 1 if a lease is drilled and 0 otherwise). In columns 1-4 and
      6, the size of the location bins, in miles, are indicated in the “Grid” row, while the structure
      of the time controls (“Q” for quarter of sample, “GY,Q” for grid-by-year plus quarter of
      sample, and “GYQ” for grid-by-quarter of sample) are indicated in the “Time” row. Column
      5 uses a double/debiased machine learning routine, as recommended in Chernozhukov et al.
      (2018). Standard errors are clustered by grid in columns 1-4, and 6. All models include a
      spline in acres, and linear terms in term length and royalty rate. “Extra” controls include
      shape regularity, a dummy variable for whether the lease spans multiple parcels, surface cover
      measures, distance to roads and water sources, and the thickness of the shale formation. The
      sample includes all leases whose primary term ends before March, 2019.



A.4     Overlap-weighted ATEs
In Section 3, we describe our rationale for dropping (primarily) negotiated leases with espe-
cially large sizes or terms that are shorter than 1 year. Our goal in dropping these observa-
tions is to achieve balance between the observable characteristics of auctioned and negotiated
leases. Here we report the results that we obtain from measuring the causal effects of mecha-
nism type on lease outcomes using overlap-weighted treatment effect techniques described in
Li et al. (2018). These estimates do not require a priori choices about which comparisons are
sufficiently balanced, so the data for these calculations include leases we previously dropped
because they were too large or their terms were too short. We compute the estimates in
Table A.8 using the “causal forest” estimator from the grf R package, as described in Athey
et al. (2019). For each outcome, these results have the same sign as those in in Tables 3 and
6, though the magnitudes are larger.




                                                    41
   Table A.8: Overlap-weighted ATE Estimates

                 Bonus     Bonus     Output      Output      Revenue      Revenue      Drilled    Drilled
                  0.56      0.52      0.236       0.232       13.15        14.05        0.100      0.068
    Auction
                 (0.05)    (0.05)    (0.064)     (0.070)      (4.38)       (5.54)      (0.037)    (0.035)
    Extra         No        Yes         No         Yes          No          Yes          No         Yes
    N            1,595     1,282       1,467      1,164        1,467       1,164        1,467      1,164
    Overlap weighted average treatment effect estimates for the natural logarithm of the bonus payment
   (columns 1 and 2), Output per acre (columns 3 and 4), Revenue per acre (columns 5 and 6) and
   whether the lease is drilled (columns 7 and 8). Columns 3 through 8 are estimated using the subsample
   of leases whose primary terms are not censored. The covariates used in determining the conditional
   expectation and propensity functions include location, effective date, acres, term, royalty rate, as well
   as shape regularity, surface cover, an indicator for leases spanning multiple parcels, shale thickness
   and distance to roads and water sources for the “extra” columns 2, 4, 6, and 8. Shale thickness is not
   available for leases in parts of the Eagle Ford shale nor for any leases in the Haynesville and Barnett
   shales.



A.5      Delay Rental Statistics
Many leases also include delay rentals, which are payments the lessee must make to the
landowner in the event that drilling has not begun by the start of intermediate milestone
events during the primary term. Failure to drill a productive well before such milestones
or to make a required delay rental payment result in early termination of the lease. For
example, a lease may have a 5 year primary term, a 25% royalty rate, a bonus payment of
$1,000 per acre, and delay rentals of $200 per acre due at the start of the fourth year. Here,
we estimate the causal effect of transaction mechanism type on the magnitude of potential
delay rentals in a lease, as well as the portion of those contracted rentals that are ultimately
paid.




                                                      42
Table A.9: Potential Delay Rentals and Mechanism Type

                 (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
                  -0.07       -0.10       0.00        -0.09       -0.09       -0.11
  Auction
                 (0.06)      (0.10)      (0.17)      (0.05)      (0.03)      (0.10)
  Grid            10           10         10          20         DML           10
  Time             Q         GY,Q        GYQ         GY,Q        DML         GY,Q
  Extra           No          No          No          No          No          Yes
  N              1,274       1,274       1,274       1,274       1,274       1,070
  R2             0.556       0.716       0.819       0.648                   0.721
 The dependent variable in the first two columns is potential discounted delay rentals,
in thousands of dollars per acre. The specifications in columns 1, 3, and 5 control
for location and time using 10-mile grid by year-quarter of sample fixed effects, with
standard errors clustered by grid, while columns 2, 4 and 6 use a double/debiased
machine learning routine, as recommended in Chernozhukov et al. (2018). All models
include a spline in acres and linear terms for term length and royalty rate.




Table A.10: Delay Rentals Paid and Mechanism Type

                 (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
                  -0.07       -0.08       -0.04       -0.08       -0.07       -0.08
  Auction
                 (0.03)      (0.06)      (0.09)      (0.05)      (0.02)      (0.06)
  Grid            10           10         10          20         DML           10
  Time             Q         GY,Q        GYQ         GY,Q        DML         GY,Q
  Extra           No          No          No          No          No          Yes
  N              1,175       1,175       1,175       1,175       1,175        974
  R2             0.371       0.593       0.754       0.515                   0.598
 The dependent variable in the first two columns is discounted delay rentals in thou-
sands of dollars per acre, that were actually paid. The specifications in columns 1,
3, and 5 control for location and time using 10-mile grid by year-quarter of sample
fixed effects, with standard errors clustered by grid, while columns 2, 4 and 6 use a
double/debiased machine learning routine, as recommended in Chernozhukov et al.
(2018). The sample includes all leases whose primary term ends before March, 2019.
All models include a spline in acres and linear terms for term length and royalty rate.




                                          43
A.6      Auction Statistics

   Table A.11: Auction Results by Number of Bidders

      Bids   Auctions   Fraction   Avg. Bonus ($/Acre)        Med. Bid/Reserve    Med. Markup
      1          235        0.55                      1,337                1.62
      2           88        0.21                      1,945                2.08              1.39
      3           35        0.08                      3,014                3.61              1.40
      4           30        0.07                      2,743                3.26              1.12
      5           21        0.05                      6,418                3.61              1.10
      6+          19        0.04                      6,027                4.71              1.14
    This table summarizes the winning bids from GLO auctions. The fifth column contains the median
   ratio of winning bid to the reserve price for each group, while the last column shows the median
   ratio of winning bid to second highest bid.



A.7      Double/Debiased Machine Learning Estimation Details
To non-parametrically control for the effects of location and time on lease terms and lease
outcomes, we adopt the double/debiased machine learning framework of Chernozhukov et al.
(2018), which we refer to as “DML” models. In our partially linear DML models, we use the
partially linear model derived in equation 4.4 of that paper. In our pseudo-poisson models,
we derive a Neyman-orthogonal score for pseudo-poisson regression, documented below.
    In all DML models, we implement the nuisance parameter estimation with random forests,
using the regression forest function from the grf package for the R language, as described
in Athey et al. (2019), with 1000 trees per forest. Following the suggestions in Chernozhukov
et al. (2018), we construct a single point estimate and covariance matrix of the relevant
parametric terms using 5-fold cross-validation, and report the “median” values of these
across 101 randomized cross-validation partitions, as in definition 3.3 of that paper.
    To derive the Neyman-orthogonal moment for pseudo-poisson regression, we closely follow
the discussion following Lemma 2.5 of Chernozhukov et al. (2018). Let Y be a non-negative
outcome, D a binary covariate, and X a vector of controls that we wish to model non-
parametrically. Our goal is to pick the values of θ and β(X) that minimize a pseudo-poisson
quasi-log-likelihood criteria:

                 (θ0 , β(X)0 ) = arg max E [Y (Dθ + β(X)) − exp(Dθ + β(X))]
                                    θ,β(X)


    Let βθ (x) be the best fitting value of β(x) for a given value of θ. For the above criterion,
we can find this implicitly by setting the gradient of the conditional expectation of the
criterion with respect to β(x) equal to 0, and re-arranging terms:

                                                      γ(x)
                              exp(βθ (x)) =
                                              exp(θ)δ(x) + 1 − δ(x)

where γ(x) = E [Y | X = x] and δ(x) = E [D | X = x]. The Neyman-orthogonal moment

                                                 44
for pseudo-poisson regression is the total derivative of the quasi-log-likelihood criterion with
respect to θ, after we plug in the solution for exp(βθ (x)):
                                                                                           
                                        exp(Dθ)γ(X)                         exp(θ)δ(X)
ψ(Y, D, X; θ, γ(x), δ(x)) = Y −                                D−                               .
                                   exp(θ)δ(X) + 1 − δ(X)             exp(θ)δ(X) + 1 − δ(X)

This is the objective whose empirical average we set to 0 in our pseudo-poisson regressions.
Note that this objective only allows for a single binary covariate in D, so in the DML
pseudo-poisson regression in Table 6, we include lease size, royalty rate and term length in
X.


Appendix B                 Data Cleaning
B.1      Sample construction
Table A.12 presents the number of RAL and auction leases from original data provided to
us by GLO that survive each of our sample restrictions. We use the EIA’s definition of shale
formations in Texas, shown shaded in yellow in Figure A.1. “Undivided” ownership refers
to shared ownership of real property by two or more parties.30 A small number of non-RAL
leases are actually allocated via bilateral negotiation when it is situated in a position where
only one party can economically use it. Similarly, some RAL leases are allocated by auction
when the State is unable to determine who the rightful surface owner is.

       Table A.12: Sample Construction

                         Drop Reason                                      Negotiation     Auction
        All Leases                                                               3,977         740
                         Not on Shale                                            2,350         528
                         Missing Value                                           2,305         528
                         Less Than 10 or Greater Than 1,000 Acres                1,832         476
                         Gross and Net Acreage Differ                            1,327         474
                         Undivided Interest                                        870         460
                         Term Less Than 1 Year                                     860         460
                         Cancelled or Withdrawn                                    852         457
                         Negotiated State Lease                                    847         457
                         Auctioned RAL Lease                                       847         428
                         Lessee Owns RAL Surface                                   846         428
        Final Sample                                                               846         428
       Additional discussion provided in Section 3.1.


  30
    For example, if parents John and Mary bequeath their 640 acre parcel to their two children, Bob and
Jane, then Bob and Jane each have an undivided interest in the parcel. In principal, it is possible for Bob
and Jane to separately lease their respective undivided interests to different oil and gas companies.




                                                    45
B.2     Firm Names
Though we observe the name of the firm on the lease, E&P companies sometimes use in-
termediaries to acquire land, and, in these cases, we might not observe the relevant firm.
One reason why a firm would do this would be to prevent its competitors from discovering
its interest in a particular play before it had had acquired enough land to develop it. This
“secrecy” motivation is probably relevant, because the presence of non-E&P company lessees
is much more common in the auction data than in the negotiated data. This is perhaps not
surprising, since the auction records are publicly released shortly after the auction, and eas-
ily observable. To partially overcome this challenge, we use data on lease assignments, legal
transactions which formally change ownership of a lease from one firm to another, to better
infer who the ultimate E&P company is on leases initially awarded to non-E&P company
lessees. We observe assignments on 18% of RAL leases and 33% of auction leases. For each
non-E&P company in our data who ever assigns a lease to an E&P company, we identify a
variety of “most common” assignees, using auction status, location and time. For non-E&P
company leases in which we do not observe an assignment, we characterize the “real” lessee
as this (conditional) most common assignee. Though this process is not perfect, it does
greatly reduce the number of leases that we believe are allocated to lessees that are not E&P
companies.




                                              46
Appendix C               RAL Lease Addenda
In addition to specifying a bonus payments, royalty rate and primary terms, mineral leases
also specify how the contracting parties will resolve disagreements about issues related to
environmental impact, on-site water usage, and surface property disruptions, among other
things. These protective clauses are standardized in the GLO auction lease agreement, and
there are “default” values for them in the GLO’s required RAL lease agreement. However,
RAL surface owners and their contracting partners can optionally negotiate some deviations
from the standard lease. To the extent that RAL surface owners are willing to forego up-
front bonus payments for stricter surface protections during subsequent exploration and
production, we might be worried that the differences in bonus payments that we observe are
not caused by the mechanism itself, but rather by a compensating differentials story.
    To determine the validity of this concern, we had a team of research assistants do a
dual-entry review of the text of these lease addenda for all RAL leases signed between 2005
and 2016. They characterized the extent to which each one improved or deteriorated the
surface owner’s rights along dimensions such as environmental impact, water usage, and
surface property disruptions. About 73% of RAL leases have one or more additional clauses
in their lease addenda. In Table A.13, we include measures of these protective clauses in
bonus regressions like those shown in Table 3. The first two columns mirror the result shown
in the main text: auctioned pleases pay 36 to 58 more log points in up-front bonus payments
than negotiated leases do. In the next two columns, we include covariates which measure
the number of pages in an RAL lease’s addendum, as well as the number of specific legal
clauses documented. Finally, in the last two columns we include covariates for each specific
kind of clause that occur in these addenda, coded as −1 if a lease’s addenda deteriorates the
surface owner’s rights, relative to the standard RAL lease, 0 if it is absent or does not affect
the surface owner’s rights, and +1 if it improves upon the surface owner’s rights. Across all
specifications, we find no evidence that variation between auctioned and negotiated leases
in protective clauses can “explain away” the observed differences in bonus payments.




                                              47
Table A.13: Bonus Payments and Mechanism Type: Robustness to RAL
Lease Addenda

                                 (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)       (6)
                                 0.36     0.52     0.40      0.58     0.39     0.57
 Auction
                                (0.08)   (0.05)   (0.09)    (0.05)   (0.09)   (0.05)
                                                   0.00      0.01
 Pages
                                                  (0.01)    (0.01)
                                                   0.01      0.01
 Clauses
                                                  (0.00)    (0.00)
                                                                       0.03    -0.05
 Surface Protection
                                                                     (0.04)   (0.05)
                                                                       0.01     0.04
 Payment Terms
                                                                     (0.04)   (0.03)
                                                                      -0.05    -0.02
 Location Requirements
                                                                     (0.07)   (0.07)
                                                                       0.08     0.10
 Pugh Clause
                                                                     (0.04)   (0.05)
                                                                       0.05     0.14
 Cleanup Terms
                                                                     (0.05)   (0.08)
                                                                      -0.19    -0.16
 Livestock Protection
                                                                     (0.12)   (0.09)
                                                                      -0.09    -0.10
 On-site Water Use
                                                                     (0.05)   (0.05)
                                                                       0.03    -0.19
 Waste Management
                                                                     (0.07)   (0.10)
                                                                       0.02     0.01
 Definitional Changes
                                                                     (0.03)   (0.04)
                                                                      -0.08    0.15
 Pollution Protection
                                                                     (0.11)   (0.10)
                                                                       0.12     0.04
 Infrastructure Constraints
                                                                     (0.06)   (0.06)
                                                                      -0.14    0.20
 Caliche Use
                                                                     (0.12)   (0.11)
                                                                      -0.03    0.09
 Additional Fees
                                                                     (0.05)   (0.07)
                                                                      -0.01    -0.11
 Time Constraints
                                                                     (0.15)   (0.10)
                                                                       0.05     0.20
 Miscellaneous
                                                                     (0.06)   (0.07)
 Grid                             10      DML      10       DML       10      DML
 Time                           GY,Q      DML     GY,Q      DML      GY,Q     DML
 N                              1,274     1,274   1,274     1,274    1,274    1,274
 R2                             0.953             0.953              0.954
 Columns 1, 3, and 5 control for space and time using 10-mile grid by year of sample
fixed effects, as well as fixed effects for quarter of sample. Columns 2, 4, and 6 use
a double/debiased machine learning routine, as recommended in Chernozhukov et al.
(2018), with non-parametric controls for lease latitude, longitude and effective date.
                                         48
