                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            THE DEMOCRACY EFFECT:
                    A WEIGHTS-BASED IDENTIFICATION STRATEGY

                                         Pedro Dal Bó
                                         Andrew Foster
                                         Kenju Kamei

                                       Working Paper 25724
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25724


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2019




We thank Alessandra Casella, Ray Duch, Adam McCloskey, Debraj Ray and seminar participants
at Bocconi, Columbia, LSE and Zurich for useful comments. We thank Catalina Ravizza for
excellent research assistance and Sven Fischer for his help in z-Tree programming. We thank
John Hey for his hospitality when the authors conducted experiments at the University of York.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Pedro Dal Bó, Andrew Foster, and Kenju Kamei. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Democracy Effect: a Weights-Based Identification Strategy
Pedro Dal Bó, Andrew Foster, and Kenju Kamei
NBER Working Paper No. 25724
April 2019
JEL No. C9,D02,D7

                                         ABSTRACT

Dal Bó, Foster and Putterman (2010) show experimentally that the effect of a policy may be
greater when it is democratically selected than when it is exogenously imposed. In this paper we
propose a new and simpler identification strategy to measure this democracy effect. We derive
the distribution of the statistic of the democracy effect, and apply the new strategy to the data
from Dal Bó, Foster and Putterman (2010) and data from a new real-effort experiment in which
subjects’ payoffs do not depend on the effort of others. The new identification strategy is based
on calculating the average behavior under democracy by weighting the behavior of each type of
voter by its prevalence in the whole population (and not conditional on the vote outcome). We
show that use of these weights eliminates selection effects under certain conditions. Application
of this method to the data in Dal Bó, Foster and Putterman (2010) confirms the presence of the
democracy effect in that experiment, but no such effect is found for the real-effort experiment.


Pedro Dal Bó                                           Kenju Kamei
Department of Economics                                Durham University Business School
Brown University                                       Mill Hill Lane, Room 176
64 Waterman Street                                     DH1 3LB, Durham
Providence, RI 02912                                   United Kingdom
and NBER                                               kenju.kamei@durham.ac.uk
pdalbo@brown.edu

Andrew Foster
Department of Economics and Community Health
Brown University
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
afoster@brown.edu
I. Introduction

         Previous research has suggested that democratic institutions may affect the
response to policies. For example, in experimental settings, Tyran and Feld (2006), Ertan,
Page, and Putterman (2010), Sutter, Haigner, and Kocher (2010), and Markussen,
Putterman and Tyran (2014) among others find that punishments and rewards have
greater impact on contributions to a public good when they are allowed democratically.2
However, as pointed out by Dal Bó, Foster and Putterman (2010), it is difficult to
interpret this difference in behavior as a clear evidence that democratic institutions affect
behavior directly. The reason is that democracy allows for selection into policies. For
example, the availability of punishments after a public good game may have a greater
effect when that availability was chosen democratically than when it is chosen randomly
simply because subjects who are predisposed to employ punishments may be more likely
to vote for such punishments if given the opportunity.

         Dal Bó, Foster and Putterman (2010) provided two identification strategies to get
around the selection problem and showed that democratic choice, net of selection,
increases the effect on cooperation of a fine on unilateral defection in a prisoners’
dilemma game. Their identification strategies were based on having all subjects vote and
then randomly overriding votes in some groups. Having information on votes of all
subjects allowed them to compare behavior controlling for each person’s vote (therefore
controlling for selection) and show that there is a significant direct effect of democracy
when the fine is in place.

         A shortcoming of their identification strategy is that one must know how subjects
voted even when their votes are overridden. Outside of the laboratory one may not be
able to override votes. The researcher may, for example, only have access to vote data
from democratic groups or societies, not from otherwise comparable groups in which

2
  More generally, other papers have compared behavior between democratically chosen environments and
those imposed both in the lab and in the field. See, for example, Frey (1998), Bardhan (2000), Potters,
Sefton and Vesterlund (2005), Olken (2010), Baldassarri and Grossman (2011), Hamman, Weber and
Woon (2011), Corazzini et al (2014), Markussen, Reuben and Tyran (2014), Mellizo, Carpenter and
Matthews (2014), and Engl, Riedl and Weber (2018). Note that not all of these papers focus on the
democracy effect that we study. Democracy can also affect behavior through the implementation of
different policies and allowing for sorting into policies. Here we study the direct effect of democracy (for
simplicity the “democracy effect”) which consists of the impact of democracy on behavior after controlling
for the chosen policies and sorting.


                                                     2
rules are imposed exogenously. Moreover, within the laboratory it may be that the
process of voting and having one’s vote overridden has a different effect than just having
the rule imposed without having previously voted.3 It thus would be useful to be able to
test for a direct democracy effect even without information on how each subject in a non-
democratic group or society would have voted.

        In this paper we devise a method that does just that. Our alternative identification
strategy consists of comparing behavior under non-democracy with behavior under
democracy but weighting the behavior of voters according to their proportions in the
population and not conditional on the election outcome. The basic insight is that the
source of the selectivity bias is that “yes” voters are overrepresented, relative to the
population, in groups that choose a particular policy. Similarly, “no” voters are
overrepresented in groups that reject the policy. If voting decisions are independent
across members of a society, a “yes” voter in a majority “yes” group is comparable to a
“yes” voter in a majority “no” group. Thus reweighting the behaviors under each policy
according to the proportion of yes and no voters in the population will yield an unbiased
estimate of the effects of the policy controlling for democratic selection.

        We then apply this method to two different settings. First, we employ the data
from Dal Bó, Foster and Putterman (2010), which considered a policy that transformed a
prisoners’ dilemma game into a coordination game. Consistent with the results presented
by Dal Bó, Foster and Putterman (2010) we find a significant democracy effect using the
new methodology. The second experiment consisted of choosing a payment scheme for a
task. The task involves adding sets of five randomly generated two-digit numbers. In the
first part of the experiment subjects were paid a fixed amount regardless of the number of
correct answers. In the second part, subjects could be paid as in the first part or by a piece
rate (their payment was determined by their own performance only, independent of the
performance of the other subjects). The payment formula was chosen by the computer for
some groups, but for other groups the formula was chosen by simple majority. The
question is whether the effect of introducing piece rate payments on performance is larger

3
 These may be the reasons why, despite the wide recognition of the importance of measuring the direct
effect of democracy, the identification strategy proposed in Dal Bó, Foster and Putterman (2010) has only
been used in a couple of experiments (e.g. Kamei 2016, Chen 2015, Marcin, Robalo and Tausch 2016, and
Schories 2017).


                                                    3
if that introduction is chosen democratically. In this case, we found that there is no
democracy effect: helping to choose the payment scheme of one’s group did not affect
the number of correct answers provided. This result suggest that the existence of a
democracy effect may be linked to strategic considerations that are present in the
coordination game but not in this real-effort task.

       The next section revisits the simple formal model in Dal Bó, Foster and Putterman
(2010) to explain the main hurdle to identifying the existence of a democracy effect,
describes the solutions provided by Dal Bó, Foster and Putterman (2010), and presents
the new identification strategy. Section III derives the proposed statistic and its
distribution, and studies its performance through Monte Carlo simulations. Section IV
applies the new identification strategy to the data from Dal Bó, Foster and Putterman
(2010) and data from the new real-effort experiment.



II. Strategies to identify the effect of democracy

       As in Dal Bó, Foster and Putterman (2010), we consider a simplified game in
which individuals are (1) matched in groups, (2) learn the mechanism         ∈    ,
(democratic or not) used to select the environment in which they will interact        ∈   ,
(these environments may involve different payoff matrices, rules of interaction or
games), (3) vote    ∈   ,      (where a denotes a vote for environment A) if they are in the
democratic mechanism, (4) learn the chosen environment, and (5) interact in that
environment.

       A subject’s choice in the environment will depend formally on the mechanism M,
the environment E, and his or her type μ. We write the choice of action of the subject as
     , ,   . The type μ includes any personal characteristic that is unobserved to the
researcher but that may be correlated with both the subject’s choice and his or her voting
decisions. The type μ is assumed to be iid with density function         .

       In this framework, an individual’s vote can only depend on his or her type, as he
or she is randomly matched with the others and does not know either their type or how
they will vote:             . We say that there is a democracy effect if the choice function




                                                4
depends on the mechanism after controlling for the environment and the subject’s type:
     , ,                    , ,   .


II.a. Why the usual comparisons do not identify a democracy effect:
           As discussed in Dal Bó, Foster and Putterman (2010), a naïve way of testing the
existence of a democracy effect, which has been used in the literature, is to consider the
expected difference in behavior by mechanism given the environment E:
          (1)         | ,              | ,               , ,        | ,            , ,        | ,
where           | ,         is the conditional density of the type given the selection mechanism and
the selected environment. While finding that equation (1) is different from zero is
consistent with a democracy effect, it does not identify a democracy effect. As discussed
in Dal Bó, Foster and Putterman (2010), the reason is that the environment E is
informative about the type of the subjects when it was democratically selected but not
when it was selected randomly:                            | ,             | ,   . In other words, subjects
that end in a particular environment democratically may not be comparable to those that
end in that environment randomly. There may be a selection effect. In particular, the
difference (1) may be non-zero even if there are no differences in behavior by
mechanism:              , ,                  , ,   for all E, μ. We could thus falsely claim to find a
democracy effect if we just compared behavior across mechanisms for a given
environment.
           To gain more intuition about the impact of the selection effect into equation (1), it
is useful to decompose the elements in that equation. Note that the terms in the left hand
side of equation (1) can be written as follows:
                 | ,                     | ,             , ,         | , ,
                                         | ,             , ,         | , ,
Note also that the relationship between the vote and the type does not depend on the
mechanism or the implemented environment if the types are independent across subjects,
that is         | , ,                 | , ,            | . In other words, once one knows how
somebody voted or would have voted, the environment and mechanism are no longer
informative about the subjects’ types. Finally, note that given that environment E was
chosen, the probability that a subject voted or would have voted for a is not independent


                                                          5
of the mechanism used to choose the environment; however, the probability of voting for
a in the non-democratic condition is equal to the probability of voting for a in the
population:          | ,                        | ,                            .

        Given these facts, we can now write the expected behavior under the two
mechanisms as follows:

                                            (2)        | ,

         | ,          , ,           |                                    | ,                   , ,         |

                                            3          | ,

                        , ,             |                                                , ,           |

        These two equations clearly show why                       | ,     and            | ,         could be
different even if     , ,     and           , ,       are not different. The integrals in (2) and (3)
would not differ if there were no democracy effect:                       , ,                   , ,    . What would
differ is the probability that a subject voted (or would have voted) for A or B. Under
environment A, for example, subjects who voted for A are overrepresented under
democracy relative to non-democracy:                         | ,                          | ,                    .
Similarly, under environment B:                   | ,                              | ,                     .
Therefore, if we are focusing on environment A,                     | ,            overweighs subjects who
voted for environment A relative to groups for which the environment A was randomly
imposed on them:              | ,                          . Since subjects that voted for A may
behave differently than those that voted for B, the average behavior under democracy
cannot be directly compared to the average behavior under non-democracy to identify the
democracy effect.



II.b. The identification strategies in Dal Bó, Foster and Putterman (2010): controlling on
types

        With a clear representation of the identification problem it is possible to
characterize solutions. We start by reviewing the solutions provided in Dal Bó, Foster
and Putterman (2010) and then provide a new identification strategy based on
reweighting the prevalence of the different types of subjects.



                                                       6
           The identification strategies introduced and used in Dal Bó, Foster and Putterman
(2010) are based on the fact that they observe the subjects’ vote under both mechanisms.
In one of their strategies, instead of looking at equation (1), they look at a comparison for
each of the possible votes (a and b). It is straightforward to show that once we control by
the environment and vote, the difference in behavior across mechanisms can be
calculated as follows:
          (4)           | , ,              | , ,                  , ,             , ,           |        .
Equation (4) can only be non-zero if, for some positive measure set of types, behavior
differs by mechanism (democratic versus not) for subjects with the same vote. By
comparing subjects that voted in the same way the selection problem is avoided. Dal Bó,
Foster and Putterman (2010) also introduced an additional identification strategy which is
based on comparing the behavior of groups with the same distribution of votes, in
particular groups with the same number of Yes and No votes.4

           Note, however, that both of these identification strategies require that subjects
vote under both mechanisms. In most applications we will not observe how subjects
would have voted under and exogenous mechanism, limiting the applicability of their
identification strategies. We also may be concerned that part of the democracy effect that
is measured, even when we can observe overridden votes, may reflect the response to
having one’s vote overridden rather than not the effect of not having had the opportunity
to vote at all.



II.c The new identification strategy: reweighting types

           We now develop a novel identification strategy that does not require that we
observe voting in the exogenous treatment. In addition to assuming that subjects’ types
are independently drawn, we only need to assume that the distribution of types in the
population from which the groups are selected for the exogenous condition is the same as
that for those selected for the democratic condition. This equality is ensured by the
random allocation of subjects to mechanisms.



4
    This identification strategy does not require assuming that votes are independent across subjects.


                                                        7
         As discussed before, the comparison of equations (2) and (3) fails to identify the
democracy effect because the distribution of types across mechanisms differs once one
controls for the environment selected. In other words, if we study behavior for
environment A, there will be an over representation of subjects with types that lead to
vote for A in the democratic treatment relative to the random one.

         The proper comparison is between behavior under the non-democratic
mechanism,         | ,    , and the following properly weighted average behavior under
democracy:

   (5)                    , ,         |                                   , ,    |             .

Note that this average uses as weights the unconditional voting probabilities
and            , instead of the conditional ones            | ,    and          | ,    as in
equation (2). By comparing (5) with (3), we see that under the null of no democracy
effect it must be the case that:

         (6)                          | , ,                       | , ,          | ,    ,

Where          | , ,            , ,           |        denotes the expected behavior under
democracy conditional on being in environment E and the subjected having voted for v.
Denote the reweighted expected behavior in the left-hand side of equation (6) as
         | ,    , where RW denotes “reweighted.”

         In conclusion, to test whether there exists a democracy effect under a particular
environment, we must compare the average behavior under non-democracy with a
properly weighted measure of the behavior of those voting for one or the other
environment, where the weights are estimates of the percentage of subjects voting for
each environment in the whole population.



III Estimation methodology

         In this section we describe how to perform the statistical test based on the
identification strategy described in the previous section and provide results from
simulation exercises that support the estimation methodology.




                                                   8
III.a. The statistic and its distribution

        The terms in equation (6) using data from an experiment with both a democratic
and non-democratic treatment can be estimated by taking averages. Denote by SD,E,v and
nD,E,v the set and number of subjects who faced the democratic mechanism D, participated
in environment E and voted for v. Similarly, denote by SN,E and nN,E the set of subjects
who faced the non-democratic mechanism and participated in environment E. Denote by
SD and nD the set and number of subjects in the democracy mechanism and by nN the
number of subject in the non-democratic mechanism. Denote by vi a subjects’ vote and by
Ci a subject’s choice of action in the environment. For simplicity, denote
and                   .

        The right hand side of equation (6) is estimated as         | ,                ∑∈     ,
                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                   ,

while the left hand side is estimated as              | ,           | , ,                    | , ,
where           ∑∈        1         ,       1     , and     | , ,                 ∑∈   , ,
                                                                                                  . The
                                                                            , ,

proposed statistic is

                              (7)               | ,          | ,    .

To perform statistical tests on the existence of a democracy effect we must know the
distribution of DE.

Proposition 1: If subjects’ types are iid and there is no democracy effect, then
0.

        The intuition behind proposition 1 was described in section II.c.: from equation
(6) we see that under the assumption of no democracy effect the expected reweighted
average behavior under democracy must coincide with the expected behavior under non-
democracy. The proof is provided in the appendix.

        To be able to do hypothesis testing, it is important to know that the distribution of
our statistic converges. The next proposition provides a central limit theorem for our
case.




                                                 9
Proposition 2: If subjects’ types are iid,           ∈ 0,1 ,         and     grow proportionately with
n, and there is no democracy effect, then √                 converges in distribution to a Normal
distribution as n goes to infinity.

           The proof is provided in the appendix.

           Knowing that the distribution of the statistic converges, we can use jackknife or
bootstrapping procedures to properly estimate the standard errors of the statistic DE.

           Note that we have assumed that the researcher observes voting and choices at the
individual level. This assumption makes it straightforward to estimate                    | , ,     ,
numbers that are crucial to this new identification strategy. While this assumption is
appropriate for most laboratory experiments in the democracy effects literature, it may
not be appropriate for field applications where the researcher only observes voting and
choices at the group level. Fortunately, we can still use this identification strategy by
calculating           | , ,        from group level data. For example, we can regress group
average behavior on vote share for a given environment, and use those estimates to
calculate         | , ,       .5



III.b. Simulations: performance of the statistic and the importance of independence

           Simulation results allow us to show the shortcomings of the naïve comparison of
behavior between democratic and non-democratic mechanisms and the advantage of the
proposed estimator for the democracy effect. The simulations consider an experiment
with a hundred groups with 5 subjects each. Subjects interact in an environment, either A
or B, with the other members of the group. Groups differ on how this environment is
chosen. Half of the groups are randomly assigned a democratic decision mechanism and
the other half are assigned a random mechanism (half of these groups will participate in
environment A and half in environment B). Groups selected for the democratic




5
    For example, if   denotes the average behavior in group j, and    denotes the vote share for environment
A in group j, then we can regress                     . We can then calculate     | , ,                 and
    | , ,          .


                                                      10
mechanisms vote for one of the two environments and the environment with a majority of
votes is implemented.

       We assume that each subject has an independent type µi with distribution N(0,1).
Subjects with type greater than zero vote for environment A while those with negative
types vote for environment B. The behavior of the subjects only depends on their own
type. It does not depend on the environment (for simplicity) and it does not depend on
democracy (so that the null of no democracy effect holds). We assume that subjects’
choice are between zero and one and a subject’s choice corresponds to the normal CDF at
the subject’s type (for example, the choice is           for a subject with         0).

            Table 1: The Performance of the Democracy Effect Statistic -
                                Simulation Results
         Panel a: i.i.d. types
                             Naïve Democracy Effect              Democracy Effect
         Environment         Average    % Rejection            Average   % Rejection
                                           of Null                          of Null
               A              0.094     85.40%                   0.0003         5.68%
               B             -0.094     85.53%                  -0.0003         5.57%
         Panel b: correlated types
                           Naïve Democracy Effect                 Democracy Effect

                A                0.18         93.80%               0.046           14.80%
                B              -0.179           94%               -0.047           15.88%
         Note: Results from five thousand simulations. The Naïve Democracy Effect
         statistic consist of comparing behavior under democracy and non-democracy
         conditional on chosen environment:          | ,         | , . The Democracy
         Effect statistic is as in equation (7). “% Rejection of Null” calculated for
         rejection of null at 5% significance level. Bootstrap standard errors are
         calculated at the group level with one thousand replications.



       Table 1, panel a, shows the results of 10,000 iterations under the previous
assumptions. The first 3 columns show the shortcomings of just comparing behavior
under democracy and non-democracy to assess whether there is a democracy effect.
Although these simulations assume that there is no democracy effect, a naïve comparison
of the estimates suggests that there is an average positive effect of democracy under
environment A and a negative effect under environment B. The null of no effect is
rejected in the vast majority of the cases. As discussed above, under democracy there is


                                                11
selection into each environment: subjects who voted for A have high types and, hence,
also make higher choices, resulting in higher average choices in democratic A
environments than in non-democratic A environments. Figure 1 shows the distribution of
the naïve democracy effect given the simulations for each environment. These
distributions are not centered at zero despite the absence of a democracy effect in the data
generating process.



          Figure 1: Distribution of the Naïve Democracy Effect under Independent
                  Types and in an Environment without a Democracy Effect
              .25
              .2.15
          Density
              .1
              .05
              0




                      -.2         -.1             0               .1              .2
                                        Naive Democracy Effect

                                   Environment A             Environment B



       The last 2 columns of Table 1, panel a, show the performance of the proposed
estimator of the democracy effect. It can be seen that the democracy effect is in average
very close to zero, consistently with the null of no democracy effect. Moreover, the null
of no democracy effect is rejected at the 5% level in less than 6% of the cases. The
proposed estimator results in a rejection of the null in the correct proportion. Figure 2
shows the distribution of the democracy effect obtained from the simulations. It can be
clearly seen that regardless of the environment (A or B), the democracy effect estimator
is distributed with mean around zero (the true democracy effect in this case).


                                             12
         Figure 2: Distribution of the Democracy Effect Statistic under Independent
                 Types and in an Environment without a Democracy Effect


                  .25
                  .2 .15
               Density
             .1   .05
                  0




                           -.2      -.1               0                 .1             .2
                                                Democracy Effect

                                          Environment A            Environment B



       Table 1, panel b, shows simulation results when we relax the assumption of
independent types. We assume instead that each subject’s type is formed by adding two
components. One component is independently distributed with normal distribution
N(0,1/2) and the other component is the same for all subjects in a group and is also
distributed N(0,1/2). As it was the case for independent types, the naïve measure of
democracy effect rejects the null too many times. More importantly, as shown in the last
2 columns in panel b, our proposed statistic for the democracy effect also fails: the null of
no democracy effect is rejected at the 5% level 15% of the cases. The reason is that the
subjects’ types are not independent inside a group. The simulated distribution of the
statistic for the case of correlated voters’ types is displayed in Figure 3.




                                                13
       Figure 3: Distribution of Democracy Effect Statistic with Correlated Types in
                                an Environment without Democracy Effect



                    .15
                    .1
          Density
                    .05
                    0




                          -.2         -.1          0               .1            .2
                                              Democracy Effect

                                        Environment A            Environment B



       Table 1, panel b, and Figure 3 make it clear that, with correlated types, it is not
enough to reweight the behavior of A and B voters to represent the average in the
population. When types are not independent, the expected average behavior of an A or B
voter depends on the types of the other members of the group. In this case, an A voter in
a group for a majority for A is more likely to have a high value of his or her type than an
A voter unconditional on the outcome of the vote. This simulation results make it clear
that the performance of our proposed statistic for the democracy effect hinges on the
independence of types.



IV Application 1: The democracy effect in solving social dilemmas

       In this section we apply the weights-based identification strategy introduced in
sections II and III to estimate the democracy effect with the data presented by Dal Bó,
Foster and Putterman (2010). That paper studies whether a modification of the prisoners’
dilemma that would allow players to reach an efficient outcome has a greater impact on
behavior when the modification is democratically chosen.




                                                    14
IV.a Experimental design

        In each experimental session, subjects were randomly divided into groups of four
for the entire session. Each session consisted of two parts. In each of the ten periods in
part 1, subjects were randomly matched in pairs to play the prisoner’s dilemma game in
Table 2 (Initial payoffs). At the beginning of part 2 of the experiment, the payoffs could
be modified to the coordination game in Table 2 (Modified payoffs). Then, subjects
played 10 rounds with random rematching. Notice that the initial game has a unique Nash
equilibrium under the assumption of material payoffs, while the modified game is a
coordination game with mutual cooperation dominating mutual defection.



            Table 2: Stage Games - Dal Bó, Foster and Putterman (2010)
                      Initial payoffs                         Modified payoffs
                                         Other's                              Other's
                                         action                                action
          Own action                    C      D      Own action             C       D
                   C                    50     10              C             50     10
                   D                    60     40              D             48     40


        Whether the payoffs were modified in part 2 was determined as follows. First,
subjects voted on whether to modify payoffs at the beginning of part 2. Second, the
computer randomly chose whether to consider the votes in each group. If the computer
considered the votes, then the majority wins and in case of a tie the computer breaks the
tie. If the computer did not consider the votes in a group, then it randomly chose whether
to modify payoffs or not in that group.6

        Following the terminology from section II, in this experiment we have two
mechanisms: Democracy denotes that votes were considered, Random denotes that votes
were not considered. We have two possible environments: initial and modified payoffs.
Subjects could vote Yes for modification or No against modification.



6
  The subjects’ computer screens informed them whether the computer randomly chose to consider the
votes and whether payoffs were modified. Some groups for which the votes were not considered were
informed of whether a majority had voted for modification or not. Since this information did not affect
behavior we aggregate both types of sessions here. For more detail on the experimental design see Dal Bó,
Foster and Putterman (2010).


                                                    15
IV.b Results

        In the democratic treatment, 53% of the subjects voted to modify payoffs. Dal Bó,
Foster and Putterman (2010) study the independence of votes in each group and cannot
reject the null that votes are independent. This is consistent with the assumption needed
to employ the new identification strategy introduced in section II.

        Table 3 provides the data that allow us to measure the effect of democracy using
the weights-based identification strategy. The first two columns report the percentage of
subjects cooperating by vote in the democracy groups under the initial and the modified
payoffs (period 11). It is clear that subjects cooperated more under the modified payoffs
and that subjects that voted Yes were more cooperative than those that voted No. For
groups with the Random mechanism, we also observe greater cooperation rate under the
modified payoffs. We do not distinguish here subjects that voted Yes or No in the
Random mechanism as that information is not necessary for the new identification
strategy while it was essential for the identification strategy used in Dal Bó, Foster and
Putterman (2010).

        If we focus on the groups that ended with modified payoffs, we see that those
groups whose payoffs were modified democratically had a cooperation rate of 70% while
those that ended there randomly had a cooperation rate of 47.9%. As discussed in section
II, this difference (22.1%) is not a measure of the democracy effect. As anticipated
subjects that voted yes are overrepresented in groups that democratically chose to
modified payoffs (75% of subjects that voted Yes against 53.13% in the general
population) and that Yes voters are more cooperative than No voters. To calculate the
democracy effect we need to reweight the behavior of Yes and No voters using the
proportions in the general population. This correctly weighted average is presented in
column (4) and its comparison with the behavior from exogenously imposed modification
results in a democracy effect of 13.33% under modified payoffs. This effect is
statistically significant at the 5% level (p-value = 0.0396, two-sided).7


7
  If we only consider the sessions from the first experiment in Dal Bó, Foster and Putterman (2010) without
the information treatment, then we obtain p-value=0.07.


                                                    16
                  Table 3: The effect of the democracy in overcoming social dilemmas
                                            Mechanism
                                    Democracy                        Random                          Standard
                                                                                    Democracy
                                                                                                     Errors[p-
                                                        Properly                      Effect
                                                                                                      values]
                                                        weighted
Environment         Voted Yes     Voted No       All    average
                        (1)          (2)         (3)      (4)           (5)             (6)             (7)
                        24         14.55        17.5     19.57        18.06            1.51             6.7
Initial
                       (25)         (55)        (80)                   (72)                          [0.8215]

                       80             40        70       61.25        47.92            13.33           6.48
Modified
                       (60)          (20)       (80)                  (192)                         [0.0396]**
Notes: Data from Dal Bó, Foster and Putterman (2010). Numbers in parentheses indicate the number of
subjects. Bootstrapped SE. The number of bootstrap iterations is 10,000. ** indicates significance at the 0.05
level.


                 Note that similar calculations can be done for the initial payoffs without finding
          any significant democracy effect. This is not surprising as this game has a unique Nash
          equilibrium under the assumptions of monetary payoffs and a large majority of subjects
          chooses to defect.



          V. Application 2: Incentives, effort and the democracy effect

                 In the previous section we considered the effect of democracy on behavior in
          environments with strategic interaction between the subjects. Strategic interaction may be
          important because democratic choice and strategic play both have a collective aspect—
          both voting and the strategic play affect the payoffs of others. It is thus instructive to ask
          whether a democracy effect is observed when, once the environment is chosen, ones play
          does not affect others. In this section we thus consider a real-effort experiment in which
          some subjects had the chance to democratically choose a remuneration policy before
          performing a set of tasks. We apply the weights-based identification strategy introduced
          in section II to measure the effect of democracy on the subjects’ performance.

                 The idea that choosing the remuneration can affect effort is related to the
          literature suggesting that worker participation in the work place can affect productivity
          (see Levine and Tyson 1990; Bonin, Jones, and Putterman 1993; and Black and Lynch


                                                         17
2001). A recent experimental literature has also shown that allowing workers to choose
their own compensation may contribute to high productivity (Charness, Cobo-Reyes,
Jiménez, Lacomba and Lagos 2012; Mellizo, Carpenter, and Matthews 2014).


V.a Experimental design

         In each experimental session, subjects participated anonymously through
computers. Upon arrival, instructions were read aloud (instructions used in the
experiment are available in Appendix B). All subjects were given pens and scrap papers.
Each session consisted of two parts and subjects were paid only for their performance on
one of the two parts (this was chosen randomly at the end of the session). In part 1
subjects were asked to add as many sets of five randomly generated two-digit numbers as
possible in 20 minutes. This is a standard real-effort task in the literature – as in Niederle
and Vesterlund (2007). During the task, subjects were allowed to take breaks and browse
the internet. This was done for the subjects to have an opportunity cost of exerting effort
in performing the summation task which may increase the response to the payment
formula.8 In part 1, subjects were paid 8 pounds regardless of the number of correct
answers.

         In part 2, subjects were randomly assigned to a group of three and, as in part 1,
they were asked again to add as many sets of five randomly generated two-digit numbers
as possible in 20 minutes. As in part 1, subjects were allowed to browse the internet
during the 20 minutes assigned to the task. Payments were determined following one of
two possible payment formulas: Formula A which consists of a fixed amount of 8
pounds; and Formula B which consists of 25 pence per correct response. Although each
subject belonged to a group of three persons, their payment was determined by their own
performance only, independent of the performance of the other two subjects in the group.

         How the payment formula was chosen depended on the treatment: democractic or
random. In the democratic treatment, each subject voted for one of the two formulas to be
used in their group. The formula obtaining a majority of votes in the group was used in


8
  See Araujo et al (2015) for evidence of little response to incentives without internet breaks and Corgnet,
Hernán-González, and Schniter (2015) for evidence that the availability of internet increases the effect of
incentives in a real-effort task in the lab.


                                                     18
that group. In the random treatment, the computer randomly chose a formula to be used
in the group. Since we use the weights-based identification strategy described in section
II, we did not ask subjects to vote in the random treatment.

        A total of 216 students at the University of York (UK), most of who were
undergraduate students, participated in the experiment.9 Twelve sessions were conducted.
The duration of the experiment was less than 80 minutes, and the average earnings
(including a participation fee of 3 pounds) are 12.5 pounds.



V.b Results

        In this experiment, 56% of the subjects voted for formula B. An important
requirement of the procedure, as noted, is that votes are independent within groups. This
condition is verified in two ways. First, as Figure 4 shows, there is little difference
between the observed cumulative distribution of votes for B in a group (solid line) and
the distribution that would arise if subjects decided their votes independently of each
other (binomial, depicted as a dashed line). This difference is not statistically significant
(p-value = 0.5310).10 Second, a random-effects analysis of voting does not reject the null
of no random effects at the group level, suggesting that voting decisions are independent
within groups (p-value = 0.1493).




9
  The subjects were recruited by email using hroot (Hamburg Registration and Organization Online Tool) -
see Bock et al. (2015). No subject participated in more than one session. Subjects interacted through
individual computer terminals using the z-Tree software (Fischbacher 2007).
10
   Since the theoretical distribution is not continuous, following Dal Bó, Foster and Putterman (2010), we
do not use the usual Kolmogorov-Smirnov test but a modification proposed by Anthony N. Pettitt and
Michael A. Stephens (1977). We calculate the p-value by Monte Carlo simulation under the null that the
number of votes for B in a group follows a binomial distribution with probability of success equal to the
observed one (0.5556).


                                                   19
                                          Figure 4: Cumulative Distribution of Votes by Group

                       1         .8
         Cumulative Distribution
             .4        .6
                       .2
                       0




                                      0                    1                            2          3
                                                               Votes for B in a group

                                                               Observed                 Binomial



                  Table 4 provides a summary of the results of the experiment. The first two
columns report the average number of correct responses in part 2 by vote in the groups
with the democratic mechanism under formula A and formula B.

                  Note that greater incentives to exert effort (formula B) result in a greater number
of correctly answered questions. Under the random institution, formula B results in 41.03
correct questions in average versus 20.87 for formula A. This difference is significant (p-
value of less than 0.001).11 For the groups under the democratic mechanism, we can
compare behavior conditional on individual voting. As seen in Table 4, the average
number of correct responses under formula A is smaller than under formula B for those
who voted formula A (p-value = 0.0014) and for those who voted formula B (p-value less
than 0.001). In summary, the experimental design resulted in task performance
responding to incentives in this experiment. Consistently with the performance results,


11
     According to an individual-level Mann-Whitney test (two-sided).


                                                                     20
     we observe that subjects facing steeper incentives work harder: subjects spend
     significantly less time browsing the internet under formula B than under formula A.12

              There is also evidence of selection into formula B, as those who voted for B
     perform significantly better under B than under A (p-value of less than 0.001). It is this
     selection into formula B that requires that we reweight the observations in order to obtain
     an unbiased estimate of the democracy effect.

              The last two columns of Table 4 present the democratic effects based on the
     properly weighted average as defined in sections II and III. We do not find a significant
     democratic effect in raising performance. The democratic effect is negative under
     formula A and positive under formula B but it is not statistically significant in either case.



   Table 4: The effect of the democracy on work performance (Number of correct answers)
                                         Mechanism
                                 Democracy                           Random                            Standard
                                                                                     Democracy
                                                                                                       Errors[p-
                                                     Properly                          Effect
                                                                                                        values]
                                                     weighted
Environment      Voted A       Voted B       All     average
                    (1)          (2)         (3)       (4)              (5)              (6)                  (7)
                  17.97         19.67      18.33      18.92           20.87             -1.95                4.06
Formula A
                   (33)          (9)        (42)                       (45)                                [0.6301]

                  36.2          51.25      47.83      44.56           41.03             3.53                2.82
Formula B
                   (15)          (51)       (66)                       (63)                                [0.2112]
Notes: Numbers in parentheses indicate the number of subjects. Bootstrapped SE. The number of bootstrap
iterations is 10,000.


              Interestingly, the naïve calculation of the democracy effect is positive and
     significant for formula B (for formula B the naïve democracy effect is 6.8 with a p-value
     of 0.0312).13 That is, the naïve measure of the democracy effect would have lead as to
     believe that there is a significant and positive effect while this is mainly due to the effect
     of selection: B voters perform better under that formula and also are overrepresented in
     groups which voted for that formula.


     12
        For example, under the random treatment, subjects under formula A spend 458 seconds browsing the
     internet on average, versus only 7 seconds under formula B (p-value of less than 0.001).
     13
        The naïve democracy effect is not statistically significant under formula A (p-value of 0.378).


                                                       21
       While a previous experimental literature has suggested that workers’ performance
may improve when they are given the opportunity to choose the policies under which
they work, our experiment has a different result in that democracy does not significantly
raise the subjects’ performance after controlling for the chosen policies and selection into
policies. One possible reason for this difference is that some of those papers (like
Charness et al 2012) focus on the total effect of democracy (that is the effect without
controlling for the chosen policy and selection).

       However, Mellizo, Carpenter and Matthews (2014) do find a direct effect of
democracy on productivity in a real-effort experiment. In that case, the choice of
compensation was between revenue sharing and a tournament. These compensation
schemes result in payoffs that depend on other subjects’ performance, introducing
strategic interaction to the effort decision contrary to what is the case in our real-effort
experiment. It could be that strategic interaction is necessary for the democracy effect to
be important. Maybe a “social multiplier” through strategic interaction is required: the
effect may operate, in part, by affecting subjects’ expectations about the behavior of other
which in turn may affect their own behavior. This channel is not present in our real effort
experiment where payoffs are independent of the performance of others.

       It is certainly an area for further research to examine the importance of
democratic collective decision-making with other tasks studied in the literature, as the
impact of mechanisms on intrinsic motivations may largely depend on the various factors
including the characteristics of tasks (Gneezy, Meier and Rey-Biel, 2009).



VI. Conclusions

       Many papers had found evidence consistent with democracy having a direct
impact on behavior. However, it is difficult to prove such an effect due to the
endogeneity generated by democratic choice: groups that voted for a particular policy or
institution may be different from the average group. Dal Bó, Foster and Putterman (2010)
overcome this identification problem by using identification strategies that require
observing how subjects under the non-democratic mechanisms would have voted. They
find that a democracy effect exists in their laboratory experiment. Since the use of their



                                              22
identification strategies is limited by the requirement that votes be observed even for
those under the non-democratic mechanism, we provide here an alternative identification
strategy without that restrictive requirement.

       The new identification strategy presented here consists of calculating the average
behavior under democracy by weighting the behavior of subjects that voted one way or
another with their prevalence in the general population. We apply this new identification
strategy to the data from Dal Bó, Foster and Putterman (2010) and find, consistently with
their results, that there is a direct effect of democracy. We also apply the new
identification strategy to a new real-effort task experiment in which payment to subjects
depends only on their own performance and the choice of incentives. We find that the
effect of introducing piece rate payments relative to a flat rate does not depend on
whether they were introduce democratically or not. This suggests that the effect of the
democracy effect may depend on the existence of strategic interaction such that optimal
behavior may depend on beliefs about others (as in the coordination game in Dal Bó,
Foster and Putterman 2010).

       We expect that this new identification strategy, due to its less demanding
requirements, will allow for the study of the democracy effect in a greater number of
settings. Not only can be applied in laboratory experiments but it also may be useful in
field experiments and even in observational data.



References

Araujo, Felipe A., Erin Carbone, Lynn Conell-Price, Marli W. Dunietz, Ania
         Jaroszewicz, Rachel Landsman, Diego Lamé, Lise Vesterlund, Stephanie W.
         Wang, and Alistair J. Wilson (2015). “The slider task: an example of restricted
         inference on incentive effects.” Journal of the Economic Science Association,
         2(1): 1-12.

Baldassarri, Delia, and Guy Grossman (2011). "Centralized sanctioning and legitimate
         authority promote cooperation in humans," Proceedings of the National
         Academy of Sciences 108 (27), 11023-11027.




                                             23
Bardhan, Pranab (2000). “Irrigation and Cooperation: An Empirical Analysis of 48
         Irrigation Communities in South India.” Economic Development and Cultural
         Change, 48(4): 847–65.

Black, Sandra E. and Lisa M. Lynch (2001). “How to Compete: the Impact of Workplace
         Practices and Information Technology on Productivity.” Review of Economic
         and Statistics, 83(3): 434-445.

Bock, Olaf, Ingmar Baetge, Andreas Nicklisch, 2014. “hroot: Hamburg Registration and
         Organization Online Tool.” European Economic Review, 71: 117-120.

Bonin, John P., Derek C. Jones, and Louis Putterman (1993). “Theoretical and Empirical
         Research on Producers’ Cooperatives: Will Ever the Twain Meet?” Journal of
         Economic Literature, 31(3): 1290-1320.

Charness, Gary, Ramón Cobo-Reyes, Natalia Jiménez, Juan Lacomba and Francisco
         Lagos (2012). “The Hidden Advantage of Delegation: Pareto Improvements in a
         Gift Exchange Game.” American Economic Review, 102(5): 2358-79.

Chen, Josie I (2015). “Obedience to Rules with Mild Formal Sanctions: The Roles of
         Informal Sanctions and Voting.” Mimeo.

Corazzini, Luca, Sebastian Kube, Michel André Maréchal, and Antonio Nicolò (2014).
         “Elections and Deceptions: An Experimental Study on the Behavioral Effects of
         Democracy,” American Journal of Political Science 58(3): 579–592

Corgnet, Brice, Roberto Hernán-González, and Eric Schniter (2015). “Why real leisure
         really matters: incentive effects on real effort in the laboratory.” Experimental
         Economics, 18(2): 284–301.

Dal Bó, Pedro, Andrew Foster, and Louis Putterman (2010). “Institutions and Behavior:
         Experimental Evidence on the Effects of Democracy.” American Economic
         Review, 100(5): 2205-29.

Engl, Florian, Arno Riedl, and Roberto A. Weber (2018). “Spillover Effects of
         Institutions on Cooperative Behavior, Preferences, and Beliefs,” mimeo.




                                            24
Ertan, Arhan S., Talbot Page and Louis Putterman. 2005. “Who to Punish? Individual
         Decisions and Majority Rule in Mitigating the Free-Rider Problem?” European
         Economic Review, 53(5): 495-511.

Fischbacher, U. (2007). “z-Tree: Zurich Toolbox for Ready-made Economic
         Experiments,” Experimental Economics 10(2), 171-178.

Frey, Bruno S. (1998). “Institutions and Morale: The Crowding-out Effect.” In
         Economics, Values, and Organization, ed. Avner Ben-Ner and Louis Putterman,
         437–60. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Gneezy, Uri, Stephan Meier and Pedro Rey-Biel (2011). “When and Why Incentives
         (Don't) Work to Modify Behavior.” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
         25(4): 191-209.

Hamman, John R., Roberto A. Weber and Jonathan Woon (2011). “An Experimental
         Investigation of Electoral Delegation and the Provision of Public Goods,”
         American Journal of Political Science 55(4): 737–751.

Hoeffding, Wassily and Herbert Robbins (1948). “The central limit theorem for
         dependent variables.” Duke Mathematical Journal 15: 773–780.

Kamei, Kenju (2016). “Democracy and Resilient Pro-Social Behavioral Change: An
         Experimental Study.” Social Choice and Welfare 47(2): 359–378.

Levine, David I. and Laura D. Tyson (1990). “Participation, Productivity, and the Firm’s
         Environment.” In Paying for Productivity: A Look at the Evidence, ed. Alan S.
         Blinder. Washington: Brookings Institution.

Marcin, Isabel, Pedro Robalo, and Franziska Tausch (2016). “Institutional Endogeneity
         and Third-party Punishment in Social Dilemmas,” mimeo.

Markussen, Thomas, Louis Putterman, and Jean-Robert Tyran (2014). “Self-Organization
         for Collective Action: An Experimental Study of Voting on Sanction Regimes,”
         Review of Economic Studies 81(1): 301-324.

Markussen, Thomas, Ernesto Reuben, and Jean-Robert Tyran (2014). “Competition,
         Cooperation and Collective Choice,” The Economic Journal 124(February):
         163–195.



                                           25
Mellizo, Philip, Jeffrey Carpenter, and Peter Hans Matthews (2014). “Workplace
         democracy in the lab,” Industrial Relations Journal 45(4), 313–328.

Niederle, Muriel and Lise Vesterlund (2007). “Do Women Shy Away from Competition?
         Do Men Compete Too Much?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3): 1067-
         101.

Olken, Ben (2010). “Direct Democracy and Local Public Goods: Evidence from a Field
         Experiment in Indonesia,” American Political Science Review 104 (2): 243-267.

Potters, Jan, Martin Sefton, and Lise Vesterlund (2005). “After You – Endogenous
         Sequencing in Voluntary Contribution Games,” Journal of Public Economics,
         89(8): 1399–1419.

Schories, Fanny E. (2017). “Institutional Choice and Cooperation in Representative
         Democracies: An Experimental Approach,” mimeo.

Sutter, Matthias, Stefan Haigner and Martin G. Kocher. (2010). “Choosing the carrot or
         the stick? Endogenous institutional choice in social dilemma situations.” Review
         of Economic Studies 77(4): 1540-1566.

Tyran, Jean-Robert and Lans P. Feld. 2006. “Achieving Compliance when Legal
         Sanctions are Non-deterrent,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 108(1): 135–
         56.




                                           26
Appendix A: Proofs



Proof of proposition 1: The democracy effect statistic under environment E is:

                                  | , ,            1             | , ,              | ,

                    | , ,                     1                  | , ,                       | ,

where ε, ψ, ξ and τ are errors arising from sampling with expectation equal to zero given

that            ,             | , ,                | , ,     and             | ,              | ,       .

Therefore,

                         | , ,            1              | , ,              | ,                             .

Note that the terms in brackets is zero under the assumption of independent types given
formula (6) in section II. It remains to be shown that                                  0.

Given the law of iterated expectations we have that                                 |     , and it is
enough to show that           |       0. This is the case when types are independent as own
behavior depends only on ones types after controlling for the environment and the
mechanism. In the same way we can prove that                          0.□



Proof of proposition 2: For simplicity of exposition, we focus on environment A. For a
sample of size n with                     , the democracy effect statistic is
                    ∑∈    1                   ∑∈                 ∑∈    1                ∑∈


                          ∑∈
                                      ,

where     denotes the set of subjects under democracy (D), and                     denotes the set of
subjects under democracy who ended under environment A and voted for v.
        Note that the last term is the average of iid random variables, and by the central
limit theorem, converges to a Normal distribution. Since the last term is independent of
the first two ones, it remains to be shown that the first two terms also converge to a
Normal distribution as the number of observations increases.



                                                    27
          To prove this, we start by defining the following random variables:
1                  ,          1            are random variables denoting the vote of subject i, and
1     ∈                ∪           is a random variable denoting that subject i is under environment A.
                                                          ∑∈                      ∑∈                     ∑∈
We can now define some averages:                                    ,                          ,                    ,
∑∈                            ∑∈                         ∑∈
           ,                               and                              .

          The first two terms of the democracy effect can be written as                                                    . There

are in effect three complications associated with constructing an asymptotic distribution
for this expression. The first is that that                   and               are m-dependent given that the
realization of the voting is the same for all m subjects in a group, the second is that the
random variable                    is correlated with           and with                      and similarly for          , and the
third is that               and        are perfectly negatively correlated. All three issues are addressed
by Theorem 4 in Hoeffding and Robbins (1948) extended to the case of six correlated m-
dependent variables. This extension of Theorem 4 is as follows. Assume a sequence m-

dependent random vectors in                      such that                      0, and                   ∞ for          1,2, … ,6
                                                                    ∑                  ∑             ∑
and       1,2, … , . Assume that the function                                      ,           ,…,            has a total

differential at 0, … ,0 . Then as                  → ∞,        . has a limiting normal distribution. Note
that the constraint that the random variables have expectation equal to zero is done
without loss of generality as the random variables can be centered by subtracting their
expected value. That is, if                              0, then we define                                    and
     ∑             ∑               ∑              ∑                         ∑                            ∑
               ,             ,…,                                        ,                          ,…,                        and

we work then with the function                     . .
          Note that in our case all the random variable are between 0 and 1, and, hence, the
cube of their absolute value is less than infinity. Finally, it is straightforward to show that

                           has a total differential at the expected value of its arguments (what is crucial

here is that                           0 and              0 given that                     ∈ 0,1 , it would fail if
everybody voted in the same way). Thus, the conditions for Theorem 4 in Hoeffding and




                                                               28
Robbins (1948) hold, the first two terms converge to Normal distributions and the
proposition follows. □




                                           29
Appendix B: Experimental Instructions



B.1. Voting Treatment:



                                        Welcome
   This is an experiment on decision-making. Please turn off all of your electronic
   devices (e.g., mobile phone).

   Each of you will be paid at the end of the experiment. How much you will be paid
   depends on what you do during the experiment. All interactions in the experiment
   will be anonymous and through computers. Your identity will be kept private.

   During the experiment you are not allowed to communicate with other participants. If
   you have a question, please raise your hand.

   This experiment has two parts. Each part lasts 20 minutes. Your payment is
   determined potentially based on your own performance in Part 2. At the end of the
   experiment, Part 1 or Part 2 will be randomly (with a probability of 50%) selected by
   the computer for payment.

                                           Part 1

   In this part, you have 20 minutes to answer a series of questions. For each question,
   you will be asked to add five randomly generated two-digit numbers as seen in the
   screen. Once you add five two-digit numbers in a question, fill the blank with your
   answer and click the “OK” button, you will move on to the next addition question:
   five two-digit numbers will be randomly re-generated.

   Your payment will be calculated with the following formula in Part 1:

                               A fixed amount of 8 pounds

   Note that your payment will be fixed. It will not depend on the number of your own
   correct answers or the responses of others. You will be paid in total 11 pounds
   (including the £3 show-up fee) if Part 1 is selected for payment.

   During the experiment, you can take a rest anytime by using Google Chrome (internet
   browser). You can do whatever you want to do (e.g., check emails, read news) with
   the internet browser. As shown in the screen image below, there is a “browse” button
   at the bottom of the screen. If you click on the “browse” button, the addition question
   will disappear (your screen will become blank) and Google Chrome will pop up.
   Click on the “work” button if you would like to get back to work. Google Chrome



                                           30
will disappear and your screen will be switched to the work site (the question you
were working on) if you click on the “work” button. Notice that the timer will not
stop when you are browsing.
                         [Screen image of the addition task:]




Note: The numbers shown above are for illustrative purpose only.
 [If you click on the “browse” button, Google Chrome will pop up and the addition
                             task will disappear:]




[When you click on the “work” button, the google chrome window will disappear and
     your screen will return to the addition task you were working on before:]


                                        31
Once the 20 minutes are over, you will be informed of the number of your correct
responses in the addition task and will move on to Part 2. Any questions?

                                        Part 2

Part 2 consists of a voting stage and an addition-task stage that lasts for 20 minutes.
In this part, participants will be randomly divided into groups of three. This means
that you will be randomly assigned to one group with two other participants. You will
not know who these participants are, nor will they know who you are.

Before answering the adding questions, you will vote which formula to be used for
payment calculation in your group. There are two possible formulas:

Formula A: a fixed amount of 8 pounds
Formula B: 25 pence per correct response

Formula A is the same formula used in Part 1. In contrast, you will be able to earn
money dependent on your answers in Formula B. Note, however, that your payment
in Formula B will depend on the number of your own correct answers; and it will not
depend on the responses of others.

All three persons in your group will use the formula that receives a majority of votes
(i.e., 2 or 3 votes). You will be informed of the formula chosen by your group.

In Part 2, you will have 20 minutes to solve as many addition problems as you can.
As in Part 1, you can take a rest by browsing internet (see the screen images on the



                                        32
   previous pages). Notice that, as in Part 1, the timer will not stop when you are
   browsing.

   If Part 2 is randomly selected for payout, you will be paid a show-up fee of £3 and an
   amount depending on the selected payment formula and the number of your own
   correct responses (if Formula B was selected).

   Any questions?




B.2. Random choice of formula:



                                       Welcome
This is an experiment on decision-making. Please turn off all of your electronic devices
(e.g., mobile phone).

Each of you will be paid at the end of the experiment. How much you will be paid
depends on what you do during the experiment. All interactions in the experiment will be
anonymous and through computers. Your identity will be kept private.

During the experiment you are not allowed to communicate with other participants. If
you have a question, please raise your hand.

This experiment has two parts. Each part lasts 20 minutes. Your payment is determined
potentially based on your own performance in Part 2. At the end of the experiment, Part 1
or Part 2 will be randomly (with a probability of 50%) selected by the computer for
payment.

                                          Part 1

In this part, you have 20 minutes to answer a series of questions. For each question, you
will be asked to add five randomly generated two-digit numbers as seen in the screen.
Once you add five two-digit numbers in a question, fill the blank with your answer and
click the “OK” button, you will move on to the next addition question: five two-digit
numbers will be randomly re-generated.

Your payment will be calculated with the following formula in Part 1:

                                    A fixed amount of 8 pounds




                                            33
Note that your payment will be fixed. It will not depend on the number of your own
correct answers or the responses of others. You will be paid in total 11 pounds (including
the £3 show-up fee) if Part 1 is selected for payment.

During the experiment, you can take a rest anytime by using Google Chrome (internet
browser). You can do whatever you want to do (e.g., check emails, read news) with the
internet browser. As shown in the screen image below, there is a “browse” button at the
bottom of the screen. If you click on the “browse” button, the addition question will
disappear (your screen will become blank) and Google Chrome will pop up. Click on the
“work” button if you would like to get back to work. Google Chrome will disappear and
your screen will be switched to the work site (the question you were working on) if you
click on the “work” button. Notice that the timer will not stop when you are browsing.
                           [Screen image of the addition task:]




Note: The numbers shown above are for illustrative purpose only.
 [If you click on the “browse” button, Google Chrome will pop up and the addition task
                                     will disappear:]




                                            34
 [When you click on the “work” button, the google chrome window will disappear and
      your screen will return to the addition task you were working on before:]




Once the 20 minutes are over, you will be informed of the number of your correct
responses in the addition task and will move on to Part 2. Any questions?

                                        Part 2




                                          35
In this part, participants will be randomly divided into groups of three. This means that
you will be randomly assigned to one group with two other participants. You will not
know who these participants are, nor will they know who you are.

Before answering the adding questions, the computer will randomly (i.e., with a
probability of 50%) choose the formula to be used in your group. There are two possible
formulas:

           Formula A: a fixed amount of 8 pounds
           Formula B: 25 pence per correct response

Formula A is the same formula used in Part 1. In contrast, you will be able to earn money
dependent on your answers in Formula B. Note, however, that your payment in Formula
B will depend on the number of your own correct answers; and it will not depend on the
responses of others.

You will be informed of which formula the computer randomly selected. All three
persons in your group will use the same payment formula.

In Part 2, you will have 20 minutes to solve as many addition problems as you can. As in
Part 1, you can take a rest by browsing internet (see the screen images on the previous
pages). Notice that, as in Part 1, the timer will not stop when you are browsing.

If Part 2 is randomly selected for payout, you will be paid a show-up fee of £3 and an
amount depending on the selected payment formula and the number of your own correct
responses (if Formula B was given).

Any questions?




                                            36
