                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     TAXING TOP INCOMES IN A WORLD OF IDEAS

                                       Charles I. Jones

                                     Working Paper 25725
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25725


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2019




John Cochrane and I initiated this project together, but because of other pressing commitments,
he had to withdraw. I am extremely grateful for his many insights. I also thank Ufuk Akcigit,
Sebastian Di Tella, Ben Hebert, Pete Klenow, Ben Lockwood, Casey Mulligan, Emmanuel Saez,
Stefanie Stantcheva, Chris Tonetti, Gabriel Zucman, and seminar participants at Berkeley, BU,
Chicago, Columbia, Stanford, and Vanderbilt for helpful suggestions. Andres Yany provided
expert research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Charles I. Jones. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Taxing Top Incomes in a World of Ideas
Charles I. Jones
NBER Working Paper No. 25725
April 2019
JEL No. E0,H2,O4

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper considers the taxation of top incomes when the following conditions apply: (i) new
ideas drive economic growth, (ii) the reward for creating a successful innovation is a top income,
and (iii) innovation cannot be perfectly targeted by a separate research subsidy --- think about the
business methods of Walmart, the creation of Uber, or the "idea" of Amazon.com. These
conditions lead to a new force affecting the optimal top tax rate: by slowing the creation of the
new ideas that drive aggregate GDP, top income taxation reduces everyone's income, not just the
income at the top. When the creation of ideas is the ultimate source of economic growth, this
force sharply constrains both revenue-maximizing and welfare-maximizing top tax rates. For
example, for extreme parameter values, maximizing the welfare of the middle class requires a
negative top tax rate: the higher income that results from the subsidy to innovation more than
makes up for the lost redistribution. More generally, the calibrated model suggests that
incorporating ideas as a driver of economic growth cuts the optimal top marginal tax rate
substantially relative to the basic Saez calculation.


Charles I. Jones
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305-4800
and NBER
chad.jones@stanford.edu
                      TAXING TOP INCOMES IN A WORLD OF IDEAS                         1


1. Introduction

This paper considers the taxation of top incomes when the following conditions apply:
(i) new ideas drive economic growth, (ii) the reward for creating a successful new idea
is a top income, and (iii) innovation is broad-based and cannot be perfectly targeted by
a separate research subsidy.
   The classic tradeoff in the optimal taxation literature is between redistribution and
the incentive effects that determine the “size of the pie.” But in most of that literature
— starting with Mirrlees (1971), Diamond (1998), Saez (2001) and Diamond and Saez
(2011) — the “size of the pie” effects are relatively limited. In particular, when a top
earner reduces her effort because of a tax, that reduces her income but may have no or
only modest effects on the incomes of everyone else in the economy.
   In constrast, I embed the optimal tax literature in the idea-based growth theory of
Romer (1990), Aghion and Howitt (1992), and Grossman and Helpman (1991). Accord-
ing to this literature, the enormous increase in living standards over the last century
is the result of the discovery of new ideas — perhaps by a relatively small number of
people. To the extent that top income taxation distorts this innovation, it can impact
not only the income of the innovator but also the incomes of everyone else in the
economy.
   The nonrivalry of ideas is key to this result and illustrates why incorporating phys-
ical capital or human capital into the top tax calculation is insufficient. If you add one
unit of human capital or one unit of physical capital to an economy — think of adding
a computer or an extra year of education for one person — you make one worker more
productive, because these goods are rival. But if you add a new idea — think of the
computer code for the original spreadsheet or the blueprint for the electric generator
— you can make any number of workers more productive. Because ideas are nonrival,
each person’s wage is an increasing function of the entire stock of ideas. A distortion
that reduces the production of new ideas therefore impacts everyone’s income, not just
the income of the inventor herself.
   A standard policy implication in this literature is that it may be optimal to subsidize
formal R&D, and one could imagine subsidizing research but taxing top incomes as
a way to simultaneously achieve both efficient research and socially-desirable redis-
tribution. Instead, we consider a world with both basic and applied research. Basic
      2                                      CHARLES I. JONES



research uncovers fundamental truths about the way the world works and is readily
subsidized with government funding. Applied research then turns these fundamen-
tal truths into consumer products or firm-level process innovations. This is the task
of entrepreneurs and may not be readily subsidized as formal R&D. Think about the
creation of Walmart or Amazon.com, organizational innovations in the health care and
education industries, the latest software underlying the Google search engine, or even
the creation of nonrival goods like a best-selling novel or the most recent hit song.
Formal R&D is a small part of what economists would like to measure as efforts to
innovate. For example, around 70% of measured R&D occurs in the manufacturing
industry. In 2012, only 18 million workers (out of US employment that exceeds 130
million) were employed by firms that conducted any official R&D.1 According to their
2018 corporate filings, Walmart and Goldman-Sachs report doing zero R&D.
      The idea creation and implementation that occurs beyond formal R&D may be
distorted by the tax system. In particular, high incomes are the prize that motivates
entrepreneurs to turn a basic research insight that results from formal R&D into a prod-
uct or process that ultimately benefits consumers. High marginal tax rates reduce this
effort and therefore reduce innovation and the incomes of everyone in the economy.
      Taking this force into account is important quantitatively. For example, consider
raising the top marginal tax rate from 50% to 75%. As we discuss below, in the United
States, the share of income that this top marginal rate applies to is around 10%, so the
change raises about 2.5% of GDP in revenue before the behavioral response. In the
baseline calibration, such an increase in the top marginal rate reduces innovation and
lowers GDP per person in the long run by around 6 percent. With a utilitarian welfare
criterion, this obviously reduces welfare. But even redistributing the 2.5% of GDP to the
bottom half of the population would leave them worse off on average: the 6% decline
in their incomes is not offset by the 5% increase from redistribution. In other words,
unless the social welfare function puts disproportionate weight on the poorest people
in society, raising the top marginal rate from 50% to 75% reduces social welfare.
      We consider various revenue- and welfare-maximizing top tax rate calculations, first
ignoring the effect on innovation and then taking it into account. For a broad range
of parameter values, the effects are large. For example, in a baseline calculation, the

  1
      These numbers are from Wolfe (2014).
                      TAXING TOP INCOMES IN A WORLD OF IDEAS                          3


revenue-maximizing top tax rate that ignores the innovation spillover is 92%. In con-
trast, the rate that incorporates innovation and maximizes a utilitarian social welfare
function is just 22%. Moreover, if ideas play an even more significant role than assumed
in this baseline, it is possible for the optimal top income tax rate to turn negative: the
increase in everyone’s income associated with subsidizing innovation exceeds the gains
associated with redistribution.
   Importantly, however, the point of this paper is not to estimate “the” optimal top
income tax rate. Such a calculation involves many additional considerations docu-
mented in the existing literature (reviewed below) that are omitted from the analysis
here. Instead, the point is that future work aimed at calculating such a number will
certainly want to explicitly consider the effects of top income taxation on the creation
of new ideas. They appear to be quantitatively important.
   The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. After a brief literature review,
Section 2 lays out the steady-state of a rich dynamic growth model and considers the
top tax rate that maximizes revenue, along the lines of Diamond and Saez (2011) and
others. Section 3 then considers the tax scheme that maximizes the welfare of the
“bottom 90%” or the median voter (they are the same people here). This turns out
to matter quantitatively: the planner cares about distorting the creation of ideas not
merely because it affects the revenue that can be earned by regular workers, but be-
cause it affects their consumption and economic growth directly. This setup is espe-
cially convenient for two reasons. First, it yields a nice closed-form solution. Second,
it allows us to remain agnostic about the source of the behavioral tax elasticity for top
earners: whether this comes from an effort choice or an occupational choice or from
something else is irrelevant; we just need to know the elasticity.
   Section 4 goes further and finds the tax system that maximizes a utilitarian social
welfare function. While this objective function is obviously of interest, the solution does
not admit a closed-form expression. In addition, we must be explicit about the nature
of the behavioral tax elasticity for top earners, which makes the model less general.
Section 5 discusses additional results and extensions, including empirical evidence
on growth and top income taxation. Finally, Section 6 builds the full dynamic growth
model that nests the simple model as a special case in the steady state.
   4                                   CHARLES I. JONES



1.1 Literature Review

Partly motivated by the rise in top income inequality documented by Piketty and Saez
(2003), there has been an explosion of work on top income taxation in recent years.
Badel and Huggett (2015), Rothschild and Scheuer (2015), Sachs, Tsyvinski and Werquin
(2016), and Lockwood, Nathanson and Weyl (2017) allow for imperfect substitution
in production, general exernalities, or human capital spillovers so that the decisions
of top earners can affect the wages of others in the economy. Ales and Sleet (2016)
consider a different kind of spillover: the taxation of CEOs in an assignment model like
Gabaix and Landier (2008) or Tervio (2008) in which CEO effort affects the profits of
the firm. Badel and Huggett (2017) considers the revenue-maximizing top tax rate in a
general setting when incomes at lower brackets can be affected by the top tax rate and
when top earners possibly have other sources of income taxed at different rates that
are themselves affected by the top rate. In all these cases, the additional forces typically
lower the optimal top tax rate relative to the Diamond and Saez (2011) numbers.
   Among these, Lockwood, Nathanson and Weyl (2017) is closest to the present paper.
They consider optimal nonlinear taxation in a full Mirrleesian setup when different
people can choose different careers. They suggest that some careers, such as research
or engineering, generate positive externalities in the economy while others, such as
finance and law, may generate negative externalities. The fully-optimal tax system
would assign different tax rates to these different career options, but if forced to pick
a single top tax rate, the planner has to average across these externalities in some way.
I instead focus explicitly on the research dimension, where leveraging the extensive
endogenous growth literature allows us to make more precise statements about this
particular externality.
   Piketty, Saez and Stantcheva (2014) emphasize that to the extent that some of the
standard behavioral elasticity of top incomes with respect to taxes is associated with
rent seeking, the relevant elasticity for optimal top income taxation is even lower. Ak-
cigit, Baslandze and Stantcheva (2016b) explore the international mobility of superstar
inventors in response to top income tax rate differences and find a large elasticity,
particularly for foreign inventors. Moretti and Wilson (2017) show that the migration
patterns of star scientists across U.S. states are highly elastic with respect to tax rates.
Kindermann and Krueger (2014) consider a rich overlapping generations model with
                       TAXING TOP INCOMES IN A WORLD OF IDEAS                          5


idiosyncratic risk and show that top tax rates as high as 90% may be optimal. Scheuer
and Werning (2017) show how the Saez (2001) formula generalizes in the presence of
“superstar” effects. In particular, they show that the same basic formula applies, but
only when one recognizes that the income distribution is itself endogenous to the tax
schedule.
   Akcigit, Grigsby, Nicholas and Stantcheva (2018) provide extensive empirical evi-
dence that innovation responds to tax incentives. They use a combination of patent
data, state-level corporate and personal income tax rates, and changes in federal tax
rates in both “macro” and “micro” level research designs in the U.S. in the 20th cen-
tury. For example, they find that the elasticity of patents, the number of inventors,
and patent citations with respect to either personal income taxes or corporate tax rates
(in particular, with respect to the “keep rate” 1 − τ ) are all larger than 2 in magnitude:
increasing the keep rate by 10% raises innovation by more than 20 percent(!). These
macro elasticities include movements of innovation from one state to the other, and
therefore are an upper bound on the net effect most relevant in this paper. But they also
report various estimates of the net effect that are at least 0.6 in magnitude — increasing
the keep rate by 10% raises innovation by at least 6%.
   Another closely related paper is Jaimovich and Rebelo (2017), who study the growth
consequences of taxation. They focus on a puzzle in the endogenous growth literature:
if long-run growth rates are sensitive to tax policy, then why is it that we see so little
evidence of this in time series and cross-sectional evidence? They use a version of the
Romer (1990) growth model in which researchers have heterogeneous talent to study
the effect of a (linear) tax on firm profits and find that the effect of taxes is nonlinear.
When tax rates are low, tax changes have relatively muted effects because the marginal
researchers have relatively low talent. But as tax rates get high, they start to distort the
research effort of highly-talented researchers (they assume a Pareto talent distribution),
and this can have large effects. They show that a social planner in their model would
choose a tax rate on profits of around 30-35%, close to the observed corporate profits
tax rate, and in the range where the effect of taxes on growth is small.
   This paper studies optimal taxation in a growth setting and differs in several ways.
First, the focus is explicitly on top income taxation. We embed the growth framework
in the setting of the tax literature and characterize the various forces that influence
   6                                    CHARLES I. JONES



the optimal top tax rate. Second, considering nonlinear taxes rather than a linear tax
on profits is important. For example, in Jaimovich and Rebelo (2017), the optimal
nonlinear schedule might feature a subsidy for research incomes in the intermediate
range followed by a high tax rate on top incomes. The extra bracket in the tax sched-
ule would allow the planner to subsidize research so that the right number of people
work in R&D while also using the high rate to transfer income away from top earners.
We incorporate an explicit subsidy to formal R&D in the framework and consider the
additional role played by nonlinear income taxation. Finally, the growth model used
by Jaimovich and Rebelo (2017) features strong growth effects: a change in tax policy
can permanently alter the growth rate of the economy. A wealth of evidence suggests
that this framework may overstate the effect of policy changes; for example, see Bloom,
Jones, Van Reenen and Webb (2019). I instead explore a model in which policies have
long-run level effects, and the size of this level effect is a key parameter influencing the
top tax rate; Jaimovich and Rebelo (2017) essentially assume this parameter is infinity
while we consider values of between 1/8 and 1.
   On a related point, Bell, Chetty, Jaravel, Petkova and Van Reenen (2017) combine
tax records from the IRS and patenting data for individual inventors to suggest that the
elasticity of occupational choice for inventors with respect to the top tax rate is small.
Their argument is that the distribution of earnings outcomes for inventors is highly
skewed, so the decision to become an inventor is like buying a lottery ticket. Because of
risk aversion, taxes on top incomes have a small effect on occupational choice in their
setting; top tax rates hit only when the marginal utility of consumption is very low.
Bell, Chetty, Jaravel, Petkova and Van Reenen (2019) emphasize that exposure to role
models who are innovators is empirically an important determinant of who becomes
an innovator. It is partly for this reason and because of the points made above related
to Jaimovich and Rebelo (2017) that this paper completely abstracts from effects on the
extensive margin of occupational choice. Instead, as these papers acknowledge, the
conventional effects of taxes on effort choice — the focus here — may still be important.
(And that is perhaps one way to reconcile these studies with the evidence cited earlier
in this literature review of relative large effects of taxes on inventive effort, patents, and
citations.)
   Hall and Woodward (2010) provide a different perspective. Using an extensive data
                       TAXING TOP INCOMES IN A WORLD OF IDEAS                         7


set on venture capital funding from 1987 until 2008, they show that the returns to en-
trepreneurs are extremely skewed: nearly 3/4ths of entrepreneurs receive nothing at
exit, while a few receive more than a billion dollars. An entrepreneur with a coefficient
of relative risk aversion of two values this lottery with a certainty equivalent of only
slightly more than zero. An implication is that the tax rate that applies to the successful
outcome can have a substantial influence on entrepreneurial activity.
   Finally, another important consideration is other policies that may be more effec-
tive at stimulating innovation. For example, perhaps providing a strong social safety net
and lenient bankruptcy laws will provide insurance on the downside that encourages
entrepreneurs to take risks. Or perhaps high top tax rates encourage talented people to
become entrepreneurs instead of hedge fund managers, actually stimulating innova-
tion. Clearly any calculation attempting to determine the optimal top tax rate will need
to take all these forces into account. This paper takes a first step at showing how the
theory of optimal top income taxation can be combined with idea-based growth theory,
focusing on a relatively conventional setting and exploring a range of parameter values
consistent with the existing literature.




2. The Revenue-Maximizing Tax Rate in a Simple Model

The simple model in this section provides the key intuition for our main result. Later,
in Section 6, we show that the simple model is a special case of the balanced growth
path of a richer dynamic model. The model and notation are similar to Jones (2005).
   The economy contains an exogenous number of entrepreneurs who do applied
research, Sa , an exogenous number of “basic” researchers, Sb , and an exogenous num-
ber of workers, L. This setup therefore abstracts from occupational choice, for the
reasons discussed above. Entrepreneurs get to choose their effort, e; workers and basic
researchers each supply one unit of labor inelastically.
   There is a long history in the literature on R&D distinguishing between “invention”
and “innovation” or between “basic” and “applied” research. Basic science discov-
ers fundamental truths or inventions, and then applied research turns this into goods
that benefit firms or consumers. Applied research is essential in that you cannot eat
chemical formulas; basic research is essential in that applied research is based on the
       8                                     CHARLES I. JONES



fundamental discoveries. In the context of optimal income taxation, the funding side of
this distinction is also relevant. Much of government funding for research is focused on
basic research, while we think of top income taxation as being relevant for the applied
innovations that create consumer goods or process innovations.2
       The production function for consumption uses applied ideas, A, and two types of
labor, managers M̃ and workers L:


                                           Y = Aγ M̃ ψ L1−ψ .                                          (1)


The purpose of these different types of labor will be explained more later.
       Next, we need to specify a production function for ideas. Section 6 develops a full
dynamic growth model in which ideas are a stock and researchers produce a flow of
new ideas every period. In the long run, the stock of ideas is proportional to the flow,
which in turn depends on the number of researchers. For the majority of this paper,
we focus on the balanced growth path of the full model; this makes the intuition and
the analysis as clear as possible. The tradeoff is that the analysis ignores transition
dynamics, but given how little we know about the transition paths in these models,
that tradeoff is worth making. Along the balanced growth path, the stock of applied
ideas is
                                          A = νa E[ez]Sa B β .                                         (2)

The long-run stock of applied ideas is proportional to the number of entrepreneurs, Sa .
The factor of proportionality, in turn, depends on effort, e, talent, z, and the stock of ba-
sic research ideas, B. The expectation is needed because entrepreneurs are heteroge-
neous in their talent, and the effort choice may depend on this talent. (In equilibrium,
it turns out that e is independent of z, so we can eventually write this as just E[ez] = ēz̄.)
Also, the larger the stock of basic research ideas, B, the higher the number of applied
ideas in the long run; that is, we assume β > 0.
       Finally, basic researchers produce basic research ideas, where once again stocks and
flows are proportional:
                                               B = νb Sb .                                             (3)


   2
    For a recent application of this distinction in the growth literature, see Akcigit, Hanley and Serrano-
Velarde (2016a).
                       TAXING TOP INCOMES IN A WORLD OF IDEAS                           9


To keep things simple for the moment, we assume the stock of basic knowledge, B, is
directly proportional to the number of basic researchers.
   Combining these equations, final output — and consumption since there is no cap-
ital — in steady state is
                                              γ
                               Y = νE[ez]Sa Sbβ M̃ ψ L1−ψ                                   (4)

where ν ≡ νa νbβ . In the full dynamic model of Section 6, we consider a much richer
structure for the idea production functions, including dynamic feedback from past
basic and applied ideas into the production of new ideas as well as diminishing returns
to research effort at a point in time. The key equation (4) still turns out to be the solution
in this richer structure; for example, see equation (46) in Section 6.
   In the dynamic version of this model, all the population variables — Sa , Sb , M̃ , and
L — grow at a constant population growth rate. The overall degree of increasing returns
to scale in the economy is then given by γ(1 + β), and this combination of parameters
plays a crucial role in the model.
   First and foremost, this increasing returns results from the nonrivalry of ideas, em-
phasized by Romer (1990). Because this force plays such a crucial role in what follows,
it deserves some elaboration. The parameter γ results from the nonrivalry of applied
ideas in equation (1). The parameter β results from the nonrivalry of basic ideas as an
input in applied research.
   How does the nonrivalry of ideas explain economic growth? According to Romer
(1990), the key is that nonrivalry gives rise to increasing returns to scale. The standard
replication argument is a fundamental justification for constant returns to scale in pro-
duction. If we wish to double the production of computers from a factory, one feasible
way to do it is to build an equivalent factory across the street and populate it with
equivalent workers, materials, and so on. That is, we replicate the factory exactly. This
means that production with rival goods is, at least as a useful benchmark, a constant
returns process.
   What Romer stressed is that the nonrivalry of ideas is an integral part of this replica-
tion argument: firms do not need to reinvent the idea for a computer each time a new
computer factory is built. Instead, the same idea — the detailed set of instructions for
how to make a computer — can be used in the new factory, or indeed in any number
of factories, because it is nonrival. Since there are constant returns to scale in the rival
   10                                    CHARLES I. JONES



inputs (the factory, workers, and materials), there are therefore increasing returns to the
rival inputs and ideas taken together: if you double the rival inputs and the quality or
quantity of the ideas, you will more than double total production. These insights are
embedded in the production function in equation (1): there is constant returns in the
rival inputs (here, just labor) and increasing returns to ideas and the rival inputs taken
together. The parameter γ measures the overall degree of increasing returns associated
with the nonrivalry of applied ideas. A similar argument explains the parameter β and
the nonrivalry of basic ideas in applied research.
   This discussion hints at why distortions to the creation of ideas can be so costly. If
you add one unit of human capital or one unit of physical capital to an economy —
think of adding a computer or an extra year of education for one person — you make
one worker more productive. But if you add a new idea — think of the computer code
for the first spreadsheet, or the design of the iphone, or the blueprint for the latest
electric generator — you can make any number of workers more productive. GDP per
person is proportional to the total stock of ideas, not to ideas per person. A distortion
that reduces the production of new ideas therefore impacts everyone’s income.
   In principle, there are several allocative decisions that need to be made, even in
this simple economy. The overall population needs to be divided into entrepreneurs,
basic researchers, and workers, and the entrepreneurs need to decide how much to
work. In what follows, we take the first allocation as given — for example, we assume
that a formal research subsidy puts the right number of people into basic research and
incentivizes them to provide the right amount of effort. Instead, we focus on the extent
to which the behavior of entrepreneurs is distorted by the top marginal tax rate. Hence,
the only allocative decision in this simple economy is the choice of e: how hard do
entrepreneurs work to create new ideas and make everyone in the economy richer?
Importantly, note that the optimal allocation of people between basic research and
labor is invariant to the entrepreneur’s effort choice. For example, if L + Sb = N (as
in the full model in Section 6), let b ≡ Sb /N be the fraction of people who work in basic
research. Then total output can be written as Y = Const · bβγ (1 − b) and the output-
                            b
maximizing allocation is   1−b   = βγ, independent of the effort choice.
                         TAXING TOP INCOMES IN A WORLD OF IDEAS                         11


2.1 Diamond, Saez, and the Revenue-Maximizing Tax Rate



Following the insights of Diamond (1998), Saez (2001) and Diamond and Saez (2011)
etc., one can make good progress on this question by keeping the model of effort choice
as general as possible. This is particularly true if we take the tax schedule as given and
focus on finding the top tax rate that maximizes revenue.
   Managers are included in the model to capture the traditional Diamond and Saez
(2011) tradeoff. In particular, we assume M̃ := E(ez)M , where M is the exogenous
supply of managers, e denotes their effort, and z denotes their (heterogeneous) talent.
We abuse notation slightly in using the same notation for the talent and effort of man-
agers that we used for entrepreneurs. Even ignoring ideas completely by setting γ = 0,
the model will feature a “traditional” role for top income taxation working through
managers.
   We assume a two-part tax schedule: all income below w̄ is taxed at rate τ0 , while all
income above is taxed at τ . Let w be the wage of unskilled work, wb the wage of basic
research, ws the wage per unit of effective effort (ez) of entrepreneurs, and wm the wage
per unit of effective effort of managers. We assume basic researchers are not taxed at
the top rate and that the supply of managers is sufficiently small that their income is
taxed at the top rate.
   Total tax revenue in the economy is then


T = τ0 (wL + wSb + wa E(ez)Sa + wm E(ez)M ) + (τ − τ0 )[(wa E(ez) − w̄)Sa + (wm E(ez) − w̄)M ]
    |                  {z                } |                          {z                    }
                 all income pays τ0                    income above w̄ pays an additional τ − τ0

   As we show later in Section 6, the share of output paid to entrepreneurs is a con-
stant, ρs , that is invariant to the top tax rate, as is the share of output paid to managers.
That is
                          wa E(ez)Sa          wm E(ez)M
                                     = ρs and           = ρm .                               (5)
                              Y                   Y
Note that in general, ρm could differ from ψ because ideas must be paid for in some
way as well, and this means that factors are not typically paid their marginal products.
                                                           wL+wb Sb
Defining ρ ≡ ρs + ρm , the remainder of GDP, 1 − ρ =         Y      ,   is paid to workers and
basic researchers.
      12                                            CHARLES I. JONES



      With these definitions, total tax revenue can be rewritten as


                               T = τ0 Y (τ ) + (τ − τ0 )[ρY (τ ) − w̄(Sa + M )].                     (6)


That is, all income gets taxed at the base rate τ0 , while the income above w̄, due to
entrepreneurs and managers, generates extra revenue to the extent that the top tax rate
exceeds τ0 .
      The top tax rate that maximizes tax revenue can be found by setting the derivative
of equation (6) equal to zero. This first-order condition can be written as

                                                         dY
                                   (ρ − ρ̄) Y        +       · [(1 − ρ)τ0 + ρτ ] = 0                 (7)
                                   | {z }                |dτ       {z         }
                                mechanical gain               behavioral loss

               w̄(Sa +M )
where ρ̄ ≡         Y      .   The first term of this equation is the mechanical revenue gain that
comes from raising the top tax rate, holding Y constant. The second term is the loss
in revenue that comes from changes in economic behavior leading to a reduction in Y .
Maximizing revenue sets the sum of these effects to zero.
      This can be rearranged to give an expression for the revenue-maximizing top tax
                                     d log Y
rate τ ∗ . Letting ηY ,1−τ ≡      d log(1−τ )   and ∆ρ ≡ ρ − ρ̄, we have3

                                                               1−ρ
                                          ∗
                                                    1 − τ0 ·   ∆ρ · ηY ,1−τ
                                         τrm    =             ρ               ,                      (8)
                                                         1+   ∆ρ ηY ,1−τ


where the subscript “rm” stands for “revenue maximization.”
      This equation can be compared to the basic result in Saez (2001) and Diamond
                                                  1
and Saez (2011), which is τds =                 1+αζ .   The result here differs in two key ways. First,
the term involving τ0 is absent from the numerator in the Diamond-Saez formula: the
reason is that these papers do not consider any interaction effects between the efforts
of top earners and the wages earned by workers outside the top. Such a term has been
introduced by follow-up research by Badel and Huggett (2015), Rothschild and Scheuer
(2015), and Lockwood, Nathanson and Weyl (2017), among others. Those papers allow
for general exernalities or human capital “spillovers” while Badel and Huggett (2017)
derives such a formula in a very general setting. The approach here differs in that we

  3
      A more complete derivation is available in the appendix.
                         TAXING TOP INCOMES IN A WORLD OF IDEAS                      13


focus explicitly on the effects that arise in idea-based growth models. This could be
viewed as a special case of some of the more general formulations. But the value is that
this is a special case that we understand well because of the large amount of research
on idea-based growth models. We therefore obtain stronger intuitions and quantitative
estimates as a result.
   The second difference relative to the Diamond-Saez formula is in the nature of the
elasticity, ηY ,1−τ . In Diamond and Saez, the fundamental elasticity (called ζ above)
is that of average top income with respect to the take-home rate. Here, instead, it is
economy-wide income, again reflecting the fact that top taxes can affect the economy
more broadly. The entirety of the growth model is embedded in ηY ,1−τ , and this elastic-
ity will be discussed further in a moment.
   It is helpful to keep in mind the following intuition for the various terms that appear
in the solutions. The intuition can typically be found by looking back at equation (7).
For example, ∆ρ ≡ ρ− ρ̄ is the tax base to which the top marginal rate applies, capturing
the mechanical effect. Similarly, 1 − ∆ρ is the tax based to which the τ0 rate applies.
Next, ρηY ,1−τ is the effect of top taxes on the revenue of top earners via the behavioral
response. And τ0 (1 − ρ)ηY ,1−τ is the effect on bottom tax revenue working through the
behavioral response of top earners.
   The term ρ/∆ρ in the denominator parallels the Pareto distribution exponent in the
Diamond-Saez formula (which they call “α”). It is the ratio of the total income of top
earners divided by the share of that income that is taxed at the top rate. The smaller is
this ratio, the higher is the income above the top rate, and the higher is the revenue-
maximizing top tax rate.
   To go further with this equation, of course, we now need to characterize ηY ,1−τ ,
which is itself an equilibrium object. From the production function in (4) — recog-
nizing that M̃ := E(ez)M — we have


                                     ηY ,1−τ = (γ + ψ)ζ                                   (9)


where ζ is defined to be the elasticity of E[ez] with respect to 1 − τ . The elasticity ζ is
the key elasticity that enters the Diamond and Saez formula: what is the elasticity of a
top earner’s income with respect to the take-home rate? For now, we will just leave this
as a parameter and calibrate it the way Diamond and Saez do — in particular, we will
   14                                    CHARLES I. JONES



consider a low value of ζ ≈ 0.2 and a higher value of ζ ≈ 0.5.
   The parameter ψ captures the importance of “managers” — more accurately, top
earners who are not idea creators — in the economy. We calibrate it to a small but
seemingly reasonable value of 0.15. As we explain below, this parameter plays a minor
role in the results that follow.
   The other key parameter, γ, captures the increasing returns associated with applied
ideas: when an entrepreneur creates and implements a new idea, it raises everyone’s
income. The more important are ideas, the more important this “spillover” will be.
   There is no consensus value of γ in the growth literature. As shown in the full model
in Section 6 — see especially equation (48) — along a balanced growth path, the growth
rate of income per person satisfies:


                                       gy = γ(1 + β)gS .                              (10)


That is, the long-run growth rate of income per person is proportional to the growth
rate of researchers. The factor of proportionality is γ(1 + β), the overall degree of in-
creasing returns to scale. One might feed in 1% to 2% for gy . Values for gS range from a
low of around 1% (corresponding to population growth) to a high of around 4% (if one
uses the NSF/OECD definition of researchers). Taking ratios, this suggests that γ(1 + β)
lies somewhere between 1/4 and 2.
   In the simple model, the top marginal tax rate only affects the effort of applied
researchers, so we need to separate γ from 1 + β. It is far from obvious how to do this.
Moreover, one could easily imagine cases in which the top marginal tax rate affects the
effort of basic research or that basic research is imperfectly subsidized by a formal R&D
tax credit. Given that we already have a wide range of uncertainty surrounding the
value of γ(1 + β), we consider a set of parameter values for γ between 1/8 and 1. Since
what matters for the top tax rate is the sum γ + ψ, the fact that we consider a large range
of values for γ is what makes the precise value of ψ relatively unimportant.
   The one parameter not yet discussed is ∆ρ ≡ ρ − ρ̄. This parameter equals the
amount of income taxed at the top rate as a share of the economy’s GDP. When top
incomes obey a Pareto distribution with tail parameter 1/ξ, it is straightforward to show
that
                      TAXING TOP INCOMES IN A WORLD OF IDEAS                       15


                                    Income share of earners taxed
                    ∆ρ =    ξ ×
                                    at the top marginal rate (ρ)

In the U.S. economy, Pareto inequality is approximately ξ = 2/3 and according to the
Internal Revenue Service (2017, p. 30), the share of taxable income from returns with
a marginal tax rate at the top is just under 20% in 2015. This suggests a first estimate
of ∆ρ ≈ .67 × 20% ≈ 13%. However, in 2015, total taxable income of $7.4tr was only
41% of the $18.2tr GDP. Multiplying by this 41% provides a second estimate of ∆ρ ≈
.41 × 13% ≈ 5.3%. We use an intermediate value of ∆ρ = 10% in the calculations since
it is not obvious which number to prefer and since this value makes the intuition for the
calculations easier to appreciate. We similarly choose ρ = 15%, which makes ρ/∆ρ =
1.5, which is the value that Diamond and Saez typically use for the Pareto parameter
that enters the denominator of their revenue-maximizing top tax rate. Alternatively,
the expression above implies that ρ/∆ρ = 1/ξ. This is another way of saying that this
term is precisely the Pareto parameter that enters the standard Saez (2001) expression.
Finally, given that we choose ρ = 0.15, it is helpful to choose ψ = 0.15 as well: when we
show results with γ = 0 to shut down the role of ideas, this means that managers are
paid a share of GDP commensurate with their economic importance.
   Table 1 shows the revenue-maximizing top tax rate for a range of cases and parame-
ter values. The first line is from the simple Diamond and Saez formula 1/(1 + αζ) where
α = 1.5 = ρ/∆ρ. The remaining lines are from equation (8).
   Several findings stand out. First, the baseline parameter values deliver high tax rates
of 0.80 and 0.67 with the Diamond and Saez formula. Interestingly, the second and third
lines of the table show that equation (8) implies even higher top rates when γ = 0. The
reason for this can be seen in the fact that ηY ,1−τ = (γ + ψ)ζ, whereas the Diamond
and Saez formula only involves ζ. The difference is that γ + ψ captures the general
equilibrium effect that taxes have on wages, whereas the Diamond-Saez formula can
be interpreted as ignoring this GE effect. In our Cobb-Douglas setting, managers are
paid the fraction ψ of output, regardless of how much they work: lower effort the leads
to an offsetting increase in the wage wm . Therefore, an increase in the top tax rate that
reduces work effort increases the top wage, somewhat mitigating the change in effort:
ψζ < ζ since ψ < 1, which tends to raise the top tax rate. For example, the second row
of the table finds a revenue-maximizing top tax rate of 96.4% instead of 80%.
   The third row of the table preserves the basic GE forces, but keeps the idea channel
   16                                       CHARLES I. JONES




                        Table 1: Revenue-Maximizing Top Tax Rates


                                                      Behavioral Elasticity
                     Case                                0.20         0.50

                     Diamond-Saez formula:               0.800       0.667
                     γ = 0 and τ0 = 0:                   0.964       0.930
                     γ = 0 and τ0 = 0.20:                0.923       0.851

                          Degree of IRS, γ
                                  1/8                    0.863       0.742
                                  1/4                    0.806       0.644
                                  1/2                    0.702       0.477
                                   1                     0.524       0.221

           Note: The table reports the revenue-maximizing top tax rate for various cases.
           The first line is from the simple Diamond and Saez formula 1/(1 + αζ) where
           α = 1.5. The remaining lines are from equation (8). The parameter ζ is calculated
                                            ζ
           from the behavioral elasticity 1−ζ  which implies ζ = 1/6 and ζ = 1/3 for the
           0.2 and 0.5 cases, respectively (see Section 4 for more details). Other baseline
           parameter values are ∆ρ = 0.1, ρ = ψ = 0.15, and τ0 = 0.20.



turned off by setting γ = 0. With τ0 = 0.2, there is still an ηY ,1−τ force in the numer-
ator of the revenue-maximizing top tax rate formula: when managers work harder,
that raises the wages of workers, a la Badel and Huggett (2017). But these effects are
relatively small in this calibration because the share of managers in the economy, ψ, is
small, and the revenue-maximizing top tax rate is 92.3% for γ = 1/2.
   The remainder of the table shows how these calculations change when we turn on
the idea channel. The more important are ideas, the lower is the revenue-maximizing
top tax rate.


2.2 Intuition

The intuition for many of the results in this paper can be found by thinking about a
simple question: suppose we double the “keep rate” 1 − τ . What is the long-run effect
on GDP?
   The answer to this question is determined by the key elasticity ηY ,1−τ . In particular,
                        TAXING TOP INCOMES IN A WORLD OF IDEAS                        17


if you double the keep rate, then GDP goes up by a factor of 2ηY ,1−τ . To keep things
simple, suppose the effort of managers is completely unaffected by taxes and focus on
the effect working through ideas, so that ψ = 0 and ηY ,1−τ = γζ.
                                                                                 ζ
   For the baseline calibration, consider γ = 1/2 and a behavioral elasticity   1−ζ   = 0.2
which implies ζ = 1/6. (Nothing substantive changes if you just set ζ = 0.2 directly;
                                                 ζ
we explain later why the Frisch elasticity is   1−ζ   = 0.2.) In this case, ηY ,1−τ = 1/12
and   21/12   ≈ 1.06. In other words, going from a top tax rate of 75% to 50% — which
doubles the keep rate from 25% to 50% — raises GDP in the long run by only 6%! This
is surprisingly small. If anything, it suggests we might want values of γ that are higher,
not lower.
   Now consider increasing the top tax rate from 50% to 75%. The top income tax base
∆ρ is 10% of GDP, so without any change in economic behavior, the policy changes top
revenue from 5% to 7.5% of GDP, for a gain of 2.5% of GDP in revenue. However, the
cost of this policy is 6% of GDP with our baseline parameter values. Focusing on the
bottom 90%: their incomes go down by 6% because of the reduction in GDP and then
go up by 2.5%/0.9 ≈ 2.8% because of redistribution, for a net loss of about 3.2% of their
consumption. The next section drives this point home explicitly by considering the
choice of both τ and τ0 to maximize a social welfare function.
   One other thing to appreciate about the 6% gain in GDP from lowering the tax rate
from 75% to 50%: while this seems small, notice that it is achieved by a potentially small
number of people. How many researchers are there in the economy? Maybe 1% or 5%
or 10%? Their effort is increasing by 2ζ = 1.15, or by 15%. So a small group of talented
researchers working 15% harder raises GDP by 6% in the long run. But recall, that is
in some sense the entire point of Romer: a relatively small number of researchers is
responsible for the bulk of economic growth for the last 150 years!



3. Maximizing Worker Welfare

In this section, we consider the choice of τ and τ0 to maximize a social welfare function
(instead of taking τ0 as given and choosing τ to maximize tax revenue). We begin by
considering only the welfare of workers, as this yields a clean, closed-form solution.
   18                                    CHARLES I. JONES



3.1 Workers

On the worker side, we assume workers are below the top tax threshold and supply one
unit of labor inelastically:
                                        cw = w(1 − τ0 )                            (11)

                                        uw (c) = θ log c.                          (12)



3.2 The Government Budget Constraint

Suppose the government budget constraint requires raising a fraction Ω of final output
in tax revenue, so that T = ΩY . For example, this revenue may be used in part to pay
for the basic research. Using equation (6), we now have


                          τ0 Y + (τ − τ0 )[ρY − w̄(Sa + M )] = ΩY.                 (13)


Alternatively, it is sometimes useful to express this equation as


                      [(1 − ρ)τ0 + ρτ ]Y − (τ − τ0 )[w̄(Sa + M )] = ΩY.            (14)


When Y changes, the effect on tax revenue depends on (1 − ρ)τ0 + ρτ .



3.3 Maximizing Utility of Workers

The consumption of a representative worker equals her wage, proportional to (1 −
τ0 )Y /L, so the tax system that maximizes the welfare of workers solves


                               max log(1 − τ0 ) + log Y (τ ) s.t.                  (15)
                                τ,τ0


                               τ0 Y + (τ − τ0 )(ρY − w̄Sa ) = ΩY.                  (16)

   Some straightforward calculation then gives the following result (a derivation is in
the appendix):


Proposition 1 (Maximizing Worker Welfare): The top tax rate that maximizes the wel-
                          TAXING TOP INCOMES IN A WORLD OF IDEAS                                               19


fare of workers subject to the government budget constraint satisfies
                                                                                                  
                                                1−ρ             1−∆ρ                          Ω
                              1 − ηY ,1−τ       ∆ρ    · τ0∗ +    ∆ρ      · (1 − τ0∗ ) −       ∆ρ
                       ∗
                      τww =                                ρ                                           .         (17)
                                                      1+   ∆ρ ηY ,1−τ


Combining this condition with the government budget constraint gives the explicit solu-
tion:                                             h                                     i
                                                      1−∆ρ          Ω               ρ̄
                                  1 − ηY ,1−τ          ∆ρ    −      ∆ρ       1+   1−∆ρ
                           ∗
                          τww =                 ρ                     ρ̄                      ,                  (18)
                                       1+       ∆ρ ηY ,1−τ      +   1−∆ρ ηY ,1−τ

where ηY ,1−τ = (γ + ψ)ζ.



   Equation (17) in the proposition has a form that is most easily compared to the
revenue-maximizing top tax rate we found in the earlier section in equation (8). Many
of the terms are similar.
   Relative to the Diamond and Saez result, there are now three new terms in the
numerator rather than just one — all multiplied by the key elasticity ηY ,1−τ . The first
          1−ρ
term is   ∆ρ    · τ0∗ . This term was the novelty in the revenue-maximizing top tax rate back
in (8). Recall that it captures the fact that increasing the top tax rate reduces GDP, and
therefore reduces the revenue that accrues via the lower tax rate τ0 .
                                                             1−∆ρ     ∗
   The second new term in the numerator is                    ∆ρ ·(1−τ0 ).          While it is not obvious from
these symbols, this term captures the direct effect of a higher tax rate on the welfare of
workers: the higher tax reduces GDP which directly reduces the worker’s consumption.
The revenue-maximizing tax rate considered earlier only captured the effect of lower
GDP on lowering tax revenue; this new term captures the fact that lower GDP lowers
the consumption of workers as well. The term 1 − τ0∗ appears because it is related to
                                                                                   1−∆ρ
the marginal utility of consumption of the worker, and the                          ∆ρ        term is a scaling factor
that adjusts for the fraction of income taxed at the base rate, 1 − ∆ρ, versus the fraction
taxed at the top rate, ∆ρ.
   Finally, the last new term in the numerator is Ω/∆ρ. This term appears because we
require our tax system to raise an amount of revenue equal to Ω as a share of aggregate
income. Other things equal, a higher Ω requires a higher top tax rate.
   The second equation in the proposition, equation (18), uses the government bud-
get constraint to eliminate the now-endogenous τ0∗ from the solution and provides an
       20                                          CHARLES I. JONES



explicit solution for the top tax rate that maximizes worker welfare.4
       A useful intuition from this equation comes from studying the point at which a “flat
tax” is optimal — that is, where τ = τ0 = Ω, or, equivalently, the keep rates are equal,
κ = κ0 = 1 − Ω. Equation (18) implies that5

                                                                               ∆ρ
                               τ ≤ τ0 and κ ≥ κ0 ⇐⇒ ηY ,1−τ ≥                       .                             (19)
                                                                             1 − ∆ρ

Suppose we are considering increasing κ by lowering the top tax rate. The percent
gain to GDP, and therefore to a worker’s consumption, is ηY ,1−τ · d log κ. The amount
of revenue this requires is ∆ρ · d log κ since the top tax base is proportional to ∆ρ. Al-
ternatively, we could take that same amount of revenue and redistribute it directly. The
                                                                            ∆ρ
redistribution gets divided among 1−∆ρ “people,” so the per worker gain is 1−∆ρ d log κ.
If these two ways of increasing a worker’s consumption yield the same gain, then the
two keep rates are the same. If one yields more, then its keep rate will be higher.
       For example, consider our baseline parameter values of ∆ρ = 0.1 and a Frisch labor
                                                                           ∆ρ         1
supply elasticity of 0.20, so that ζ = 1/6. In this case,                 1−∆ρ    =   9   and ηY ,1−τ = 61 (γ + ψ).
Therefore, the flat tax will maximize worker welfare when γ+ψ = 2/3. And if γ+ψ > 2/3,
then the top tax rate will be below τ0 .
       Table 2 shows some numerical examples for the baseline parameter values includ-
ing Ω = 0.2. Even with a Frisch labor supply elasticity of 0.20, the top tax rate falls to
21.7% for γ = 1/2. Notice that with ψ = 0.15, this case means that γ + ψ = 0.65, which
is close to the flat tax value of 2/3. When γ = 1, the top tax rate is solidly into negative
territory at -24.7%: subsidizing idea creation is even more effective than redistribution


   4
      A higher ηY ,1−τ (and therefore a higher γ or ζ) lowers the top tax rate, provided Ω is not too large. A
                                                                                                   ρ̄
higher Ω raises the top tax rate. The main term that is novel in this expression is 1−∆ρ              . Looking back at
equation (17), one can see that τ0 entered twice. Combining those two terms reveals that the net effect
depends on [(1 − ρ) − (1 − ∆ρ)]. The 1 − ∆ρ term captures the tax base to which τ0 applies, while the 1 − ρ
term captures the extra revenue that comes from the base tax rates when Y changes; recall equation (14).
It is the net of these two effects that matters, and [(1 − ρ) − (1 − ∆ρ)] = ∆ρ − ρ = −ρ̄. In other words,
a higher τ0 , other things equal, lowers τww  ∗
                                                 , as the behavioral effect is larger than the mechanical tax base
effect. The ρ̄ expression enters the tax rate that maximizes worker welfare twice. The reason for this is
that the government budget constraint means that τ0 = Ω−∆ρτ          1−∆ρ
                                                                              , so there is an additional Ω term (in the
numerator of 18) and an additional multiplier effect coming through the fact that τ0 depends on τ .
    5
      It is easier to see this result using the following solution for the top keep rate that maximizes worker
welfare:                                                                       
                                                                           ρ̄
                                                    ηY ,1−τ 1−Ω
                                                             ∆ρ
                                                                   1 +   1−∆ρ
                                        κ∗ww =         ρ               ρ̄            .
                                                1 + ∆ρ   ηY ,1−τ + 1−∆ρ     ηY ,1−τ
                        TAXING TOP INCOMES IN A WORLD OF IDEAS                            21



                     Table 2: Tax Rates that Maximize Worker Welfare


            Degree of    Behavioral elast. = 0.2         Behavioral elast. = 0.5
             IRS, γ        ∗
                          τww          τ0∗                 ∗
                                                          τww          τ0∗

               1/8        0.639        0.151             0.323        0.186
               1/4        0.490        0.168             0.067        0.215
               1/2        0.217        0.198             -0.368       0.263
                1        -0.247        0.250             -1.028       0.336

          Note: Shows the values of τ and τ0 that maximize worker welfare based on
          Proposition 1. Assumes Ω = 0.2 in addition to the other baseline parameter
          values.



as raising worker welfare.



4. Maximizing Utilitarian Social Welfare

In order to incorporate the welfare of entrepreneurs and managers, we have to specify
their utility function and how they choose effort.


4.1 Preferences and Equilibrium Effort

Assume entrepreneurs and managers have utility functions u(c, e) that depend on con-
sumption c and effort e with the following functional form:


                                  u(c, e) = θ log c − ζe1/ζ .                               (20)


This specification is a simple form of “constant Frisch elasticity” preferences and deliv-
ers constant effort in the presence of exponential growth in consumption. The (com-
                                                                             ζ
pensated) Frisch elasticity of effort with respect to the wage is then      1−ζ .   This is what
we’ve called the “behavioral elasticity” in the earlier calculations.
   We focus in what follows on entrepreneurs, but managers are treated symmetrically.
An entrepreneur with talent z solves the following problem:


                                      max u(c, e) s.t.                                      (21)
                                        c,e
       22                                        CHARLES I. JONES


                             c =w̄(1 − τ0 ) + [ws ez − w̄](1 − τ ) + R

                               =w̄(1 − τ0 ) − w̄(1 − τ ) + ws ez(1 − τ ) + R

                               =w̄(τ − τ0 ) + ws ez(1 − τ ) + R


where R is a lump-sum rebate of tax revenue, discussed further shortly, that the agent
takes as given.
       Given our functional form on utility, this leads to the following FOC:

                                            1
                                                −1       θws z(1 − τ )
                                           eζ        =                 .                              (22)
                                                               c

And the Frisch elasticity of effort with respect to the wage or the keep rate, holding
                                                 ζ
consumption constant, is obviously              1−ζ      as noted earlier.
       To complete the solution of the entrepreneur’s problem, we need to specify the
rebate, R, and an important issue arises. Recall that in general with log preferences,
the SE and IE cancel, so that in the absence of a rebate, a linear tax will have no effect
on effort. This is not true for the nonlinear tax we have here. Instead, the top tax rate
will reduce effort, but in a heterogeneous fashion that asymptotes to zero for highly
talented people.6
       That heterogeneity might be interesting to explore, but it is not especially clean.
Instead, we take a different approach below. In particular, we assume that the rebates
are heterogenous and such that equilibrium consumption of a researcher with talent z
is given by
                                           cz = ws ez(1 − τ )1−α                                      (23)

where α parameterizes the extent to which the rebate depends on the tax rate.7

   6
       Setting R = 0 and combining the FOC with the entrepreneur’s budget constraint gives
                                                               
                                                   w̄(τ − τ0 )
                                       e1/ζ−1 e +                 =θ
                                                   ws z(1 − τ )

and certainly if ζ is not too large, an increase in τ will reduce e. But as z → ∞, e becomes independent of
τ.
   7
     That is, the researcher solves the problem in equation (21) taking the following rebates as exogenous:

                            R(z) = ws e∗ z(1 − τ )1−α − w̄(τ − τ0 ) − ws e∗ z(1 − τ )

where e∗ does not depend on z and is given in equation (24). Note that these rebates differ according to
the entrepreneur’s skill, z. This raises an interesting question about how this could be microfounded in a
Mirrleesian framework in which it is typically assumed that the government cannot observe individuals’
skills. This issue does not arise in the revenue-maximizing or the maximize-worker-welfare tax systems
                           TAXING TOP INCOMES IN A WORLD OF IDEAS                                       23


    The FOC for effort then reduces to


                                            e∗ = [θ(1 − τ )α ]ζ ,                                        (24)


meaning that entrepreneurs of differing talent put in the same effort in equilibrium.
Importantly, notice that the elasticity of effort with respect to the keep rate is αζ, so
that ηY ,1−τ = α(γ + ψ)ζ. The parameter α therefore influences the top tax rate.
    Consumption, however, does depend on talent, z:


                                      c∗z = θζ ws z(1 − τ )1−α(1−ζ) .                                    (25)


    If α = 1, both consumption and effort are proportional to (1 − τ )ζ . Alternatively, a
smaller α moves us closer to the situation where the SE and IE cancels, making effort
less sensitive to the tax rate and consumption more sensitive so that taxes distort less
and transfer more.


4.2 Utilitarian Social Welfare

A social welfare function of interest is the utilitarian or “behind the veil of ignorance”
specification:
                                                 Z                             Z
          SW F ≡ Lu(cw ) + Sb u(cb ) + Sa            u(csz , esz )dF (z) + M       u(cm    m
                                                                                      z , ez )dF (z).


Substituting in the expressions for cw , cb , csz , esz , cm    m
                                                           z , ez and the income share parameters

(e.g. ρ), this expression can be rewritten as

                         SW F − ϕ          1
               SW F ≡             ·
                            θ       L + Sb + Sa + M
                       = log Y + ℓ log(1 − τ0 ) + s[(1 − α) log(1 − τ ) − ζ(1 − τ )α ],                  (26)

               Sa +M
where s ≡    L+Sb +Sa +M ,   ℓ ≡ 1 − s, and ϕ is a term that does not depend on τ or τ0 .8

and so is not central to the present paper. I therefore leave this interesting question to future research.
  8
    In particular,
                              ρℓ           ρb              ρs           ρm 
                  ϕ ≡ θL log     + θSb log     + θ Sa log      + M log        + θ(Sa + M )z̃,
                              L            Sb              z̄S          z̄M
           R
where z̃ ≡ log z dF (z).
    24                                   CHARLES I. JONES



    As shown in the appendix, we then have the following result:

Proposition 2 (Maximizing Social Welfare):            The tax rates that maximize the social
welfare function in (26) subject to the government budget constraint satisfy the following
two equations in two unknowns, written in terms of the keep rates κ and κ0 (i.e. κ ≡
1 − τ ):
                                                                             
               α  κ     ℓ                                              ρ̄ℓ
           αζsκ +   ·       (∆ρ + ρ̄ηY ,1−τ ) = ηY ,1−τ           1+              + s(1 − α)   (27)
                  κ0 1 − ∆ρ                                          1 − ∆ρ

                                κ0 (1 − ∆ρ) + κ∆ρ = 1 − Ω.                                     (28)

    Unfortunately, these equations do not admit a closed-form solution. However, the
proposition is easy to analyze graphically. For example, in the special case of α = 1, the
first equation in (27) can be rewritten as
                                                             
                                                        ρ̄ℓ
                                         ηY ,1−τ 1 +   1−∆ρ
                             κ=          1    ℓ
                                                                                               (29)
                                  sζ +   κ0 1−∆ρ   (∆ρ + ρ̄ηY ,1−τ )

And then our two equations — (28) and (29) — can be analyzed graphically, as in Fig-
ure 1. In fact, inspecting equation (27) reveals that it delivers κ as an increasing function
of κ0 , so Figure 1 applies more generally even when α differs from one.
    Comparative statics can be inferred by totally differentiating the two equations. In
particular, a sufficient condition for the “expected” comparative statics is that the tax
system is weakly progressive, i.e. κ ≤ κ0 . In that case:
    – ↑γ ⇒ ↑κ and ↓κ0 : The more important are ideas, the lower the top tax rate.

    – ↑ζ ⇒ ↑κ and ↓κ0 : The more elastic are top earners, the lower the top tax rate.

    – ↑ Ω ⇒ ↓ κ and ↓ κ0 : The more the government needs to raise, the higher the tax
      rates.


4.3 Numerical Examples

We can also proceed numerically. The examples shown next assume Ω = 0.2, s = 0.1,
and ∆ρ = 0.1. Table 3 shows results for α = 1, while Table 4 shows results for α = 1/2.
    Two properties of these examples stand out. First, for γ ≥ 1/2, the top marginal tax
rate is quite low, at 23% or lower. Despite the utilitarian impetus to redistribute from
                  TAXING TOP INCOMES IN A WORLD OF IDEAS                                    25




                   Figure 1: Maximizing Social Welfare: α = 1

             κ




                                                          FOC




            κ∗




                                                       Government BC


             0                    κ∗0                                     κ0




           Table 3: Tax Rates to Maximize Utilitarian Welfare: α = 1


                  Behavioral elast. = 0.2                 Behavioral elast. = 0.5
 Degree of                       GDP loss                                GDP loss
  IRS, γ          τ ∗     ∗
                         τ0     if τ = 0.75               τ ∗     ∗
                                                                 τ0     if τ = 0.75

     1/8         0.649    0.150         0.7%            0.400     0.178        3.6%
     1/4         0.502    0.166         2.8%            0.163     0.204        9.6%
     1/2         0.231    0.197         8.9%           -0.255     0.251        23.6%
      1          -0.238   0.249         23.4%          -0.919     0.324        49.3%

Note: Shows the SWF-maximizing values of τ and τ0 , calculated numerically based on
Proposition 2. Assumes Ω = 0.2 and s = 0.1, in addition to the other baseline parameter
values. “GDP loss if τ = 0.75” is computed by noting that Y ∝ (1 − τ )α(γ+ψ)ζ and reports
the percentage decline in GDP from moving from the welfare-maximizing tax system to
one with a top tax rate of 75%.
      26                                      CHARLES I. JONES




                    Table 4: Tax Rates to Maximize Utilitarian Welfare: α = 1/2


                            Behavioral elast. = 0.2               Behavioral elast. = 0.5
           Degree of                       GDP loss                              GDP loss
            IRS, γ          τ ∗     ∗
                                   τ0     if τ = 0.75             τ ∗     ∗
                                                                         τ0     if τ = 0.75

               1/8        0.445     0.173       0.8%             0.328   0.186     2.0%
               1/4        0.369     0.181       1.9%             0.189   0.201     4.8%
               1/2        0.222     0.198       4.6%          -0.070     0.230    11.4%
                1         -0.047    0.227      11.3%          -0.517     0.280    26.0%

              Note: See notes to Table 3.



high earners to low earners, the fact that the discovery of ideas lies at the heart of the
economic growth experienced by all earners restrains top income taxation.
      Second, these examples show that if ideas are sufficiently important, this force can
result in a negative top tax rate. That is, it can be welfare-maximizing to subsidize the
incomes of higher earners at the margin.
      The tables also report the “GDP loss if τ = 0.75.” These columns show the percent-
age decline in GDP from moving from the welfare-maximizing tax system to one with a
top tax rate of 75%, computed by noting that Y ∝ (1 − τ )α(γ+ψ)ζ .9 For example, when
γ = 1/2, α = 1, and the behavioral elasticity is 0.2, the welfare-maximizing top tax rate
is 0.23, and GDP declines by 8.9% if instead the top tax rate is 0.75.


4.4 Summary

We summarize our calibration exercises in Table 5. As we showed at the start of this
paper, our basic setup delivers extremely high revenue-maximizing top tax rates in the
absence of the idea channel (γ = 0). When the idea channel is present, however, top
tax rates fall considerably. Revenue-maximizing top rates fall from 92% to 70% with
γ = 1/2. However, once the idea channel is present, revenue-maximization is no longer
even approximately the same as welfare maximization: the welfare of everyone in the
economy is affected by the discovery of new ideas. The top tax rate that maximizes
  9
      This can be seen by combining equation (4) with (24).
                         TAXING TOP INCOMES IN A WORLD OF IDEAS                               27



                         Table 5: Summary of Calibration Exercises


                Exercise                                          Top rate, τ
                No ideas, γ = 0
                   Revenue-maximization, τ0 = 0                       0.96
                   Revenue-maximization, τ0 = 0.20                    0.92

                With ideas                                     γ = 1/2       γ=1
                   Revenue-maximization                          0.70        0.52
                   Maximize worker welfare                       0.22        -0.25
                   Maximize utilitarian welfare                  0.22        -0.05

           Note: This table collects the results from the various calibration exercises for
           the default parameter values of ∆ρ = 0.10, s = 0.10, and a Frisch elasticity of
           labor supply for top earners of 0.2. In the second and third rows, we add the
           consideration that τ0 = 0.2. In the final two rows, we instead require the tax
           system to raise 20% of GDP in revenue (Ω = 0.2), and the last row sets α = 1/2.




worker or utilitarian welfare is considerably lower, falling to 22% for γ = 1/2, for exam-
ple. Taking ideas into account has first-order effects on optimal top income taxation in
this setting.



5. Discussion

In this section, we discuss several issues related to economic growth and the taxation
of top incomes.


5.1 Empirical Evidence on Growth and Taxes

Stokey and Rebelo (1995) first observed a remarkable fact related to growth and taxes:
the growth rate of the U.S. economy in the 20th century was relatively stable while taxes
as a share of GDP increased substantially. Similarly, there are large movements in top
marginal tax rates that are not associated with systematic changes in the growth rate.
For example, the top marginal tax rate in the U.S. reached 94% at the end of World
War II and exceeded 90% during much of the 1950s and early 1960s [Internal Revenue
    28                                    CHARLES I. JONES



Service (2018)]. Yet these years exhibit, if anything, some of the fastest growth in the
U.S. economy, not the slowest. Top marginal rates declined in the next two decades,
but so did growth rates. These facts must be confronted by any theory of economic
growth.
   Semi-endogenous growth theory (in which policy has level effects as in Solow, rather
than long-run growth effects) helps, but it is not a complete resolution. In particular,
other things equal, one would expect large declines in top marginal tax rates to raise
growth rates at least along a transition path to a higher steady state.
   Instead, I see two possible ways to reconcile the basic facts with growth theory. First,
the “other things equal” qualification is clearly not met. What the government does
with the tax revenue is important, and in the decades during and after World War II,
there were massive investments in basic research. Similarly, the decline in marginal tax
rates in recent decades has been paired with a decline in funding for basic research as a
share of GDP. We do not know what the counterfactual path of economic growth in the
20th century would look like had taxes not changed.
   Second, reductions in the top tax rate may shift people from producing goods to
producing ideas; while this extensive margin is not modeled in this paper, it features in
other papers such as Jaimovich and Rebelo (2017). The impact effect of this change is
to reduce the production of goods, and this may show up as lower GDP growth in the
near term before the positive effects through increased innovation materialize.10


5.2 The Social Rate of Return

At some basic level, there is an optimal amount that needs to be spent as compensation
for research effort, and the question in the model boils down to “How big is the gap
between the equilibrium share and the optimal amount to pay for research?” If there is
a big gap, then the implied social return to research is high, and we want to subsidize
research. In this section, we show how to connect this interpretation to our analysis.
   Jones and Williams (1998) discuss how to calculate a social rate of return to R&D.
In particular, they consider the following variational argument: suppose you reduce
consumption today by one unit, invest it in R&D to create new ideas, and then re-
  10
     There are two channels for lower GDP growth in the near term. First, in the old national income
accounts, R&D was treated as an intermediate good and so would not be counted. Second, to the extent
that there is a lag between research and innovation, the GDP gains may take longer to appear.
                          TAXING TOP INCOMES IN A WORLD OF IDEAS                                  29


duce R&D tomorrow, consuming the proceeds, so as to leave the future time path of
ideas unchanged. What is the percentage gain in consumption that this variation can
achieve? They show that the optimal R&D investment rate in an endogenous growth
model occurs where this social rate of return equals the social planner’s interest rate as
implied by a standard Euler equation for consumption.
       Applying their analysis here indicates that the social return to entrepreneurial effort
in our model is given by11
                                                                      
                                                           1       1
                                  r̃ = gY + λgy                  −                                   (30)
                                                      ρs (1 − τ ) γ

where ρs ≡ ws S̃a /Y is the share of income paid to entrepreneurs. At the margin,
after taxes, entrepreneurs earn ρs (1 − τ ). Speaking loosely, this equation suggests that
the optimal subsidy is approximately such that ρs (1 − τ ) = γ. That is, you want en-
trepreneurs to earn a share of income roughly equal to the importance of applied ideas
in the economy.12
       To put some numbers on this, suppose gy = 2%, gY = 3%, γ = 1/2, and ρs = 10%.
For τ = 1/2, equation (30) implies that the social rate of return to applied research is
39%. If the share of income earned by entrepreneurs, ρs , equals 5% instead, the social
return rises to 79%; with ρs = 20%, the return is 16%.
       These numbers are in line with estimates of the social rate of return to research
in the literature — for example, see Jones and Williams (1998) and Hall, Mairesse and
Mohnen (2010) for surveys. In one of the most recent and best-identified studies, Bloom,
Schankerman and Van Reenen (2013) estimate a social rate of return of 59%, identified
from state-specific changes in R&D tax policy in a panel of U.S. firms.13 Of course it
is not at all clear that social returns to formal R&D should be compared to the social
  11
      A full derivation is presented in Appendix B.
  12
      Interestingly, the “optimal” subsidy does not equate the social rate of return to the real interest
rate, partly because there are different definitions of “optimal” that we consider in this paper: revenue
maximization, maximizing worker welfare, and maximizing social welfare. These are evidently not the
same as the variational argument regarding consumption. Also, we say “roughly” because the planner’s
interest rate is not gY , but this is close.
   13
      Two other recent papers focus on careful identification of the benefits of R&D policy. Howell (2017)
uses a regression-discontinuity design to identify the effect of the Department of Energy’s SBIR grant
program. Budish, Roin and Williams (2015) provide a detailed analysis of clinical trials for cancer
treatments. While neither paper formally computes an estimate of the social return to research, both
find evidence suggestive of large social returns. Lucking and Bloom (2017) update the analysis of Bloom,
Schankerman and Van Reenen (2013) so that the latest year is 2015 instead of 2001 and find a social return
to research of 58%.
   30                                 CHARLES I. JONES



return to effort in our model, particularly since one of our key points is that applied
research is not easily subsized through formal R&D subsidies, while the social return
estimate in Bloom et al is identfied precisely from state-specific R&D subsidies. Still,
the calculation and comparison does seem useful at some level — one might expect the
social returns to non-formal research to be even higher, perhaps, because it does not
benefit from the existing subsidies — and suggests that our baseline parameter values
are not unreasonable.



6. The Full Growth Model

This section is basically housekeeping. It presents a fully-worked out dynamic growth
model and shows that the allocation along the balanced growth path is characterized
by the simple static model that we’ve used in the main body of the paper up until now.
The basic economic environment for the full growth model is summarized in Table 6.


6.1 Equilibrium with Imperfect Competition and Taxes

In this section, we study the equilibrium with imperfect competition first described for
a model like this by Romer (1990). Briefly, the economy consists of three sectors. A final
goods sector produces the consumption-output good using managers and a collection
of intermediate goods. The intermediate goods sector produces a variety of different
intermediate goods using ideas and labor. Finally, talented entrepreneurs produce
new ideas, which in this model are represented by new kinds of intermediate goods.
These entrepreneurs use basic research ideas when they innovate, and basic research
is funded entirely by the government. The final goods sector and the research sector
are perfectly competitive and characterized by free entry, while the intermediate goods
sector is the place where imperfect competition is introduced. When a new design for
an intermediate good is discovered, the design is awarded an infinitely-lived patent.
The owner of the patent has the exclusive right to produce and sell the particular in-
termediate good and therefore acts as a monopolist in competition with the producers
of other kinds of intermediate goods. The monopoly profits that flow to this producer
ultimately constitute the compensation to the entrepreneurs who discovered the new
design in the first place.
   TAXING TOP INCOMES IN A WORLD OF IDEAS                        31




Table 6: Economic Environment for Growth Model

                                  R At      1−ψ
Final output               Yt =    0       xit  di [E(ez)Mt ]ψ

Production of variety i                    xit = ℓit
                                       R
Resource constraint (ℓ)                    ℓit di = Lt

Resource constraint (N )            Lt + Sbt = Nt

Population growth                 Nt = N̄ exp(nt)

Entrepreneurs                     Sat = S̄a exp(nt)

Managers                          Mt = M̄ exp(nt)

Applied ideas               Ȧt = ā[E(ez)Sat ]λ Aφt a Btα

Basic ideas                                     λ B φb
                                       Ḃt = b̄Sbt t

Talent heterogeneity                     zi ∼ F (z)

Utility (Sa , M )            u(c, e) = θ log c − ζe1/ζ

Utility (L, Sb )                       u(c) = θ log c
   32                                         CHARLES I. JONES



   We begin by stating the key decision problems that have to be solved by the vari-
ous agents in the economy and then we put these together in our formal definition of
equilibrium.
   Problem (HH). Households solve a standard optimization problem, choosing a time
path of consumption and an allocation of time. There are three types of households:
workers (who can make goods or work as basic researchers), entrepreneurs, and man-
agers. The problem for workers is assumed to be simple — they just work and consume
their income after taxes:
                                           cw = w(1 − τ0 )                            (31)

   The problems for entrepreneurs and managers are essentially identical, apart from
the fact that their wage per efficiency unit of effort can vary. For entrepreneurs: taking
the time path of {wst , rt , Rt } as given, they solve
                                       Z      ∞
                                 max              u(ct , et ) exp(−δt) dt,            (32)
                                {ct ,et } 0


subject to


               v̇t = (rt − n)vt + w̄(τ − τ0 ) + ws ez(1 − τ ) + Rt − ct , v0 given,   (33)


                                    u(c, e) = θ log c − ζe1/ζ                         (34)
                                             Z t
                                lim vt exp(− (rs − n)ds) ≥ 0.                         (35)
                               t→∞                    0

where vt is the financial wealth of an individual, rt is the interest rate, and Rt is the
lump-sum rebate for people of type z, which they take as given. We are suppressing the
dependence of vt and Rt on type z to simplify the notation.
   Problem (FG). A perfectly competitive final goods sector takes the variety of inter-
mediate goods in existence as given and produces output according to
                                                     Z        At
                                     Yt = M̃tψ                      1−ψ
                                                                   xit  di.           (36)
                                                          0


That is, at each point in time t, taking the manager’s wage rate wmt , the measure of
intermediate goods At , and the prices of the intermediate goods pit as given, the repre-
                              TAXING TOP INCOMES IN A WORLD OF IDEAS                                                  33


sentative firm solves
                                               Z       At                                  Z       At
                            max         M̃tψ                 1−ψ
                                                            xit     di − wmt M̃t −                      pit xit di.    (37)
                           {xit },M̃t              0                                           0


       Problem (IG). Each variety of intermediate good is produced by a monopolist who
owns a patent for the good, purchased at a one-time price PAt . As discussed in describ-
ing the economic environment, one unit of the intermediate good can be produced
with one unit of labor. The monopolist sees a downward-sloping demand curve for her
product from the final goods sector and chooses a price to maximize profits. That is, at
each point in time and for each intermediate good i, a monopolist solves


                                               max πit ≡ (pit − wt )x(pit )                                            (38)
                                                pit


where x(pit ) is the demand from the final goods sector for intermediate good i if the
price is pit . This demand curve comes from a first-order condition in Problem (FG).14
       Problem (R&D). The production function for new ideas depends on entrepreneurs,
the existing stock of applications, At , and the stock of fundamental ideas, Bt :

                                                                      λ φa α
                                                            Ȧt = āS̃at At Bt                                         (39)


where S̃at is the efficiency units of applied research effort. Each individual research
firm is small and takes the productivity of the idea production function as given. In
particular, each research firm assumes that the idea production function is


                                                               Ȧt = ν̄t S̃at .                                        (40)


That is, the duplication effects associated with λ and the knowledge spillovers asso-
ciated with φa and α in equation (39) are assumed to be external to the individual




  14
       To be more specific, the demand curve x(pi ) is given by
                                                                                       1/ψ
                                                                                   1
                                           x(pit ) =              (1 − ψ)M̃tψ ·                .
                                                                                  pit
     34                                               CHARLES I. JONES



research firm. In this perfectly competitive sector, the representative firm solves


                                              max PAt ν̄t S̃at − wst S̃at ,                                            (41)
                                               S̃at


taking the price of ideas PAt , entrepreneurial productivity ν̄t , and the wage wst as given.
    The Government and Basic Research. To keep things simple, we assume the gov-
ernment hires basic researchers to produce the fundamental research ideas. If the
government spends Gbt on hiring basic researchers at the wage wt , then Gbt = wt Sbt
implicitly determines the number of researchers that get hired, and these researchers
produce basic ideas according to

                                                               λ φb
                                                      Ḃt = b̄Sbt Bt .                                                 (42)


We’ve assumed for simplicity that applied ideas At do not feed back into basic research,
but this could be easily relaxed.
    The government collects taxes from everyone in the economy and uses these rev-
enues to fund basic research, the tax rebates, and other spending, Got , which together
equal a fraction Ω of final output:


τ0 [wL + wSb + wa E(ez)Sa + wm E(ez)M ] + (τ − τ0 )[(wa E(ez) − w̄)Sa + (wm E(ez) − w̄)M ]
                                  Z
                          = Gbt + R(z)dF (z) + Got ≡ ΩYt .                           (43)



    Now that these decision problems have been described, we are ready to define the
equilibrium.
    An equilibrium in this economy consists of time paths for the allocations {cszt , cm     w
                                                                                       zt , ct ,

eszt , em     s     m                                                                   ∞
        zt , vzt , vzt , {xit }, Yt ,M̃t , S̃at , Sbt , Lt , At , Bt , ν̄t , Gbt , Got }t=0 and prices {wt , wst , wmt , rt ,

{pit }, {πit }, Rt (z), PAt }∞
                             t=0 such that for all t:


   1. cszt , cm     w s        m s             m
              zt , ct , ezt , ezt , vzt , and vzt solve Problem (HH).


   2. {xit } and M̃t solve Problem (FG).

   3. pit and πit solve Problem (IG) for all i ∈ [0, At ].

   4. S̃at solves Problem (R&D).
                       TAXING TOP INCOMES IN A WORLD OF IDEAS                         35


  5. Sbt is determined by the government: Sbt = Gbt /wt .

                                     R      s + M v m )dF (z) = P A .
  6. (rt ) The capital market clears: (Sat vzt   t zt            At t


  7. (wt ) The labor market clears: Lt + Sbt = Nt .

  8. (wst ) The market for entrepreneurs clears: E(ez)Sat = S̃at

  9. (wmt ) The manager market clears: E(ez)Mt = M̃t

                                                                 λ−1 φa α
 10. (ν̄t ) The idea production function is satisfied: ν̄t = ν S̃at At Bt .

                                              πit       ṖAt
 11. (PAt ) Assets have equal returns: rt =   PAt   +   PAt .


 12. The tax rebates are Rt (z) = ws e∗ z(1−τ )1−α −[w̄t (τ −τ0 )+ws e∗ z(1−τ )+(r −gY )vt ].

 13. Yt is given by the production function in (36).

                                                          R
 14. Lt satisfies the resource constraint for labor:          xit di = Lt

 15. At is given by the production function in (39).

 16. Bt is given by the production function in (42).

 17. Gbt is exogenously given.

 18. (Got ) The government budget constraint in (43) is satisfied.

   Notice that, roughly speaking, there are twenty-six equilibrium objects that are part
of the definition of equilibrium and there are twenty-six equations described in the
conditions for equilibrium that determine these objects at each point in time. Not
surprisingly, one cannot solve in general in closed form for the equilibrium outside of
the balanced growth path, but along a balanced growth path the solution is relatively
straightforward, and we have the following results.


     (a) Because of symmetry considerations, the production function for final
     output can be written as
                                     Y = Aψ M̃ ψ L1−ψ .                           (44)
     36                                        CHARLES I. JONES



       The stock of ideas along the BGP is in turn given by15

                                                      α
                                                           λ
                                                           1−φa
                                   A∗t
                                                     1−φb
                                         = νa S̃at Sbt          .                                 (45)


       Putting these two equations together,

                                                    γ
                                 Yt∗ = νa E[ez]Sa Sbβ M̃tψ Lt1−ψ                                  (46)

                        ψλ                  α
       where γ ≡       1−φa   and β ≡      1−φb .        This is exactly the specification of the
       production function for our simple model in (4).

              Letting y ≡ Y /(N + M + Sa ) denote per capita income,

                                                         γ
                                                       β
                                           yt∗ ∝ S̃at Sbt    .                                    (47)


       Taking logs and derivatives, growth rates along the BGP are given by


                                 gy = γ(1 + β)gS = γ(1 + β)n.                                     (48)




       (b) The Euler equation for consumption and the effort choice for a person
       of talent z are
                                   ċt (z)   ċt
                                           =     = (rteq − n − δ)                                 (49)
                                   ct (z)    ct
       As we did earlier, we’ve chosen the lump-sum rebates (in the definition of
       equilibrium) to deliver a steady-state consumption of


                                 c∗t (z) = θζ ws z(1 − τ )1−α(1−ζ) .                              (50)


       and then equilibrium effort is independent of z:


                                           e∗ = [θ(1 − τ )α ]ζ                                    (51)

15
     Define                                                                  α            1
                                                         1              1−φ       · 1−φ
                                   λ
                                                ā       1−φa        b̄           b           a
                                νa1−φa ≡
                                               gA                   gB
                 TAXING TOP INCOMES IN A WORLD OF IDEAS                     37




(c) Profit maximization. The solution to Problem (FG) implies that man-
agers and intermediate goods receive constant shares of factor payments:

                     wm M̃              Apx
                           = ψ ≡ ρm and     =1−ψ                        (52)
                      Y                  Y

The solution to Problem (IG) involves a monopoly markup over marginal
cost that depends on the CES parameter in the usual way:

                                             wt
                               peq    eq
                                it = pt =       .                       (53)
                                            1−ψ

These equations then imply that total profits of intermediate goods firms
satisfy
                                Aπ
                                   = ψ(1 − ψ).                          (54)
                                Y
Also, recall from the resource constraint for labor that Ax = L. Substituting
this into (52) together with p = w/(1 − ψ) yields

                             wL
                                = (1 − ψ)2 ≡ ρℓ .                       (55)
                             Y




(d) Research. The perfectly competitive research sector ensures that the
                                                 Ȧ
wage per unit of research satisfies ws = PA ·   S̃a
                                                      which implies

                               ws S̃a      PA A
                                      = gA      .                       (56)
                                Y           Y

The arbitrage equation pins down the price of an idea as

                                 π            π
                        PA =          =                .                (57)
                               r − gπ   r − (gY − gA )

Therefore

            PA A         1         Aπ         1
                 =               ·    =                · ψ(1 − ψ).      (58)
             Y     r − (gY − gA ) Y     r − (gY − gA )
    38                                    CHARLES I. JONES



      And substituting this back into (56) gives

                            ws S̃a         gA
                                   =                · ψ(1 − ψ) ≡ ρs                      (59)
                             Y       r − (gY − gA )

      Notice that because the interest rate and growth rates of the economy are in-
      variant to policy in the long run, the share of income paid to entrepreneurs
      ρs is as well.

   In equilibrium, raw labor is paid less than its marginal product so that some of
final output can be used to compensate entrepreneurs. As Romer (1990) pointed out,
because of the increasing returns associated with the nonrivalry of ideas, all factors
cannot be paid their marginal products. There is not enough final output to go around.
   Notice that ρℓ + ρm + ρs 6= 1. In particular, what is true is that Y = wL + wm M̃ + Aπ
and Aπ > ws S̃a . That is, there are some “profits” left over associated with owning
patents in this economy (that get paid to entrepreneurs and managers through the
claims on profits in asset markets). Nevertheless, it remains true that wL+wm M̃ +ws S̃a
is proportional to Y with a constant (and invariant to taxes) factor of proportionality
in the steady state, so everything in the simple model carries through ignoring this
subtlety.16
   Overall, then, this section explains how the steady state of the full model captures
the simple model that we used at the start of the paper.



7. Conclusion

This paper considers the taxation of top incomes when the following conditions apply:
(i) new ideas drive economic growth, (ii) the reward for creating a successful innovation
is a top income, and (iii) innovation cannot be perfectly targeted by a separate research
subsidy. These conditions lead to a new force affecting the optimal top tax rate: by
slowing the creation of the new ideas that drive aggregate GDP, top income taxation
reduces everyone’s income, not just the income at the top. When the creation of ideas
is the ultimate source of economic growth, this force sharply constrains both revenue-
  16
     One might wonder about where the payments to basic researchers wSb show up. The equation Y =
wL + wm M̃ + Aπ describes the payments made to factors, not the income received. The income received
gets taxed, and these taxes go, in part, to pay for basic research.
                          TAXING TOP INCOMES IN A WORLD OF IDEAS                    39


maximizing and welfare-maximizing top tax rates. For example, for extreme parameter
values, maximizing the welfare of the middle class requires a negative top tax rate: the
higher income that results from the subsidy to innovation more than makes up for the
lost redistribution. More generally, the calibrated model suggests that incorporating
ideas and economic growth cuts the optimal top marginal tax rate substantially relative
to the basic Saez calculation.
   The point of this paper is not to provide a precisely calculated value of the “correct”
optimal top tax rate. As an extensive literature points out, there are many considera-
tions that need to be taken into account to provide such a number. Instead, the point is
that the existing literature has underemphasized a consideration that appears to have
a first-order effect on the calculation. When the return to the discovery of new ideas
is an important part of the compensation of top earners, the nonrivalry of these ideas
means that distortions to innovation can have large effects on other people’s incomes,
and therefore on the optimal top tax rate itself.




A. Proofs

The Revenue-Maximizing Top Tax Rate in Equation (8). Starting from equation (7),
            dY         dY
note that   dτ   = − d(1−τ ) so that


                                                      dY     1 − τ (1 − ρ)τ0 + ρτ
                                       (ρ − ρ̄) =                 ·
                                                    d(1 − τ ) Y        1−τ
                              ⇒ ∆ρ(1 − τ ) = ηY ,1−τ · [(1 − ρ)τ0 + ρτ ]

                  ⇒ ∆ρ − ηY ,1−τ (1 − ρ)τ0 = (∆ρ + ηY ,1−τ ρ)τ                       (A1)


which can be solved for τ to give the solution in the text:

                                                      1−ρ
                                    ∗
                                             1 − τ0 · ∆ρ · ηY ,1−τ
                                   τrm   =           ρ               .
                                                1+   ∆ρ ηY ,1−τ



Proof of Proposition 1. Maximizing Worker Welfare
   40                                      CHARLES I. JONES



   The Lagrangian for this problem is


              L = log(1 − τ0 ) + log Y + λ[τ0 Y + (τ − τ0 )(ρY − w̄Sa ) − ΩY ].                (A2)


The first order condition with respect to τ0 is

                                      1
                                           = λ[Y − (ρY − w̄Sa )]
                                    1 − τ0
                                          = λY [1 − (ρ − ρ̄)]

                                          = λY (1 − ∆ρ).                                       (A3)


   The first order condition with respect to τ is

               1 ∂Y τ                          ∂Y τ Y
                      + λ[τ0 + (τ − τ0 )ρ − Ω]        + λ(ρY − w̄Sa ) = 0
               Y ∂τ τ                          ∂τ Y τ
                       1                               1
                ⇒ ηY ,τ + λY [(1 − ρ)τ0 + ρτ − Ω]ηY ,τ + λY (ρ − ρ̄) = 0.
                       τ                               τ

                                                   τ
   Now use the fact that ηY ,τ = −ηY ,1−τ ·       1−τ   and to simplify notation, let η := ηY ,1−τ .
Then, rewrite this FOC as

                         η                              η
                    −       − λY [(1 − ρ)τ0 + ρτ − Ω]       + λY ∆ρ = 0
                        1−τ                          1− τ
                                 1
                          ⇒ η        + (1 − ρ)τ0 + ρτ − Ω = ∆ρ(1 − τ )
                                λY

   Substituting from (A3) for λY and rearranging gives


                 η[(1 − ∆ρ)(1 − τ0 ) + (1 − ρ)τ0 − Ω] = ∆ρ(1 − τ ) − ηρτ

                                                             = ∆ρ − τ (∆ρ + ρη).


   Finally, solve for τ :

                                ∆ρ − η[(1 − ∆ρ)(1 − τ0 ) + (1 − ρ)τ0 − Ω
                         τ=
                                               ∆ρ + ρη
                                     h                            i
                                       1−ρ    1−∆ρ             Ω
                                1 − η ∆ρ τ0 + ∆ρ (1 − τ0 ) − ∆ρ
                            =                     ρ
                                             1+   ∆ρ η

                                                                                               (A4)
                          TAXING TOP INCOMES IN A WORLD OF IDEAS                          41


which proves the proposition. QED.

Proof of Proposition 2. Maximizing Social Welfare

   The problem is to choose τ0 and τ to maximize


            SW F = log Y + ℓ log(1 − τ0 ) + s(1 − α) log(1 − τ ) − sζ(1 − τ )α              (A5)


subject to the government budget constraint (GBC):


                               τ0 Y + (τ − τ0 )(ρY − w̄Sa ) = ΩY.                           (A6)


   Let λ be the Lagrange multiplier on the GBC, denoting the shadow value of an extra
unit of tax revenue. Then the first order condition with respect to τ0 is

                                    ℓ
                                         = λ[Y − (ρY − w̄Sa )]
                                  1 − τ0
                                        = λY [1 − (ρ − ρ̄)]

                                        = λY (1 − ∆ρ).                                      (A7)


   The first order condition with respect to τ is

           1 ∂Y τ   s(1 − α)                                          ∂Y τ Y
                  −          + αζ(1 − τ )α−1 + λ[τ0 + (τ − τ0 )ρ − Ω]
           Y ∂τ τ     1−τ                                             ∂τ Y τ
                                                    + λ(ρY − w̄Sa ) = 0
                     1 s(1 − α)                                                1
             ηY ,τ     −        + αζ(1 − τ )α−1 + λY [(1 − ρ)τ0 + ρτ − Ω]ηY ,τ
                     τ   1−τ                                                   τ
                                                    + λY (ρ − ρ̄) = 0.

                                               τ
   Now use the fact that ηY ,τ = −ηY ,1−τ ·   1−τ   and to simplify notation, let η := ηY ,1−τ .
Then rewrite this FOC as

                 η    s(1 − α) αζ(1 − τ )α                            η
            −       −         +            − λY [(1 − ρ)τ0 + ρτ − Ω]
                1−τ     1−τ      1−τ                                 1−τ
                                                 + λY ∆ρ = 0.

                                                                                          ℓ
   Now use the FOC with respect to τ0 in equation (A7) to note that λY =           (1−τ0 )(1−∆ρ) .
   42                                   CHARLES I. JONES



Substituting this in above and using some algebra gives

                                          ηℓ
 −η − s(1 − α) + αsζ(1 − τ )α +                     [(1 − ρ)(1 − τ0 ) + ρ(1 − τ ) − (1 − Ω)]
                                  (1 − τ0 )(1 − ∆ρ)
                                      ∆ρ 1 − τ
                                 +ℓ               =0
                                    1 − ∆ρ 1 − τ0

which can be simplified further to
                                                                   
                                           α   ηℓ            1−Ω
              −η − s(1 − α) + αsζ(1 − τ ) +          1−ρ−
                                            1 − ∆ρ           1 − τ0
                                                                    
                                               ∆ρ 1 − τ          ηρ
                                          +ℓ                1+         = 0.
                                             1 − ∆ρ 1 − τ0       ∆ρ

   Next, rearrange this equation and write in terms of the keep rate κ and κ0 as
                                                             
                       ηℓ(1 − ρ)       α      ∆ρ κ         ηρ         ηℓ 1 − Ω
        η + s(1 − α) −           = αsζκ + ℓ             1+       −
                        1 − ∆ρ              1 − ∆ρ κ0      ∆ρ      1 − ∆ρ κ0
                                           1     ℓ
                                 = αsζκα +           [κ(∆ρ + ηρ) − η(1 − Ω)]
                                           κ0 1 − ∆ρ
                                           1     ℓ
                                 = αsζκα +           [κ∆ρ + η[ρκ − (1 − Ω)]]             (A8)
                                           κ0 1 − ∆ρ

   Now recall that the government budget constraint can be manipulated:


                             (1 − ∆ρ)κ0 + ∆ρκ = 1 − Ω                                    (A9)

                          ⇒ (ρ − ρ̄κ − (1 − Ω) = −(1 − ∆ρ)κ0

                               ⇒ ρκ − (1 − Ω) = ρ̄κ − (1 − ∆ρ)κ0 .                     (A10)


   Substituting this expression into (A8) gives

                         ηℓ(1 − ρ)           1     ℓ
        η + s(1 − α) −             = αsζκα +            [κ∆ρ + η[ρ̄κ − (1 − ∆ρ)κ0 ]]
                          1 − ∆ρ             κ0 1 − ∆ρ
                                             κ     ℓ
                                   = αsζκα +           [∆ρ + η ρ̄] − ηℓ
                                             κ0 1 − ∆ρ
                       TAXING TOP INCOMES IN A WORLD OF IDEAS                                   43


   Rearranging and collecting terms:
                                                                           
                  ακ     ℓ                                            1−ρ
            αsζκ +           [∆ρ + η ρ̄] = η + s(1 − α) + ηℓ 1 −
                   κ0 1 − ∆ρ                                         1 − ∆ρ
                                                                       
                                                                   ρ̄
                                         = η + s(1 − α) + ηℓ
                                                               1 − ∆ρ
                                                                      
                                                                 ρ̄ℓ
                                         = s(1 − α) + η 1 +
                                                              1 − ∆ρ

Together with the government budget in (A9), this proves the proposition. QED.



B. Deriving the Social Rate of Return

Following Jones and Williams (1998), begin with a discrete-time version of our model,
where the production function for ideas is


                            ∆At+1 = G(S̃t , At , Bt ) = S̃tλ Aφt a Btα                          (A11)


and the production function for final output is Y = Aσ M̃ ψ L1−ψ .
   Consider the following variation: reduce consumption by one unit today, and use
the proceeds to hire additional entrepreneurs to produce ideas. Then tomorrow, reduce
the number of entrepreneurs by the appropriate amount to leave the time path of At
unchanged from period t + 2 onward. Denote the additional consumption can be
gained by this variation by r̃, which is the social rate of return.
   Mathematically, this return is then given by
                                                                                    
                       1 ∂Gt ∂Yt+1      w̃t+1   ∂Gt /∂ S̃t                  ∂Gt+1
             1 + r̃ =    ·     ·      +       ·                          1+
                      w̃t ∂ S̃t ∂At+1                    ˜
                                         w̃t ∂Gt+1 /∂ St+1                  ∂At+1

where w̃t is that shadow price that converts one unit of research effort into one unit of
consumption. Substituting for the derivatives, we have
                                                                                           
                   1     ∆At+1        Yt+1    w̃t+1 λ∆At+1 /S̃t                     ∆At+2
         1 + r̃ =     ·λ           ·σ       +       ·                        1 + φa
                  w̃t      S̃t        At+1      w̃t λ∆At+2 /S̃t+1                   At+1
                            Yt
                ≈ λσgA ·          + 1 + gw̃ + gS̃ + φa gA − gA
                          w̃t S̃t

where the approximation comes from ignoring second order terms (products of growth
   44                                      CHARLES I. JONES



rates).
   Finally, we need to consider w̃. This is the rate at which one unit of research input
can be converted into consumption. Recall S̃t = ēz̄St , and the key distortion in the
economy is on research effort. In particular, the researcher’s first order condition is

                                       1 ue
                                   −    ·   = ws (1 − τ ) ≡ w̃.                             (A12)
                                       z uc

That is, the rate at which entrepreneurs trade off a unit of research input for consump-
tion is ws (1 − τ ). Substituting this into the social rate of return equation, we have

                                              1
                           r̃ ≈ λσgA ·               + gY − (1 − φa )gA .                   (A13)
                                         ρs (1 − τ )

Collecting terms and noting that γ ≡ λσ/(1 − φa ) and gy = σgA yields the result in the
text in equation (30).



References
Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt, “A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction,” Econo-
  metrica, March 1992, 60 (2), 323–351.

Akcigit, Ufuk, Douglas Hanley, and Nicolas Serrano-Velarde, “Back to Basics: Basic Re-
  search Spillovers, Innovation Policy and Growth,” December 2016. University of Chicago
  manuscript.

  , John Grigsby, Tom Nicholas, and Stefanie Stantcheva, “Taxation and Innovation in the 20th
  Century,” Working Paper 24982, National Bureau of Economic Research September 2018.

  , Salome Baslandze, and Stefanie Stantcheva, “Taxation and the International Mobility of
  Inventors,” American Economic Review, October 2016, 106 (10), 2930–81.

Ales, Laurence and Christopher Sleet, “Taxing Top CEO Incomes,” American Economic Review,
  November 2016, 106 (11), 3331–66.

Badel, Alejandro and Mark Huggett, “Taxing Top Earners: A Human Capital Perspective,”
  Working Papers, Georgetown University, Department of Economics September 2015.

  and     , “The Sufficient Statistic Approach: Predicting the Top of the Laffer Curve,” Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 2017, 87 (C), 1–12.
                        TAXING TOP INCOMES IN A WORLD OF IDEAS                          45


Bell, Alexander M., Raj Chetty, Xavier Jaravel, Neviana Petkova, and John Van Reenen, “Who
  Becomes an Inventor in America? The Importance of Exposure to Innovation,” Working
  Paper 24062, National Bureau of Economic Research November 2017.

  ,   ,   ,   , and     , “Do Tax Cuts Produce More Einsteins? The Impacts of Financial
  Incentives vs. Exposure to Innovation on the Supply of Inventors,” Working Paper 25493,
  National Bureau of Economic Research January 2019.

Bloom, Nicholas, Charles I. Jones, John Van Reenen, and Michael Webb, “Are Ideas Getting
  Harder to Find?,” 2019. Stanford University manuscript.

  , Mark Schankerman, and John Van Reenen, “Identifying Technology Spillovers and Product
  Market Rivalry,” Econometrica, 07 2013, 81 (4), 1347–1393.

Budish, Eric, Benjamin N. Roin, and Heidi Williams, “Do firms underinvest in long-term
  research? Evidence from cancer clinical trials,” The American Economic Review, 2015, 105
  (7), 2044–2085.

Diamond, Peter A, “Optimal Income Taxation: An Example with a U-Shaped Pattern of Optimal
  Marginal Tax Rates,” American Economic Review, March 1998, 88 (1), 83–95.

Diamond, Peter and Emmanuel Saez, “The Case for a Progressive Tax: From Basic Research to
  Policy Recommendations,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2011, 25 (4), 165–90.

Gabaix, Xavier and Augustin Landier, “Why Has CEO Pay Increased So Much?,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2008, 123 (1), 49–100.

Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman, Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy,
  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991.

Hall, Bronwyn H., Jacques Mairesse, and Pierre Mohnen, “Chapter 24 - Measuring the Returns
  to R&D,” in Bronwyn H. Hall and Nathan Rosenberg, eds., Handbook of the Economics of
  Innovation, Volume 2, Vol. 2 of Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, North-Holland,
  2010, pp. 1033 – 1082.

Hall, Robert E. and Susan E. Woodward, “The Burden of the Nondiversifiable Risk of En-
  trepreneurship,” American Economic Review, June 2010, 100 (3), 1163–94.

Howell, Sabrina T., “Financing Innovation: Evidence from R&D Grants,” American Economic
  Review, April 2017, 107 (4), 1136–64.

Internal Revenue Service, “Statistics of Income 2015: Individual Income Tax Returns,” Technical
  Report September 2017. Publication 1304.
      46                                  CHARLES I. JONES



  , “SOI Tax Stats - Historical Table 23,” Technical Report 2018.

Jaimovich, Nir and Sergio Rebelo, “Nonlinear Effects of Taxation on Growth,” Journal of Political
  Economy, 2017, 125 (1), 265–291.

Jones, Charles I., “Growth and Ideas,” in Philippe Aghion and Steven A. Durlauf, eds., Handbook
  of Economic Growth, New York: North Holland, 2005, pp. 1063–1111.

  and John C. Williams, “Measuring the Social Return to R&D,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  November 1998, 113 (4), 1119–1135.

Kindermann, Fabian and Dirk Krueger, “High Marginal Tax Rates on the Top 1%? Lessons from
  a Life Cycle Model with Idiosyncratic Income Risk,” Working Paper 20601, National Bureau of
  Economic Research October 2014.

Lockwood, Benjamin, Charles Nathanson, and E. Glen Weyl, “Taxation and the Allocation of
  Talent,” Journal of Political Economy, 2017, 125 (5), 1635–1682.

Lucking, Brian and Nicholas Bloom, “Have R&D Spillovers Changed over Time?,” 2017. Stanford
  University manuscript.

Mirrlees, James A., “An Exploration in the Theory of Optimum Income Taxation,” Review of
  Economic Studies, 1971, 38, 175–208.

Moretti, Enrico and Daniel J. Wilson, “The Effect of State Taxes on the Geographical Location of
  Top Earners: Evidence from Star Scientists,” American Economic Review, July 2017, 107 (7),
  1858–1903.

Piketty, Thomas and Emmanuel Saez, “Income Inequality In The United States, 1913–1998,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 2003, 118 (1), 1–39.

  ,        , and Stefanie Stantcheva, “Optimal Taxation of Top Labor Incomes: A Tale of Three
  Elasticities,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, February 2014, 6 (1), 230–71.

Romer, Paul M., “Endogenous Technological Change,” Journal of Political Economy, October
  1990, 98 (5), S71–S102.

Rothschild, Casey and Florian Scheuer, “A Theory of Income Taxation under Multidimensional
  Skill Heterogeneity,” manuscript 5165, Stanford University 2015.

Sachs, Dominik, Aleh Tsyvinski, and Nicolas Werquin, “Nonlinear Tax Incidence and Optimal
  Taxation in General Equilibrium,” NBER Working Papers 22646, National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research, Inc September 2016.
                       TAXING TOP INCOMES IN A WORLD OF IDEAS                         47


Saez, Emmanuel, “Using Elasticities to Derive Optimal Tax Rates,” Review of Economic Studies,
  2001, 68, 205–229.

Scheuer, Florian and Iván Werning, “The Taxation of Superstars,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 2017, 132 (1), 211–270.

Stokey, Nancy L. and Sergio Rebelo, “Growth Effects of Flat-Rate Taxes,” Journal of Political
  Economy, June 1995, 103, 519–550.

Tervio, Marko, “The Difference that CEOs Make: An Assignment Model Approach,” American
  Economic Review, 2008, 98 (3), 642–668.

Wolfe, Raymond M., “Business R&D Performance in the United States Tops $300 Billion in
  2012,” NCSES Info Brief, NSF, October 2014, 15-303.
