NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAN SIMPLE PSYCHOLOGICAL INTERVENTIONS INCREASE PREVENTIVE
HEALTH INVESTMENT?
Johannes Haushofer
Anett John
Kate Orkin
Working Paper 25731
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25731

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2019, Revised December 2019

Supported by grant NIH UH2 NR016378 to JH. We thank Jane Dougherty, Daniel Mellow, Moritz
Poll, and the Busara Center for Behavioral Economics for research assistance; Clair Null, Michael
Kremer, and the WASH Benefits Kenya team for collaboration and advice; and Nava Ashraf, David
Laibson, Xavier D'Haultfoeuille, Alessandro Iaria, and Pedro Rey-Biel for comments. The pre-analysis
plan for this study is registered at https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/2850/history/27566.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2019 by Johannes Haushofer, Anett John, and Kate Orkin. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Can Simple Psychological Interventions Increase Preventive Health Investment?
Johannes Haushofer, Anett John, and Kate Orkin
NBER Working Paper No. 25731
April 2019, Revised December 2019
JEL No. D91,I12,O12
ABSTRACT
Behavioral constraints may explain part of low demand for preventive health products. We test the
effects of two light-touch psychological interventions on water chlorination and related health and
economic outcomes using a randomized controlled trial among 3750 women in rural Kenya. One intervention
encourages participants to visualize alternative realizations of the future; one builds participants' ability
to make concrete plans. Both interventions include information on health benefits of chlorination.
After twelve weeks, both interventions increase the share of households who chlorinate drinking water
and reduce child diarrhea episodes. Analysis of mechanisms suggests both interventions increase self-efficacy—beliefs
about one's ability to achieve desired outcomes—as well as the salience of chlorination. They do not
differentially affect beliefs and knowledge about chlorination (compared to a group who receive only
information), nor affect lab measures of time preferences or planning ability. Results suggest simple
psychological interventions can increase use of preventive health technologies.

Johannes Haushofer
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
427 Peretsman-Scully Hall
Princeton, NJ 08540
and Busara Center for Behavioral Economics,
Nairobi, Kenya
and also NBER
haushofer@princeton.edu

Kate Orkin
University of Oxford
Merton College
Merton Street
Oxford, OX14JD
United Kingdom
kate.orkin@merton.ox.ac.uk

Anett John
CREST
5 Avenue Henry Le Chatelier
91120 Palaiseau
FRANCE
anett.john@ensae.fr

A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/2850/history/27566

1.

Introduction

Individuals often fail to invest in preventive healthcare, even when such investments cost little
and individuals are aware of their benefits.1 An estimated two thirds of deaths of children under
5 could be averted with cheap preventive technologies (Dupas 2014a). A prominent example
is chlorination of drinking water, which is highly effective in reducing prevalence of diarrhea,
particularly among young children (Arnold and Colford Jr 2007). Diarrhea is the second leading
cause of death worldwide among children aged 1–5, contributing to nearly half a million deaths
in 2015 (Wang et al. 2016). It is a leading cause of morbidity, and stunts healthy growth in
children through enteric dysfunction (Richard et al. 2013). In many settings, chlorine for water is
readily and cheaply available, but infrequently used by individuals without access to clean water.
In our study areas in Kenya, only 3 percent of households used chlorine before any intervention
(Null et al. 2018), although a month’s supply costs only KES 25 (USD 0.25). Interventions which
provide chlorine for free, often in combination with information or marketing campaigns, increase
usage to between 23 and 60 percent, but even after these interventions, take-up remains far below
complete (Kremer et al. 2011a; Dupas et al. 2016; Null et al. 2018; Luoto et al. 2014).
A growing body of evidence suggests that behavioral or psychological constraints may explain
some of the low demand for preventive health products. For example, demand for commitment
products suggests a role of present bias in health decisions (Schilbach 2018; Bai et al. 2017; Giné,
Karlan, and Zinman 2010; DellaVigna and Malmendier 2006; Royer, Stehr, and Sydnor 2015). The
success of planning interventions argues for a role of planning skills and limited attention(Stadler,
Oettingen, and Gollwitzer 2009; Milkman et al. 2013; Milkman et al. 2011). Most recently,
economists have started to explore the role of beliefs about oneself – from self-image to agency
and sense of control over one’s life – in determining health behavior (Ghosal et al. 2019; Banerjee,
la Ferrara, and Orozco 2018; Baranov et al. 2017).
In this paper, we present evidence from a field experiment in rural Kenya which studies the role of
behavioral constraints in limiting the use of chlorine to treat drinking water, by targeting these constraints directly with simple psychological and informational interventions. We allocate 3750 young
women to four treatment groups. The first group received a two-session group intervention where
participants visualized alternative realizations of the future, depending on their behavior in the
present (“Visualization” or “V”). The intervention aimed to make future outcomes more vivid and
1

For instance, providing insecticide-treated bed nets reduces incidence of malaria, which increases both
farmworker productivity (Dillon, Friedman, and Serneels 2014) and farm yields (Fink and Masiye 2015). Bleakley
(2010) estimates that a child who grew up malaria-free earns 50 percent more throughout their adult life. However,
demand for bed nets is low and price sensitive (Cohen and Dupas 2010; Dupas 2014b). Similarly, treating intestinal
parasites improves child health and school attendance (Miguel and Kremer 2004), growth (Bobonis, Miguel, and
Puri-Sharma 2006), test scores (Ozier 2018), and adult wages (Baird et al. 2016), yet take-up is low at non-zero
prices (Kremer and Miguel 2007).

1

tangible in participants’ minds, thus increasing their perceived value relative to the more immediate
costs required to attain them. The second group received a two-session intervention that helped
participants to undertake activities that they were struggling to do regularly, by making concrete,
specific plans, anticipating potential obstacles, and establishing routines (“Planning” or “P”). Both
interventions required participants to think about how their current behavior affects their future outcomes.To isolate the effects of the psychologically active elements of these treatments, a third, active
control group received all elements of the intervention except the psychologically active components
(“Active Control” or “AC” intervention): these participants also gathered as a group, but to discuss
“psychologically inactive” topics. In addition, all three groups received a short information module
about the benefits of chlorination (“Information” or “INF” intervention), to hold beliefs about
chlorination constant across groups. Finally, we compare these treatments to a fourth, pure control
group (“PC”), who were simply surveyed at endline. Thus, our groups are “V+INF”, “P+INF”,
“AC+INF”, and “PC”. The comparison between the three “active” treatment groups and the pure
control group gives the total effect on targeted behaviors of providing interventions such as ours
in other, similar settings. The comparison between the two “psychological” treatment groups and
the AC+INF group tests the effect of interventions specifically targeting the ability to visualize the
future or to make and execute plans, respectively, over and above those targeting lack of information.
We report economically large and statistically significant effects of our interventions on our
main outcome of interest, chlorination of household drinking water, measured objectively through
a chemical test in unannounced household visits. Specifically, in the Visualization and Planning
groups relative to the pure control group, we find significant increases of 27 and 18 percent (6
and 4 percentage points), respectively, in the share of households whose drinking water contains
chlorine twelve weeks after the interventions. In line with these findings, both the Visualization and
Planning treatments significantly reduce the number of diarrhea episodes in children: Visualization
reduces diarrhea by 37–39 percent (9 percentage points) relative to both the active and the pure
control group, and Planning by 21–30 percent (5–7 percentage points), respectively. In contrast,
the effect in the active control group relative to the pure control group is small and not statistically
significant for both chlorination and diarrhea.
These interventions are extremely cost-effective by the standards of the World Health Organization (WHO). Delivery of the interventions cost approximately USD 4 per household, or USD 1.33
per child. If we assume, conservatively, that the treatment effects of the visualization and planning
interventions are 38 and 21 percent reductions (from the active control comparisons) in diarrhea for
3 months, and that the effects then immediately go to zero, the cost per Disability-Adjusted Life
Year (DALY) saved is USD 110 for the visualization and USD 199 for the planning intervention.2
The WHO classifies an intervention as “cost-effective” for a cost per DALY saved below USD
2

See Appendix A for detailed cost effectiveness calculations.

2

4525, and “highly cost-effective” below USD 1508. By comparison, deworming projects have a
cost per DALY saved of USD 28 – USD 70/DALY, and malaria bed nets of USD 100/DALY.3
The effect of our interventions is not limited to the health domain, but also extends to economic
behavior: the Visualization intervention caused a statistically significant 26 percent increase in
the amount saved per week (pre-specified as a secondary outcome). Effects were larger than
those of the Planning intervention (significant at the ten percent level). In addition, the Planning
intervention decreased the total self-reported hours of work in the last three months by 22 percent
(although earnings did not decline, consistent with increased efficiency of work). We see no effects
on use of other widely available preventive health products, such as vaccines or antenatal checkups,
nor in non-health investments (such as in children’s education), all pre-specified as exploratory
outcomes. We conclude that light-touch psychological interventions may be most effective when
participants also receive information emphasizing the benefits of a particular behavior change.
We also test if our psychological interventions have larger effects in villages where infrastructure
lowers the effort and time costs of chlorination. We conducted our intervention in the study sites
of a previous trial, the “WASH Benefits” study (Null et al. 2018). In this study, villages were
randomly assigned to receive chlorine dispensers placed at the water source, and dispensers had
been maintained after the trial. Our treatment effects on chlorination are somewhat larger in
villages with dispensers, although differences are mostly statistically insignificant. Thus, we observe
weak evidence that, when psychological, information and time cost/effort constraints are alleviated
simultaneously, effects on behavior may be larger than when cost and access barriers remain.
Finally, we use lab-in-the-field methods and psychological questionnaires to study the mechanisms through which these treatment effects operate. We show, first, that differences in behavior
are not explained merely by differences in beliefs about the efficacy of chlorine, or increased
knowledge about chlorination. All three “active” treatment groups received the information
treatment and show similar improvements in their belief that chlorination can prevent diarrhea,
and in knowledge about using chlorine. But the effects of psychological treatments on chlorination
and diarrhea are larger than the effects of pure information (i.e. the Active Control arm).
We then provide suggestive evidence in favor of two potential psychological channels accounting
for the larger effect of the psychological interventions compared to the Active Control. First, we
show large and significant effects of both the Visualization and Planning treatments, of 0.16 and
0.12 SDs, on a self-efficacy scale, which was pre-specified as one of three hypothesized mechanisms.4
3

WHO figures: https://www.who.int/bulletin/volumes/93/2/14-138206/en/.
Deworming: https://www.givewell.org/international/technical/programs/deworming/cost-effectiveness.
Bed nets: https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/HbunzTyFPRwcYihg6/long-lasting-insecticide-treated-netsusd3-340-per-life
4
While the visualization intervention was primarily targeted towards time preferences, and the planning
intervention towards planning skills, the design of both interventions required a strong mapping between current
behavior and future outcomes. Specifically, visualizing alternative realizations of the future depending on current

3

The larger coefficient in the Visualization treatment may explain why we observe somewhat larger
effects on chlorine and diarrhea in this group, though none of the differences between Visualization
and Planning are significant.
Second, in a “salience” task, we find that the psychological treatments focus participants’
attention on chlorination more than the information treatment alone, even 10 weeks after the
intervention. This effect is not present for other future-oriented behaviors (savings and farm investment), and thus not simply a consequence of becoming more forward-looking in general.5 While
the Visualization and Planning interventions were designed to be domain-general, they use water
treatment as an example behavior, often in the context of engaging stories or exercises. Together,
these findings suggest that psychological interventions which build self-efficacy and successfully
focus attention on a target behavior may be more effective than standard information campaigns.
Our psychological interventions do not significantly affect laboratory measures of time preferences, neither using an incentivized real-effort task, nor using multiple price lists over money. They
also have no measurable impact on cognitive functions linked to planning, nor on a self-reported
psychological scale measuring whether people took actions to achieve their goals. Furthermore,
they do not affect lab measures of risk preferences. These results suggest that deeper underlying
preferences and cognitive functions may not respond strongly to light-touch interventions. In
contrast, self-efficacy and attention appear more malleable. A caveat is that we do not measure
changes in participants’ ability to simulate future utility (à la Gabaix and Laibson 2017). Especially the Visualization intervention may have improved forecasting abilities, which could explain
differential impacts between the Visualization and the Planning intervention (notably, that savings
increase in the former but not in the latter).
Although we cannot completely rule out that treatment effects may reflect social desirability bias
in answering questions related to the content of the intervention, it is unlikely that such effects account for our findings. Most importantly, we observe increases in objectively measured chlorine content of stored household drinking water during unannounced household visits. The visits were closely
concentrated in time within each village (thus making them hard to anticipate), and the treatment
effects are robust to controlling for within-village chlorine test delay. We also observe no treatment
effects on self-reported scales capturing other socially desirable behaviors specifically mentioned
behavior requires the belief that current behavior can affect future outcomes. Similarly, making detailed plans
to achieve desired outcomes both requires and enforces the belief that these outcomes are within the individual’s
reach. We thus hypothesized that the interactive lectures and exercises in our treatments would strengthen the
psychological concept of self-efficacy: Generalized Self-Efficacy (GSE) captures beliefs about one’s ability to
achieve desirable outcomes, and overcome obstacles (Bandura 1977). It is closely related to the economic concept
of believed returns to effort, but commonly understood as domain-general rather than task-specific (Schwarzer
and Jerusalem 2010). See Bandura (1997) and Reich and Infurna (2016) for reviews of the literature.
5
This finding is in line with Zwane et al. (2011), who find people chlorinate water more if they are surveyed
18 times compared to three times, making chlorination more salient.

4

in the workshops, such as scales measuring whether one has achieved one’s goals in the past week.
Our paper makes several contributions to the existing literature. First, we show that addressing
psychological barriers can lead to economically significant increases in the use of preventive health
products, and these effects go beyond information alone. Our study builds on a small literature
which shows that such light-touch interventions can increase long-term investments, including in
health. The Visualization intervention drew on theoretical and empirical studies in economics and
psychology suggesting that future visualization techniques may be effective at increasing patient
behavior (Gabaix and Laibson 2017; Alan and Ertac 2018; Duckworth et al. 2011), including smoking cessation (Stein et al. 2018) and savings (Hershfield et al. 2011). The Planning intervention was
adapted from a low-intensity psychotherapy approach called Behavioral Activation (Lejuez et al.
2011; Ekers et al. 2014) and a behavioral intervention known as “implementation intentions” (Gollwitzer and Sheeran 2006; Duckworth et al. 2013; Morisano et al. 2010). Interventions which help
people to execute plans have been shown to improve immunization (Milkman et al. 2011), take-up of
preventive screening (Milkman et al. 2013), and exercise (Stadler, Oettingen, and Gollwitzer 2009).
Relatedly, reminders (which counter limited attention) improve compliance with medical
treatment regimens (Pop-Eleches et al. 2011) and increase productivity (Hanna, Mullainathan,
and Schwartzstein 2014; Beaman, Magruder, and Robinson 2014). Showing videos of role models
increases aspirations, savings, educational as well as business investment (Bernard et al. 2018),
and reduces prevalence of sexually transmitted disease (Banerjee, la Ferrara, and Orozco 2018). 6
Another literature documents that limited information may affect economic decisions. People
are known to increase investment in preventive health or in high-return opportunities, such as
education, after receiving information about benefits and returns (Dupas 2011; Jensen 2010; Jensen
2012; Dinkelman and Martı́nez 2014). This is also true in the context of drinking water, where
information that water is unsafe can lead to substitution to different water sources (Madajewicz
et al. 2007; Jalan and Somanathan 2008). However, in other cases, information campaigns have
not induced behavior change (Dupas 2009; Duflo, Dupas, and Kremer 2015). In our setting,
providing information and changing beliefs alone does not result in behavior change. In contrast,
psychologically targeted elements of these interventions, which improve self-efficacy and the salience
of the targeted behavior, are necessary to achieve measurable improvements in outcomes.7
6

In addition, more involved, multi-session interventions which target self-esteem and self-efficacy improve sex
workers’ savings and attendance at health checkups (Ghosal et al. 2019) and produce increases in employment McKelway (2018). Multisession interventions that resemble psychotherapy improve patience (Blattman, Jamison, and
Sheridan 2017) and reduce automatic decision-making (Heller et al. 2017), reducing violence and antisocial behavior.
With depressed mothers, they improve financial empowerment and investment in children (Baranov et al. 2017).
7
Our results suggest a possible reinterpretation of past findings: some successful “information” interventions
may work by combining pure information with psychological elements. For example, information about chlorination
provided by promoters may also operate through psychological mechanisms (Kremer et al. 2011b; Kremer et al.
2011a). Indeed, messaging around free safe water products is particularly effective in increasing adoption when
it is behaviorally inspired (Luoto et al. 2014).

5

More narrowly, our paper contributes to research that aims to increase chlorination of drinking
water, which has examined price mechanisms (Ashraf, Berry, and Shapiro 2010; Dupas et al. 2016;
Kremer et al. 2011b), communal vs. individual persuasion (Kremer et al. 2011a), and combinations
of information and subsidies (Ashraf, Jack, and Kamenica 2010; Null et al. 2018; Kremer et al.
2011a). Other researchers working on chlorination have noted that psychological constraints may
affect choices about water treatment.8 We show that psychological interventions have causal effects
on behavior and provide evidence that they work through psychological channels. These findings
complement other work on increasing demand for chlorination. Our interventions could therefore
be deployed in combination with these other programs, to deliver clean water to the 2 billion
people who currently use drinking water contaminated with feces.9 They could also be adapted to
encourage use of other preventive health products, as well as productive investments more generally.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the study design.
Section 3 describes the interventions. Section 4 describes the outcome variables. Section 5 describes
the estimation approach. Section 6 reports results. Section 7 discusses potential mechanisms.
Section 8 concludes.

2.

Experimental design

2.1

Sampling and randomization

Our study areas are Bungoma and Kakamega counties in rural Western Kenya. These counties were
included in the WASH Benefits study (henceforth WASH) of Null et al. (2018). The WASH study
was a cluster-randomized controlled trial, conducted from 2012 to 2014, which included 1,226 villages
(Null et al. 2018). Villages were grouped into clusters of one to three neighboring villages. Clusters
were then randomized to eight treatment arms, six of which tested household-level water, sanitation,
handwashing, and nutrition interventions in isolation and different combinations of interventions.10
We sampled 205 villages from the full sample of 1,226 villages. In one treatment group of the
WASH study, villages were provided with chlorine dispensers next to water sources, as well as community health promoters. We randomly selected 67 villages from this “Water Quality” (henceforth
“dispenser”) treatment arm and 67 villages from the “Passive Comparison” arm, which received no
interventions.11 In the dispenser villages, chlorine dispensers were installed at an average of five
8

For example, in Zambia Ashraf, Berry, and Shapiro (2010) note that women often mentioned being “busy” or
“distracted” after gathering water as a reason for buying chlorine but not using it. In Bangladesh, Luoto et al. (2011)
note the importance of understanding behavioral barriers to use, after finding that none of four water treatment
products had usage rates of above 30 percent, despite the provision of subsidies and extensive information.
9
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/drinking-water
10
For more information on the WASH Benefits study, see Appendix B.
11
There were two comparison groups in the original WASH study: an active comparison group, where children’s

6

community water points per village cluster, and refilled as needed. The “Dispensers for Safe Water”
program operated by the NGO Evidence Action has since maintained these dispensers, ensured
they are filled with chlorine, and retained a local promoter in each community. The randomization
has remained intact. An additional 71 villages were selected uniformly from the remaining six
WASH Benefits arms in Mumias district, Kakamega county. The inclusion of participants from
villages treated by the remaining six arms of the WASH intervention was not planned in our study,
but occurred as a result of a coding error at the sampling stage. During the WASH Benefits study,
48 of these 71 villages received one of sanitation, handwashing or nutrition interventions, but no
dispensers. However, these additional interventions all took place at the household level, and we
exclude households which participated directly in the original WASH study from participation in
the present study. In addition, all interventions other than dispensers finished three to four years
before our study. For these reasons, we group these 48 villages with the passive comparison villages
in our analysis.12 The other 23 villages received dispensers, as well as combinations of sanitation,
handwashing or nutrition interventions. We group these villages with dispenser villages, as Evidence Action continued to maintain dispensers in these villages. As a robustness check, we exclude
these 71 villages from the heterogeneity analysis by “Water Quality” assignment in Appendix F.
In the 205 study villages, we recruited 3750 women aged 18–35 between October 2017 and
January 2018. We focus on women because they are primarily responsible for household chores,
including collecting water, and thus for water chlorination. We recruit women aged 18–35 as
they are most likely to have small children, who in turn are the most vulnerable to water-borne
illnesses. With the help of local guides, enumerators visited all households in each included village
(see Section B) and conducted a census to determine household eligibility. Enumerators collected
demographic information on women that met the screening criteria: i) aged 18–35 inclusive, ii)
within this age range, the most senior woman in their household, and iii) their household did
not participate in the WASH Benefits study. The target sample of 3750 women represents all
eligible women in the 205 villages. As shown in Table 1, the women in our sample are on average
26 years old, 89 percent are married or cohabiting, and they have on average 6 years of education.
We split our sample into three “active” treatment groups and one pure control group. We
randomly assigned 992 participants to the “Visualization” (V+INF) group, 991 to the “Planning”
(P+INF) group, 992 to the “Active Control” (AC+INF) group, and 775 to the “Pure Control”
group. We stratified the randomization on village of residence, and a wealth index collected
arm circumference was measured, and a passive comparison group, where children were not measured but other
outcomes were measured.
12
Specifically, we exclude women who self-report having participated in the WASH study, and households with
children aged either 3–4 or 4–5, depending upon the village’s WASH Benefits timing. The reason for this second
exclusion is that the WASH Benefits study recruited women in their second or third trimester of pregnancy in
2012. As a result, our sample is composed of women who were exposed to village-level, but not household-level
interventions through the WASH Benefits study.

7

during the census.13 Redundant observations during stratification were equally distributed across
treatment groups.
Participants were assigned randomly to attend baseline and intervention sessions either in
the morning or in the afternoon. While participants were encouraged to attend the session type
assigned to them, they were allowed to switch to the other session time if necessary to minimize
attrition. Within a geographical region and within each treatment group, participants were invited
to sessions in alphabetical order, based on the first letter of their last name.

2.2

Design and timeline

The project was approved by the Princeton (#7376) and KEMRI (#536) IRBs. Participants in
the three “active” treatment groups participated in three sessions: a combined baseline and first
intervention session; a second intervention session one week later; and an endline 10 weeks after
the first session. Participants in the pure control group did not participate in the baseline and the
first and second intervention sessions, but participated in the endline 10 weeks after the beginning
of the study in their village. In addition, households in all four groups received an unannounced
visit 12 weeks after the beginning of the study, where enumerators collected a drinking water
sample to be assayed for the presence of chlorine.
The baseline and endline sessions lasted about two hours each and consisted of behavioral
tasks, psychological questionnaires, and a socioeconomic survey. These measures were collected in
“mobile labs” operated by the Busara Center for Behavioral Economics in Bungoma and Kakamega
counties, which each accommodated up to 25 participants at a time. The behavioral tasks and
psychological questionnaires were presented using touch screen computers, audio instructions,
color-coded response buttons using the zTree experimental interface (Fischbacher 2007), which
allowed both computer-illiterate and entirely illiterate individuals to participate. Enumerators read
instructions to the respondents in Kiswahili to maximize comprehension.14 The socioeconomic
survey was administered one-on-one by enumerators using tablets.
Each intervention session in the three “active” treatment groups lasted about two hours.
Participants were split into cohorts of five for each session, which were run by locally-trained
female facilitators. Participants were reconvened in the same cohorts for the second session. No
participant was invited for the second session without having already participated in the first session.
Participants received KES 250 (USD 2.50) for participating in the baseline survey and first
intervention session, KES 250 for the second session, and KES 350 for participating in the endline
13

The wealth index consisted of the total value of a limited set of assets (bicycles, cellphones, gas stoves, all
livestock, radios, sofas and televisions). Participants were split at the median into a “high” and “low” wealth group.
14
Most Kenyans speak a tribal “mother tongue” at home, Kiswahili as a lingua franca, and English as the
language of education and business. The Busara Center uses Kiswahili as the medium of oral communication
in most studies with this population.

8

session.15 Participants were reimbursed for their transport costs, using public transport rates
from their village of residence to the mobile laboratory. Finally, participants received payments
from the experimental tasks, as described in Section 4. Typical total study payments (excluding
transport) were around KES 1600 in the active treatment groups, and around KES 750 in the
pure control group. Participants were informed of the fixed amounts that they would be paid
during the phone call inviting them to a session, and told that they would have the opportunity to
earn some extra money during the session. All participants recruited to the sample were invited
to attend endline sessions, regardless of whether they attended the baseline and/or intervention
sessions. Table A.1 shows the number of participants at each stage of the study.

2.3

Background on chlorination use

Child diarrhea is relatively high in our study area, as it is in many parts of the developing world.
In the original WASH study control group, diarrhea prevalence in the past 7 days was 27 percent
among children aged 1 and 2 (Null et al. 2018); in our pure control group at endline, there have
been 0.2 incidences of diarrhea per child under 15 in the last 3 months. Fecal contamination of
drinking water is a likely cause of these episodes. Most of the population relies on communal
water sources, usually wells with pumps or springs (Null et al. 2018). Women and children collect
drinking water in plastic jerry cans, which is then kept in clay storage pots in the home. Water
can be contaminated easily as it is removed from storage pots.
Chlorinating water kills many of the pathogens that cause diarrhea.16 Absent point-of-collection
chlorine dispensers (as installed by WASH), households can purchase dilute chlorine. The main
brand of dilute chlorine is WaterGuard, which has been distributed and heavily marketed by the
NGO Population Services International (PSI) in Kenya since 2003. WaterGuard is available in most
local shops in the study area, and costs KES 25 (USD 0.25) per 150 ml bottle, about 0.2 percent of
average monthly earnings. Each bottle treats 1000 l of water (approximately one month to 50 days
of household drinking water) (Dupas et al. 2016; Lantagne et al. 2010) and comes with instructions
in Swahili and in pictures. There is widespread awareness of this product: even at baseline of the
WASH study in 2012, 89 percent had heard of WaterGuard, and 29 percent had used it at least once
(Null et al. 2018). Households also believe chlorine is effective: at endline, the pure control group
believe, on average, that 71 percent of incidences of diarrhea can be avoided by using chlorine.
However, take-up of chlorination is low. Even using chlorine from a free dispenser requires
repeated, proactive behavior. Dispensers are not present at every water point, so people might need
15

USD 1 was equivalent to approximately KES 100 at the time of the study.
A meta-analysis finds point-of-use methods of chlorinating drinking water reduce child diarrhea by an average
of 29 percent across 21 randomized controlled trials, suggesting unpurified water causes at least some episodes
of diarrhea (Arnold and Colford Jr 2007).
16

9

to plan their journeys to go past the correct water point. They might also need to make alternative
arrangements if the dispenser is not filled, or remind children fetching water to chlorinate it.
In non-dispenser villages, women would need to purchase WaterGuard, paying both time and
monetary costs, and remember to add it to each batch of water. In our sample at endline, 27
percent of pure control households report having chlorinated their current drinking water supply, 18
percent had detectable free chlorine in their water, and 22 percent had detectable total chlorine.17
Taste is mentioned as a potential barrier to chlorination use (Dupas et al. 2016; Ashraf, Berry,
and Shapiro 2010). Indeed, it is possible to taste if water has been chlorinated: in a blind taste test
among staff of the Busara Center for Behavioral Economics, on average participants correctly identified when drinking water had been treated with chlorine 75 percent of the time. However, we found
no statistically significant differences in the taste rating participants gave to chlorinated vs. unchlorinated water (unchlorinated water mean score =6.21/10, chlorinated water mean score =6.06/10,
p=0.66, n=90). While taste may prevent complete take-up of the product, taste differences are
present to the same extent in all arms, so do not confound estimates of treatment effects.

3.

Interventions

The structure of each session was held constant across treatment groups: each included a short lecture, followed by a story of a woman like them, reflections of how the themes relate to participants’
own lives, and finally drawing and list-writing exercises and activities.

3.1

Treatment 1: Visualization + Information module (“V+INF”)

The objective of the future visualization intervention was to increase internal motivation for patient
behavior. The intervention is based on the idea that present utility is easier to imagine than future
utility. A substantial body of evidence in psychology shows that people imagine future events
in much less detail than immediately upcoming events, focusing on abstract qualities rather than
details of execution (see e.g. Gilbert and Wilson 2009, Kahneman et al. 2004, Wilson et al. 2000).
For instance, helping out an elderly relative with their tax return next month may be imagined
as an act of love, while doing it later today is imagined as hours of painstaking sorting through
receipts. In a recent theoretical contribution, Gabaix and Laibson (2017) formalize the idea of
as-if discounting, which results from a perfectly patient decision-maker who simulates future utility
by combining priors with noisy, unbiased signals about future utility. The model implies that
interventions which improve forecasting ability (or forecasting efforts) will lead to more patient
17

See Section 4.1 on the distinction between free and total chlorine. We report free chlorine here for comparison
with other studies, but focus on total chlorine as our primary outcome measure.

10

behavior, without changing the underlying preference parameters. Models of quasi-hyperbolic
discounting (Laibson 1997 and O’Donoghue and Rabin 1999) are based on a differential weight
given to the present. Despite fundamental differences, both models predict that an increased focus
on the future will be associated with fewer dynamic preference reversals.18
The theoretical predictions are matched by empirical evidence: in a randomized educational
intervention in Turkish primary schools, Alan and Ertac (2018) find that eight weekly classes
on “imagining future selves” result in the children making more patient decisions in incentivized
choice tasks three years after the intervention. Research in psychology had previously established
that participants exposed to vivid imagery of their future selves increased hypothetical retirement
savings in laboratory and online studies (e.g. Hershfield et al. 2011). Further evidence on the effects
of future visualization techniques comes from the literatures on “best possible selves” (Markus
and Nurius 1986; Sheldon and Lyubomirsky 2006; King 2001), “episodic future thinking” (Daniel,
Stanton, and Epstein 2013), and “mental contrasting” (though mental contrasting is commonly
coupled with planning elements, such as implementation intentions, see e.g., Oettingen, Pak, and
Schnetter 2001, Oettingen, Mayer, and Thorpe 2010, and Duckworth et al. 2011).
The core of our intervention was to encourage participants to a) connect their present behavior
to outcomes in the future, b) visualize alternative realizations of the future, depending on their
current behavior, and c) put themselves in the shoes of their future selves, imagine how they
feel, and ‘talk’ to them. The approach was deliberately visual and emotional, with participants
asked to close their eyes repeatedly for several minutes, and to imagine their future selves in
as much graphic detail as possible. We hypothesize that increased vividness of the future may
affect behavior through a change in time preferences, a change in forecasting skills, or a stronger
mapping between present behavior and future outcomes (self-efficacy).
In the first intervention session, participants were given an interactive lecture on thinking
about the future. Participants were asked to think about the effect of small everyday behaviors
(such as spending their leftover budget on snacks) on future outcomes. The intervention carefully
avoided changing participants’ beliefs about which present behavior would entail which future
outcome – it merely encouraged them to make the connection themselves. Instead of pre-scribing
a list of everyday behaviors, facilitators largely relied on examples brought up by the participants.
The session then moved on to several silent visualization exercises, with prompts including “Close
your eyes for one minute. Imagine the person you will be in one year. Imagine your family in
one year.” and“ Imagine that your future self can now talk to you. How does she feel? What
does she want you to do?” In the second part of the session, participants listened to a story of
18

Both “as-if discounting” à la Gabaix and Laibson (2017) and quasi-hyperbolic discounting generate dynamic
preference reversals, but only quasi-hyperbolic discounting generates self-control problems and commitment
demand. Since there is no commitment in our study, the models are observationally equivalent for our purposes.

11

a woman whose daily life is full of tasks and worries, and who consequently focuses only on what
is necessary right now. Using examples of water chlorination and antenatal care visits, she learns
over time that thinking about the future in her everyday actions helps her and her family to have
a better life. The story was followed by a group discussion on behaviors from the participants’ own
lives, and visualizing alternative realizations of their own future, depending on present behavior.
The session finished by asking participants to draw one these “future realizations”, and make
notes on the corresponding present behavior. Unlike the Planning intervention, it focused on
high-level behaviors and outcomes without implementation details. The first intervention session
concluded with the information module described below. In the second Visualization intervention
session, participants largely revisited the first session, albeit with increased emphasis on how future
visualizations can be used to deal with temptations in the present.

3.2

Treatment 2: Planning + Information module (“P+INF”)

The Planning intervention aimed to help participants to undertake activities that they had
identified as important but were struggling to do regularly. The key idea was to make
concrete, specific plans, and approach them in a way that is informed by recent work in
psychology. One approach to treating mild depression, known as behavioral activation, draws on
literature on instrumental reinforcement and motivation (Lejuez et al. 2011).19 Depressed people
often reduce their overall activity level and avoid even basic tasks. In turn, avoidance exacerbates
negative moods, which further increase avoidance. Behavioral activation teaches participants to
set short-term goals, make detailed plans, and systematically start with the easiest tasks to “get
going.” This breaks the cycle of avoidance, and harnesses self-reinforcing motivation cycles (Ekers
et al. 2014; Weobong et al. 2017).
A second literature on “implementation intentions” (Gollwitzer and Sheeran 2006; Locke
and Latham 2002) suggests that plans are more likely to be implemented if they are concrete
and detailed, if they anticipate potential obstacles, and incorporate strategies to overcome them.
Interventions encouraging individuals to make such plans have improved classroom behavior and
test scores with school students (Duckworth et al. 2013; Morisano et al. 2010), and increased voter
turnout (Nickerson and Rogers 2010). In the health domain, they increase take-up of vaccinations
(Milkman et al. 2011), preventive screening (Milkman et al. 2013), and reported exercise (Stadler,
Oettingen, and Gollwitzer 2009). Importantly, completing a particular action plan (in this case,
to exercise) has been associated with an increase in self-efficacy (Lorig et al. 2014).
The first session began with a short lecture about how anyone can get stuck in cycles of
inactivity, where they lack motivation to get things done and lose out on the sense of achievement
19

Importantly, we do not screen for or target people with depression symptoms, or attempt to provide any
treatment for depression. We use manuals by Richards and Whyte (2011) and Lejuez et al. (2011).

12

of accomplishing what they intended to do. Participants then listened to a story of a woman very
similar to them who was overwhelmed and struggling to organize her chores, including fetching
water and chlorinating it. Once she fell out of the habit of doing routine tasks, she found it very
hard to find the motivation to start again. This had negative consequences for herself and her
family. Participants could then share experiences of similar situations from their lives.
In the second part of the first session, participants were asked to identify activities in their daily
lives that they felt were important, but where they were struggling to “get going.” In contrast
to the Visualization intervention, they did not set long-term goals, but focused on activities they
could do in the next week. With a partner, they completed a simple worksheet with two lists
of activities: one set that they enjoyed doing, and one set that were necessary and important
but they might not enjoy. They ranked the tasks on each list from most to least difficult. In
the final part of the session, participants picked the easiest one or two activities from each of the
“necessary” and “enjoyable” lists of activities, and scheduled them in a weekly diary. They then
broke the task down into steps, visualized what they would need to do to complete the activity,
anticipated potential obstacles, and made plans how to overcome them. The first intervention
session concluded with the information module described below. In the second intervention session,
they worked in the same group with the same partner where possible. They crossed off completed
plans and circled uncompleted ones, discussed barriers they had faced to undertaking the activities,
and brainstormed ways to overcome these barriers in the future.

3.3

Treatment 3: Active Control exercise + Information Module
(“AC+INF”) and Pure Control (“PC”)

The “active control” intervention controls for any effects of simply attending a session and interacting with women from neighboring villages. The sessions followed the format of the two
treatment interventions. The content of these sessions centered on the birds and plants of Kenya,
topics chosen intentionally to be psychologically inactive. In the first session, participants listened
to a short lecture on different kinds of birds that live in Kenya, followed by a short story about
the daily routine of a woman similar to them. Participants discussed the birds they see in their
village, and any birds they were particularly interested in. They wrote a list of all the birds they
could think of, and then made some drawings of birds. The second session followed an identical
structure, except that it did not include another short story about a woman, in line with the
second sessions of the other treatment groups. The second session centered on plants in Kenya. In
addition, participants in this group also received the same information module as the Visualization
and Planning treatment groups described above.
All three intervention groups concluded with an information module about the benefits of

13

chlorination. Participants were read information on chlorination, as well as on antenatal and
postnatal care (ANC/PNC). The text on chlorination read: : “Not all “drinking water” is safe,
even when it is sold as “treated”. Only water properly treated with chlorine or boiled water is
safe to drink. If you drink unsafe water you and your family may get dangerous diseases like
diarrhea, typhoid and cholera. Children are the most seriously affected by diarrhea: children can
quickly become dehydrated and very ill, and having diarrhea a lot can stop children from growing
at a normal rate. But you can avoid one out of three times you or your children gets diarrhea
simply by chlorinating your water with a product like WaterGuard, or chlorine from a dispenser.
Chlorinating in this way takes 30 minutes and makes it unnecessary to boil the water. One capful of
WaterGuard makes 20 l of water clean. If you keep the water covered and in a closed container with
a lid, and don’t dip dirty cups back into the water, the drinking water can’t get re-contaminated.
The smell of chlorine is not harmful and reduces over time. Chlorine is much cheaper than firewood
for boiling. At some water points it is even available for free from a dispenser.”
The pure control group were recruited at the same time as other groups. They completed a
brief demographic questionnaire household recruitment but received no contact prior to endline.

4.

Outcome measures

4.1

Behavioral outcomes

Our main pre-specified outcome is an objective measure of whether households chlorinate their drinking water. Enumerators made unannounced visits to participants’ homes to test the household’s
stored drinking water for the presence of chlorine to minimize experimenter demand effects in the survey (de Quidt, Haushofer, and Roth 2018).We pre-specified Total Chlorine Residual (TCR) as our
main chlorination outcome measure of interest. . TCR indicates the presence of any chlorine in the
water; i.e., that the household had at some point added some amount of chlorine to the drinking water, which is suitable if one’s primary interest is whether households attempt to chlorinate their water
at all. 20 We note that our measure is a lower bound on actual usage. Chlorine decays over time
after being added to water, and may be undetectable in water after 24 hours (Null and Lantagne
2012). Households who store water for two to three days may thus appear not to have treated water.
We follow the same chlorine testing procedure as Null et al. (2018) and Kremer et al. (2011a).
To conduct the tests, enumerators filled vials with a sample of stored household drinking water
and added DPD chlorine reagent powder, separately for total chlorine and free chlorine. Using
20

This is also the outcome of interest in Kremer et al. (2011a) and Dupas et al. (2016). Null et al. (2018) and
Ashraf, Berry, and Shapiro (2010) focus on Free Chlorine Residual (FCR), which indicates that not only has
chlorine been added, but that there is still enough unreacted chlorine in the water to keep it sanitized; i.e., that
the household added sufficient chlorine to the drinking water.

14

color comparator boxes and DPD color discs, enumerators recorded the level of chlorine present
in the water sample, between 0 mg/l and 3.4 mg/l. The TCR variable is 1 if any total chlorine
is present in the sample, and 0 otherwise. The FCR variable is 1 if any free chlorine is present
in the sample, and zero otherwise (CDC 2010).
While chlorination is our primary outcome of interest, our interventions were intended to
be domain-general. Visualizing future benefits, as well as planning skills, are relevant for many
everyday behaviors, and in particular for future investments like savings, education, and agricultural
investments. During the endline survey, participants therefore completed several modules on
economic and health behaviors. We pre-specified secondary outcomes as the extensive margins
for savings and labor supply, as well as an index of investment into children’s education. We also
specified exploratory outcomes related to health (diarrhea, vaccinations, and ante-natal care visits).

4.2

Targeted psychological channels

We hypothesized three key mechanisms for the effect of our interventions on behavior: the Visualization intervention targeted time preferences and self-efficacy, while the Planning intervention
targeted planning skills and self-efficacy (see footnote 4). We use a combination of incentivized
choice tasks and validated psychological scales to measure these constructs.
Planning skills: First, we measure whether people choose to make plans and follow through
on them in their everyday lives, with a short form of the Behavioral Activation for Depression
Scale (Kanter et al. 2007; Manos, Kanter, and Luo 2011). Participants are asked to identify
how much statements were true for them in the past week, including both positive (e.g. “I was
an active person and accomplished the goals I set out to do”) and negative items (e.g. “There
were certain things I needed to do that I didn’t do”). Responses range from “not at all” (1)
to “completely” (7). Some items are reversed before summing to generate a composite score.
Second, we use an incentivized version of the Tower of London task (TOL; also known as the
“Stockings of Cambridge” task when implemented electronically), which measures a participant’s
higher-order cognitive ability to plan ahead in sequential strategies (Shallice 1982; Phillips et al.
2001). Appendix D.1 provides further details.21
Time preferences over effort: Following recent innovations in the elicitation of time preferences (Andreoni and Sprenger 2012; Augenblick, Niederle, and Sprenger 2015), and noting that
21

Some of the psychological measures – the Tower of London task, Monetary Price Lists for time preferences,
and the General Self-Efficacy Scale – were validated in a previous study (Esopo et al. 2018). This study involved
translation and back-translation of the measures into Kiswahili, cognitive interviewing to establish cultural
acceptability of the measures, and tests of internal consistency, test-retest reliability, and construct validity.

15

water chlorination is an effortful task, we estimate time preferences in the effort domain. We use the
methodology of Augenblick (2017), and implement it with a newly developed effort task, adapted
to a field setting without computer or smartphone access in a developing country: participants
choose how many units of an effort task they want to complete at a time t for a piece rate w, where
t is 0, 1, 7, or 8 days from today, and the piece rate w is KES 2, 6, or 10. Each effort task consisted
of sending a 30-digit random number string by SMS to a toll-free number.22 Participants thus
decided, for each combination of t and w, how many such strings they wanted to send by SMS. One
time and one piece rate are randomly implemented at the end, and enforced using a KES 100 completion bonus. Following Augenblick (2017) as well as DellaVigna and Pope (2017), we structurally
identify a present bias parameter (β) and an impatience parameter (δ) assuming quasi-linear
utility and a power cost of effort function. Appendix D.2 provides full details on the estimation.
In addition to the effort discounting task, we included a conventional Multiple Price List (MPL)
(see Andreoni and Sprenger 2012 for a discussion), to measure monetary discounting. Payments
ranged from KES 100 to KES 300, and delays included today, four weeks, and eight weeks. See
Appendix D.3 for details.
Self-Efficacy: Self-efficacy broadly captures whether individuals feel a sense of control over
their life. More specifically, self-efficacy is defined as the belief that one is able to achieve desired
outcomes, and overcome obstacles (Bandura 1977). Beliefs are more difficult to capture in
incentivized choice tasks than preference parameters or cognitive skills. Consequently, we rely on a
widely used and validated psychological scale, the Generalized Self-Efficacy (GSE) scale (Schwarzer
and Jerusalem 2010). Participants are asked to rate the truthfulness of statements such as “I can
always manage to solve difficult problems if I try hard enough” on a scale from “never true” (0)
to “always true” (5). Our version contains 12 statements, 10 from the generic version, and two
which are repeated and reversed. Responses are aggregated into a summary score and z-scored.

4.3

Alternative Mechanisms

As far as possible, our design holds other mechanisms which may drive behavior constant across
the three active arms. In particular, the addition of the information module to all active arms
ensures that beliefs and knowledge about chlorination are held constant. We verify this using
multiple-choice questions. In addition, we test for differential effects of our treatments on the
salience of chlorination and other future-oriented behaviors, as well as on risk preferences.
22

Although we did not screen on phone access, all participants in our sample have access to a mobile phone: 71 percent own one, 96 percent have one in their household, and the remainder shares the phone of friends or relatives. Since
phones are often used by multiple individuals, phone access should be understood as continuous rather than binary.

16

Beliefs and Knowledge: We measure participants’ beliefs about the effectiveness of chlorination in preventing disease. In particular, we measure beliefs across treatment groups about the
proportion of pediatric diarrhea cases which can be prevented through water chlorination. We
also measure knowledge about how to properly use chlorine with two multiple-choice questions:
1. how much chlorine to add to water, and 2. the amount of time that needs to pass after adding
chlorine for water to be safe to drink. We score each question as a binary measure of whether
the participant answered correctly and create a composite value that ranges from 0 to 2, which
is then z-scored.23 All belief and knowledge questions refer to information which was provided
in the information module (Section 3.3) ten weeks earlier.
Salience Task: We test whether our interventions differentially focus participants’ attention on
chlorination. Since chlorination is an investment good, an increased salience of chlorination may be
expected directly as a result of becoming more focused on the future (especially in the Visualization
treatment). In this case, the salience of all future-oriented behaviors should increase. To disentangle
confounds from such intended treatment effects, we measure the salience of three future-oriented
behaviors (chlorination, savings, and farm investment) compared to non-future oriented behaviors.
Enumerators read out three lists of nine words each to every participant, and asked her to recall as
many words as possible directly after reading each list (participants were paid KES 5 for every word
they remembered). Each list contained three categories of future-related words (chlorine, savings,
and farm investment), as well as non-future related filler words (see Table A.7 for the list of words).
While the recall of words is clearly driven by memory, the recall of words conditional on the total
number of words remembered captures whether a concept is “top-of-mind”. We thus test whether
our treatments differentially affect the probability to recall chlorine words, conditional on the total
number of words remembered. If our treatments differentially affect the salience of chlorine, we
further test whether this is due to increased salience of future-oriented behaviors in general, by
asking whether the differential treatment effect also holds for saving and farm investment, which
were not emphasized in the sessions (see Appendix D for the empirical specification).
Risk Preferences: Chlorination behavior may increase if our participants became more risk
averse in response to one of our treatments. We measure risk aversion using a modified EckelGrossman task which offered a choice between one of three 50/50 lotteries, represented as bets on
a coin flip (Charness, Gneezy, and Imas 2013). One participant per session (25 people) was paid
their chosen lottery. We construct an ordinal measure of risk aversion with three levels, based
on the expected payout the participant is willing to forgo for an increase in certainty of payout.
23

We similarly check for differential knowledge of WHO-recommended antenatal and postnatal care. These
questions were included to pilot them for a future study.

17

5.

Econometric approach

5.1

Experimental integrity

We test for balance across treatment groups in (1) demographic variables and key outcomes, (2)
timing of the surveys relative to the intervention, (3) participation in the endline survey and the
chlorination test at home, and (4) compliance with the assigned treatment (i.e., participation
in the intervention sessions). We regress baseline demographics available for the entire recruited
sample (age, years of education, marital status, and village, see Section 2.1) on indicators for all
treatment groups. The reference group is either the active control (AC+INF) or the pure control
group (PC). The specification is identical to that used for the estimation of treatment effects
(described in Sections 5.2 and 5.3), leaving out controls Xiand lags yi0.
We further test for differences in the timing of the endline survey relative to the baseline
survey and first intervention date, as well as the timing of the chlorine test relative to the baseline
survey and first intervention date. The outcome variables are the number of days between the
first intervention and the endline survey, and between the first intervention and the chlorine test.
For participants in the pure control group, and those in the treatment groups who did not attend
the interventions, we use predictive mean matching to simulate a proxy intervention date, based
on the actual intervention dates of other participants from their village of residence.
We also test for selective attrition in attending the endline survey and the chlorination test at
home, for both the active control group comparison and the pure control comparison. We define
attrition in two ways: firstly, failure to attend endline conditional upon being recruited to the
study; and secondly, failure to attend endline conditional upon completing the baseline and first
intervention. The specification is identical to that used for the estimation of treatment effects.
Additional checks assess whether attriting individuals are different from non-attriting individuals
in terms of observed demographics.
Finally, although recruited participants did not know their treatment assignment prior to
arriving for the first intervention session, we test for differential compliance across treatment
groups – i.e., the decision to participate in the first and second intervention session. Again, the
specification is identical to that used for the estimation of treatment effects, except that the
outcome variable is an indicator for session attendance.

18

5.2

Main specification: Planning and Visualization treatments compared to Active Control

We employ the following main specification:
yi1 =α0 +α1T1i +α2T2i +Φ0Xi +δyi0 +γv +θw +ηi

(1)

Here, yi1 is the outcome of interest for respondent i at time of endline. T1i and T2i are dummies
equal to one if the respondent is assigned to the “Visualization” or “Planning” group, respectively. X
is a vector of participant controls (year of birth, employment status, marital status, education level).
γv are village fixed effects, and θw is an indicator for household wealth greater than the sample
median (which was used for stratification). Standard errors are clustered by intervention cohort
(five participants) to account for within-group dynamics. Psychological scales, behavioral tasks, selfreported chlorination, and diarrhea incidence were the only outcomes collected at baseline. For these
variables we include yi0, the same outcome variable at time of baseline, in the regressors. Where only
some baseline observations of a variable are missing, we replace the missing values with zero and add
a dummy variable indicating such cases, following Jones (1996). We remove outliers by winsorizing
outcome variables which have no theoretical lower and upper bounds at the 1st and 99th percentile.
The sample excludes the PC group. Thus, the AC+INF group is the reference category. As
pre-specified, the sample includes all participants who completed both the endline survey and at
least the first intervention session. Note that selection into the sample based on treatment is not
possible because the nature of the intervention was not revealed before the first intervention session.
The comparison between the two “psychological” treatment groups and the AC+INF group
isolates the effects of the psychologically active elements of these treatments. It tests the effect of
interventions specifically targeting the ability to visualize the future or to make and execute plans,
respectively, over and above the effect of the AC+INF intervention (which provided information
about the benefits of chlorination and got participants to gather as a group).

5.3

Comparison with pure control group

We also report results from comparing the three active (V+INF, P+INF, and AC+INF) to a pure
control group (PC). As pre-specified, the sample includes all recruited participants who completed
the endline survey, including “non-compliers” who were assigned to the active treatment groups,
but chose not to participate in the baseline survey or the interventions. The comparison between
the three “active” treatment groups and the pure control group gives the policy-relevant effect: the
total effect on targeted behaviors of providing interventions such as ours in other, similar settings.
The specification is identical to that in equation 1, except that there is a third treatment
19

indicator T3i for the active control group, and the pure control group is used as the reference
category. Further, since the pure control group was not surveyed at baseline, the estimation does
not control for the baseline outcome yi0. Finally, because the pure control completed the endline
survey on average two days earlier than the active treatment groups, the specification includes
fixed effects for i) the week of endline survey and ii) the day of the week of endline survey.24

5.4

WASH Benefits cross-randomization

To study differential effects of our treatments in villages which do and do not have free and
convenient access to chlorine through dispensers, we separately estimate the same pure control
specification for dispenser and control villages using seemingly unrelated regression (SUR). This
approach allows coefficients on control variables to vary by village treatment status, and at the
same time allows us to compare treatment coefficients across models. The primary outcome of
interest is an indicator for objective chlorination (TCR).
Due to a coding error in sampling (see Section 2.1), some participants were drawn from
treatment arms of the WASH Benefits study other than “Water Quality” or “Passive Comparison.”
As noted above, we include these participants in the main analysis of the cross-randomization,
grouped by whether or not their village had a chlorine dispenser. We exclude them in a robustness
check in Appendix F.

5.5

Treatment-on-the-Treated (TOT) Effects

As pre-specified, we also report “treatment-on-the-treated” effects from an instrumental variables
specification in which treatment status is instrumented with treatment assignment. For this
purpose, we consider all those in any “active” group, including the active control group, who
attended at least the initial baseline session to be complying with treatment assignment, even if
they didn’t complete the second session.25 For the comparison of the V+INF and P+INF to the
AC+INF group, the sample is already restricted to compliers, so that the TOT effect is the same
as the Average Treatment Effect (ATE). We therefore report the TOT only for the comparison
of the three active treatments to the pure control group.

24

The inclusion of these fixed effects was not pre-specified. We report results in Table A.20 and Table A.21
to demonstrate that our results are robust to excluding the fixed effects.
25
All substantive content was covered in the first session: the second session was merely a reinforcement and
a repetition of the first session.

20

5.6

Multiple hypothesis testing (MHT) correction

We use a step-down procedure to adjust p-values for the false discovery rate (FDR) among
groups of outcomes, and report the resulting “q-values” (Benjamini, Krieger, and Yekutieli 2006).
We adjust for multiple hypothesis testing within outcome groups (behaviors and psychological
mechanisms) and hierarchical categories (primary and secondary), but not across them. Similarly,
we consider the effects of our two active interventions to be theoretically distinct and therefore
do not correct across them. Indices are constructed following Anderson (2008).

6.

Results

6.1

Experimental integrity

Table 1 provides results on baseline balance on demographic variables, timing of the endline surveys
relative to the intervention, differential endline participation, and compliance with treatment. To
test for baseline balance, we estimate a version of equation 1 with baseline demographics as the
outcome variables. Each row shows baseline balance for one demographic variable. Columns (1)–(5)
show the comparison of the Visualization (V+INF) and Planning (P+INF) treatments to the
active control (AC+INF) treatment, and Columns (6)–(10) show the comparison of the V+INF,
P+INF, and AC+INF groups to the pure control group. Columns (1) and (6) show the mean and
standard deviation of the respective comparison groups. Columns (2) and (3) show the treatment
effects for the V+INF and P+INF treatments, respectively, relative to the AC+INF treatment.
Column (4) is a test of equality between these two coefficients, and Column (5) shows the sample
size, which varies slightly across rows because some respondents did not answer a small number
of questions, some questions are restricted to certain respondent groups, e.g. those with children.
Our demographic variables are balanced across treatments on the whole, with only two out of
30 coefficients on pairwise comparisons reaching statistical significance, at the 10 percent level.
Table A.2 presents results from a test of equality of means of outcome measures collected at
baseline between active treatment groups, including self-reported chlorination practices and knowledge of how to use chlorine. We see no statistically significant differences in outcome scores between
the active treatment groups prior to the interventions. 65 percent of respondents reported adding
chlorine to water at some point during the last month, and the variable is balanced across arms.26
26

In contrast, only 22 percent of the pure control group at endline have chlorine present in their water.
Self-reported chlorination may be inflated by social desirability bias. As discussed in Section , in some households
chlorine may have been added but decayed. Alternatively, households may chlorinate, but irregularly, reflecting
the exact behavioral barriers we seek to target. Dupas et al. (2016) also find that 3 months after a study providing
free chlorine or vouchers, 73 percent of respondents had non-empty chlorine bottles in their homes, but only 34
percent had verified chlorine in their stored drinking water.

21

The second panel in Table 1 shows results across treatment groups in terms of the number of
days between the date of baseline and first treatment and the date of endline, and then between the
date of baseline and first treatment to the date of the chlorine test at the household. Column (1)
shows that the average delay between the beginning of the interventions and endline was 68 days, i.e.
ten weeks, and the average delay to the chlorine test was 78 days. Relative to the AC+INF group,
the P group on average completed the endline survey 2 days later, significant at the 10 percent
level. Relative to the pure control group, we see that both the V+INF group and the P+INF
group on average completed the endline survey 2 days later. Although this difference is small in
magnitude, we include a fixed effect for i) the week of endline survey and ii) the day of the week
of the endline survey to the specification described in Section 5.3 for all survey outcome measures.
The third panel in Table 1 shows results on participation in the endline survey as well as in the
chlorination measure, for two alternate definitions of attrition. Where attrition is defined as failure
to complete the endline among all those initially censused, average attrition in the AC+INF and
pure control groups was 8 and 24 percent, respectively. This more conservative definition captures
the extent to which our sample deviates from being representative of our population of interest.
Average attrition from the chlorine measurement, conducted at people’s houses, was 12 percent
in the AC+INF group and 26 percent in the pure control group. Where attrition is defined as
failure to complete the endline among those recruited into the study who attended baseline (the
standard definition of attrition for most experiments), average attrition in the AC+INF group was
8 percent; it is 0 percent by definition for the pure control group. Under this definition, average
attrition from the chlorine measurement was 8 percent in the AC+INF group and 0 percent by
definition for the pure control group.
Using the more conservative definition, in comparison to the AC+INF group, we find no differential attrition from either the endline survey, or the chlorine measurement. However, in comparison
to the pure control group, the V+INF and AC+INF treatment groups have a small but statistically
significantly smaller likelihood of attriting (−6 percentage points).27 In addition, both the V+INF
and AC+INF groups are 4 percentage points less likely to attrit from the chlorine measure than
the pure control group, although this effect is only significant at the 10 and 5 percent levels.
Importantly, Appendix Tables A.4 and A.5 show that we find little evidence that this differential
attrition led to differences in sample composition that would complicate inference. Columns (3)
and (4) show that demographic variables do predict attrition from either endline measurement,
once treatment status is controlled for. However, the interaction terms between demographic
variables and treatment status in Columns (5) and (6) show that participants with particular
characteristics are no more or less likely to drop out of the study in any one of the treatment groups
27

This is unsurprising: in the active arms, we contact people again fairly soon after recruitment. In the pure
control arms, we contact them for the endline for the first time roughly twelve weeks after recruitment.

22

compared to the pure control group. This result suggests that the composition of the sample is
similar in all treatment groups, including in the pure control group, and that differences in sample
composition are unlikely to be responsible for observed differences between treatment groups.28
To account for attrition, we conduct two additional analyses of our results. First, in Appendix
Tables A.14 and A.15, we re-estimate our main results while restricting the sample in the active
treatment groups to those who attended the baseline.29 Second, to account for the differential
attrition, we include controls selected by LASSO in the specification, following Belloni, Chernozhukov, and Hansen (2014). We present these results in Appendix A.16 and A.17. Finally,
we present results in Appendix A.18 and A.19 where we both limit the sample to those who
attended baseline and include controls selected by LASSO. All of these robustness checks lead
to very similar results as our main specification.
The final panel in Table 1 shows compliance rates across the treatment groups. After the
census, all respondents in the treatment groups were invited to the baseline and first intervention
session, which were held on the same day. 78 percent of respondents attended the baseline and
completed the first session. Only respondents who attended the first intervention session were
invited to the second session. 74 percent of respondents completed both sessions, while 4 percent
did not complete the second session. Compliance is balanced across treatment groups.

6.2

Behavioral outcomes

We present three main sets of results: first, a comparison of the V+INF and P+INF treatments
to the AC+INF group; second, a comparison of these three groups to the pure control group; and
finally, separate analyses in villages with chlorine dispensers vs. villages without dispensers, and
the corresponding interaction terms with our treatment groups. The raw means and standard
deviations of all outcome measures that were z-scored are reported in Appendix Table A.8. Table
2 shows results on behavioral outcome variables. The different panels show impacts on different
families of outcomes, namely health, savings, labor, and other outcomes. The table panels indicate
the variables which were pre-specified as primary, secondary or exploratory in the pre-analysis plan.
Both the Visualization and the Planning interventions lead to significant increases in our primary
behavioral outcome measure, the presence of chlorine in household drinking water, as measured with
an objective chlorine test during an unannounced household visit. In comparison to the pure control
28

Relative to the AC+INF group, we do see that married women in the V+INF group are slightly less likely
to attrit, significant at the 10 percent level. However, given the number of comparisons made in our attrition
analysis, without correction for multiple hypothesis testing, we are not concerned about this result.
29
Under this definition, where the sample includes only those who attend baseline, there is also no differential
attrition across the active treatment arms. Attrition from endline conditional on attending baseline is, of course,
higher in the active treatment groups than the pure control group, which by definition has 0 percent attrition
since the pure control was not invited to baseline.

23

group, the V+INF group shows a 6 percentage point increase in the presence of total chlorine,
significant at the 1 percent level. The P+INF group shows a 4 percentage point increase in the
presence of total chlorine relative to the pure control group, significant at the 10 percent level. The
treatment effects in the V+INF and P+INF groups relative to pure control correspond to 27 and 18
percent increases relative to the pure control group mean of 22 percent. The treatment effect in the
AC+INF group relative to the pure control group is small (3 percentage points) and not statistically
significant. In line with this result, chlorination is significantly higher in the V+INF group (5
percentage points, significant at the 1 percent level) relative to the AC+INF group; the effect is
smaller and not significant in the P+INF group relative to the AC+INF group (2 percentage points).
The results for free chlorine (FCR, see Section 4.1), which we had not pre-specified as a
primary outcome, are similar in magnitude and statistical significance. We find no evidence that
the increase in chlorination is driven by a substitution away from boiling water – the only effective
alternative for making water safe, which was also mentioned in our information module (Section
3.3, note boiling is more expensive in terms of firewood). On the contrary, self-reports indicate
that our treatments also increased rates of water boiling (Appendix Table A.22), with significant
effects in the V+INF group.30
Note that our objective chlorination measures, obtained during unannounced household visits,
leave little room for experimenter demand effects, such as social desirability bias in responding
to survey questions. It is possible that households talked among themselves and anticipated our
visits. However, the visits were concentrated in time within each village: 68 percent of chlorine
tests were conducted on the first day that our team visited a given village (the remaining tests
were spread out, with a median within-village range of 7 days). Appendix Table A.12 shows
that the estimated treatment effects on chlorine are unaffected by including (i) a dummy for
being tested on the first day within one’s village, and (ii) the number of days elapsed since the
first chlorination tests were conducted in the village. Furthermore, chlorination behavior is not
predicted by the delay between the endline survey and the chlorine test, which may be expected
if the endline acted as a reminder to chlorinate.
Importantly, given our goal of improving health outcomes through psychological interventions,
the V+INF and P+INF treatments both generate large and statistically significant reductions in
the incidence of diarrhea among children. We find significant reductions in diarrhea episodes in both
of these groups relative to the pure control group, with a 39 percent (9 percentage point) reduction
for V+INF and a 30 percent (7 percentage point) reduction for P+INF. The effects of the V+INF
and P+INF interventions are also significant relative to the AC+INF group (V+INF: 38 percent (9
30

Our self-report question on whether households treated their water in any way to make it safe to drink
generated 97 percent affirmative responses in all groups (Appendix Table A.22), likely owing to experimenter
demand effects. This result suggests that all treatments were equally informative about the objectives of the
experimenter (de Quidt, Haushofer, and Roth 2018), leading to similar experimenter demand effects across groups.

24

percentage point) reduction, significant at the 1 percent level using both naı̈ve and FDR-corrected
p-values; P+INF: 21 percent (5 percentage point) reduction, significant at the 10 percent level using
conventional p-values, but not significant using FDR-correction). We cannot reject that the V+INF
and P+INF treatments are equally effective in reducing diarrhea. We find no strong effects on other
health outcomes, with the exception of a small decrease in the number of children under the age of 15
who visited a healthcare provider in the last 3 months, potentially due to reduced diarrhea incidence.
We pre-specified diarrhea in children under 15 (as opposed to younger age groups) to maximize
sample size, and because children in a wide age range suffer negative health effects from ongoing
enteric dysfunction, such as stunting and impaired cognition. We additionally report treatment
effects on diarrhea in children under 5 in Appendix Table A.22. We find large and significant
diarrhea reductions (34 and 25 percent, respectively) in both V+INF and P+INF relative to the
AC+INF group, though the effect sizes are not significant relative to the pure control.
The treatment effects of our interventions on diarrhea are rather large in relation to the effects
on chlorination; with an effect on diarrhea of −39 percent and an effect on the presence of any
chlorine of +27 percent, a back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests an instrumental variable
estimate of −1.4 percent, i.e. a 1 percent increase in chlorination leads to a 1.4 percent reduction
in diarrhea. This estimate compares favorably to that of a recent meta-analysis, which finds across
six randomized controlled trials that a 1 percent increase of detectable free chlorine results in a 1
percent reduction in child diarrhea (Arnold and Colford Jr 2007). There are a few possible reasons
for our slightly larger effects. First, we measure increases in total chlorine rather than the presence
of residual chlorine. Second, our interventions are domain-general trainings that may affect multiple
behaviors related to child diarrhea, such as handwashing or open defecation, while dispensers are
likely to only affect chlorination. Third, there may be dependencies with the treatment effects
on non-health outcomes: for instance, the observed increases in savings (described below) may
allow for more consumption smoothing and thereby more advantageous health outcomes.
The second panel of Table 2 shows effects on savings-related outcomes. The V+INF treatment
leads to a significant increase in our main savings-related outcome variable, the amount of money
saved regularly. This effect corresponds to a 26 percent (KES 25) increase relative to the active
control group, significant at the 5 percent level; relative to the pure control group, it is smaller
(20 percent; KES 18) and not statistically significant. In addition, we find a large and highly
significant effect on savings on the extensive margin, with the share of respondents who save
regularly increasing by 13 percentage points (36 percent) in the V+INF group relative to AC+INF,
and 12 percentage points (38 percent) relative to the pure control group. Similarly, we find
increases in the V+INF treatment on an indicator for whether the respondent saves for productive
investments, 11 and 9 percentage points (65 and 53 percent) relative to the AC+INF and pure
control groups, respectively. All of these effects are significant at the 1 percent level even after
25

correcting for multiple comparisons. V+INF participants are also more likely to have joined a
new ROSCA relative to AC+INF participants. The P+INF and AC+INF interventions did not
show significant effects on savings-related outcomes, and most of the effects in the V+INF group
described above are significantly larger than in those groups. Together, these results show that
the V+INF treatment strongly affected savings-related behaviors.
This finding has two important implications. First, it shows that our V+INF intervention,
while unsuccessful in affecting time preferences measured with laboratory-like discounting tasks,
nevertheless strongly affected future-oriented behaviors (see the results and discussion in Section
7.1). A possible explanation comes from the theoretical work of Gabaix and Laibson (2017): If the
visualization intervention helped decision-makers to generate less noisy signals about the utility
they will derive from future events, then more patient behavior would result even in absence
of changes in the underlying discounting parameters. Second, it provides evidence against an
experimenter demand-effect account of the impacts of our interventions: while the interventions
mentioned chlorination and health-related topics, savings were discussed only to the extent that
participants brought them up themselves in the discussions. The treatment effects we report
here are thus more likely to result from an increased valuation of the future (via preferences or
forecasting skills) rather than from a simple desire to please the experimenters.
The third panel of Table 2 reports effects on labor-related outcomes. Somewhat surprisingly,
we find a reduction in the total number of hours worked in the last 3 months in the P+INF group,
with a magnitude of 24 hours (22 percent) relative both to the AC+INF group and to the pure
control group. These effects are significant at the 1 percent and 5 percent level, respectively. A
similar effect is observed in the total number of days worked, which is reduced by 4 days or 18
percent in the P+INF group, relative both to the AC+INF group and to the pure control group,
significant at the 5 percent level, although the result does not survive correction for multiple
hypothesis testing. One possible reason for this reduction is again that participants in the P+INF
group may have improved their planning and execution ability and therefore be more efficient
in accomplishing tasks. Only 3 percent of our sample work for wages, with the rest divided
between subsistence farming and self-employment, and thus their income is determined largely
by their output rather than their work hours. In support of this hypothesis, we find no significant
change in average monthly earnings, despite the shortened work hours. The V+INF and AC+INF
treatments do not show significant effects on labor outcomes.
Appendix Table A.10 presents treatment-on-the-treated (TOT) estimates, when compliance
is defined as attending at least the first intervention session (which happened on the same day as
the baseline survey). Since the sample in the AC+INF comparison is restricted to compliers, the
TOT estimator is only defined for the comparison to the pure control group. In Appendix Tables
A.14, A.16, and A.18, we re-estimate our results to account for differential endline participation, as
26

described in Section 6.1. In Appendix Table A.20 we present our results excluding the endline week
and day-of-week fixed effects described in Section 5.3, since the inclusion of these fixed effects was
not pre-specified. The results are similar in magnitude and significance across all specifications.

6.3

Are psychological treatments more effective when cost barriers
are removed?

We next ask whether our treatment effects differ by whether or not the village in which the
interventions took place was randomly treated with a chlorine dispenser in the WASH Benefits
study that preceded ours. Appendix Table A.3 shows that, at baseline, participants in villages
with chlorine dispensers were comparable to participants in villages without chlorine dispensers
in terms of wealth level, age, and marital status, but had a slightly higher level of education.
Table 3 shows results from the two main estimating equations, focusing on chlorination-related
outcomes, separately for non-dispenser villages (Columns (1)–(5)) and dispenser villages (Columns
(6)–(10)). The interaction terms on our two treatment groups with the randomized dispenser
treatment are shown in Columns (11)–(13) for V+INF, P+INF, and AC+INF, respectively.
We find weak evidence of heterogeneity in the effects of the treatments on outcomes related
to chlorination by village type. Specifically, the active treatment groups P+INF, V+INF, and
AC+INF show significant treatment effects on water chlorination in the dispenser villages, but not
in the villages without dispensers. The interaction term is significant at the 5 percent level for the
AC+INF treatment, but not for the psychological interventions. A possible interpretation is that
information is effective if and only if cost barriers are removed, while the psychological treatments
have a positive effect even in the presence of cost barriers. The effects in the non-dispenser villages
are not statistically significant, potentially due to the smaller sample size. However, treatment
effects on diarrhea are concentrated in the non-dispenser villages. To explain these counterintuitive
results, it is worth thinking about those at the margin of chlorination: Participants in non-dispenser
villages face a higher cost of chlorination than those in dispenser villages. Using simple first-order
conditions, marginal benefits from chlorination should be higher in non-dispenser villages. Thus,
larger effects on diarrhea could result despite smaller effects on chlorination. The pure control
means in Table 3 suggest that non-dispenser villages have higher diarrhea levels absent treatment.
Nevertheless, this interpretation is speculative, and does not allow us to draw definitive conclusions.31 At any rate, the differences are small and require replication before being taken seriously.
31

In Appendix Table A.13, we test the robustness of our results when restricting to villages from the Water
Quality and Passive Comparison arms of the WASH Benefits study, as discussed in Section 2.1 and Appendix
B. This analysis permits a cleaner distinction between dispenser- and non-dispenser villages in the absence of any
other interventions, at the expense of a somewhat smaller sample. In this analysis, the interaction term for both
chlorination measures is significant for the V+INF intervention, suggesting that this intervention had significantly
larger effects in dispenser villages.

27

7.

Mechanisms

Our interventions targeted three psychological mechanisms: First, the visualization intervention
encouraged participants to connect everyday behaviors to distant future outcomes, and to make
these future outcomes vivid and tangible in their minds. It thus aimed to increase patient behavior,
both through valuation of the future (time preferences), and through strengthening the mapping between current behavior and future outcomes (captured in self-efficacy, or domain-general returns to
effort, see footnote 4). Second, our planning intervention aimed to build planning skills by teaching
participants to structure tasks, break them down into individual steps, and approach them in a way
that induces self-reinforcing motivation cycles. By empowering participants to tackle activities that
they were struggling with, the intervention may also build up their self-efficacy. To shed light on the
mechanisms which may account for the observed behavioral effects, we now turn to the results on our
pre-specified psychological outcomes, as well as measures of key potential alternative mechanisms.

7.1

Targeted psychological mechanisms

Table 4 shows results on psychological outcome variables, estimated using equation 1. The top
panels show results on planning skills, time preferences, and self-efficacy, subdivided into primary
and secondary outcome measures according to our pre-analysis plan. Adjustment of p-values
for multiple comparisons using FDR is done separately across all primary and all secondary
psychological outcomes.
For mechanisms, the main comparison of interest is that of the psychologically active treatment
groups to the AC+INF control group. The information module, exposure to field staff and other
participants, and experimental payments are held constant across these treatments. The restriction
to baseline survey participants holds constant any practice effects from having completed the same
tasks at baseline, and also ensures that each individual in the sample received at least the first intervention session. This comparison is also more precisely estimated than the pure control comparison
due to the inclusion of baseline outcome levels as control variables where available (see Section 5.2).
We find no statistically significant effects of any treatment on planning skills compared to
the Active Control, although the coefficients in the Planning treatment have the expected signs
(positive for the Behavioral Activation Score, and negative for the number of moves required to
complete the Tower of London task). In comparison to the pure control group, we observe a 0.11
SD increase in the Behavioral Activation Score, significant at the 10 percent level.32
The next panel reports results on outcomes related to time preferences. Our primary outcome
32

Performance on the Tower of London task is significantly improved in all active treatment groups relative
to the pure control group, but this result is likely due to the fact that all active groups had performed this task
previously at baseline, while the pure control group had not.

28

is β Effort, which captures present bias in our effort task (see Section 4.2 and Appendix D.2 for
details of the structural estimation). Additional outcomes are the δEffort parameter from the same
task, and corresponding parameters from the monetary discounting task. We find no statistically
significant effects of the Visualization treatment on the estimated time preference parameters,
relative to the active control. Somewhat surprisingly, we find a reduction of the δEffort parameter
in the Planning group, driven by an increased willingness to supply effort 7 and 8 days in the
future, at constant willingness to supply effort today or tomorrow (see Figure A.3). This result
is consistent with the Planning intervention helping participants to plan the logistics of future
effort provision (SMS data entry), such as phone access or child care (which is possible for 7 or
8 days, but perhaps too short notice for 0 or 1 days). The effect is economically small (−0.002).
Relative to the pure control comparison, we observe a small increase in the monetary discount
parameter δMP L in the V+INF and AC+INF groups, plausibly due to income effects from the
higher experimental payments in the active arms.
The third panel of Table 4 shows the effect of our interventions on the General Self-Efficacy
(GSE) scale (Section 4.2). Both the V+INF and the P+INF interventions generate statistically
significant 0.16 SD and 0.12 SD increases, respectively, relative to the AC+INF group. This finding
suggests that our interventions affected “inward-looking” beliefs about one’s ability to achieve
desired outcomes. We find similarly large (0.18 SD) and significant differences in the V+INF and
P+INF groups relative to the pure control group. The effect seems to be driven by the psychological
interventions – the AC+INF treatment by itself does not increase self-efficacy. All effects persist or
get stronger when we consider TOT estimates (Appendix Table A.11), and when we re-estimate results accounting for attrition, or excluding endline week and day-of-week fixed effects (Appendix F).
Summing up the results on our pre-specified psychological mechanisms, we find strong evidence
that both the Visualization and the Planning interventions increased participants’ self-efficacy,
roughly understood as their sense of control over their life, or their perception of (domain-general)
returns to exerting effort. This may explain the observed effects on both chlorination and savings.
We find a larger increase in self-efficacy in V+INF than in P+INF, which may help explain the larger
observed behavioral effects in the Visualization treatment. Notably, neither the self-efficacy difference between V+INF and P+INF nor their difference in most behavioral outcomes is statistically
significant. In contrast to our predictions, our interventions do not significantly affect laboratory
measures of time preferences, neither over effort nor over money, nor do they affect measures of cognitive planning skills. One possible interpretation is that deep underlying preferences and cognitive
functions do not respond strongly to light-touch interventions. This contrasts the results of Alan and
Ertac (2018), who find effects of a similar (though longer) educational intervention on incentivized
intertemporal choices. A second interpretation is that preferences changed in a way that is not
captured by our state-of-the-art (but conceptually conventional) choice tasks. For instance, Gabaix
29

and Laibson (2017) provide an account of intertemporal choice in terms of individuals’ ability to
simulate future utility. The Visualization intervention may have helped participants to generate
less noisy signals about the utility they will derive from future events, resulting in more patient
behavior. If this effect applied to forecasting of future utility in general, we would expect to see an
increased weight of the future relative to the present (captured in our estimate of β). Importantly,
the intervention prompted participants to visualize alternative realizations of their future in one
year – a time horizon where future utility is likely to feel vague and distant. In contrast, intuitively
speaking, time preferences are estimated from participants’ relative willingness to exert effort in 0
versus 1 days (for βδ) and 7 versus 8 days (for δ, see Section 4.2). It is plausible that the intervention
made far-future utility (such as having healthy children in one year) more tangible and salient, while
the disutility from near-future effort (SMS data entry within the next 8 days) was already tangible
at baseline. This could explain the observed changes in chlorination and savings behavior without
affecting our lab measures of β and δ. If true, it contributes to concerns of how suitable incentivized
laboratory measures of time preferences are to capture intertemporal choice in real-life contexts.

7.2

Beliefs, knowledge, and risk preferences

The last panel of Table 4 suggests that the information module (Section 3.3) had a similar effect
across the active treatment groups: V+INF, P+INF, and AC+INF all significantly increase beliefs
in the efficacy of chlorine in averting diarrhea relative to the pure control group, with similar effect
sizes (0.13 SD, 0.16 SD, and 0.12 SD). Effects on knowledge about how to correctly chlorinate
water are also statistically indistinguishable across the three active treatment groups. Compared
to the pure control group, the V+INF group shows a significant increase in knowledge of 0.12
SD. Effects are similar in magnitude for the other groups (0.07 SD for P+INF and 0.09 SD for
AC+INF), but do not reach statistical significance, and we cannot reject that effects in all groups
are of the same magnitude.33 Importantly, we see effects on beliefs and knowledge in all three
active arms, but we only see statistically significant effects on chlorination and diarrhea in the
V+INF and P+INF arms. Thus, the Visualization and Planning treatments have additional
effects on behavior compared to the effect of information on its own. These are likely due to
changes in psychological outcomes, such as self-efficacy (discussed above), or alternatively changes
in salience (discussed below).Both are affected only in the V+INF and P+INF groups.
Finally, we find no effects on risk aversion, suggesting that any behavioral effects are unlikely
to result from changes in risk preferences induced by our treatments.
33

We also find that all three interventions are effective in increasing knowledge of the correct schedule of
antenatal and postnatal care visits a woman should attend before and after giving birth. We do not see an
associated increase in the number of ANC visits attended by pregnant women in our sample, but our sample size
for this analysis is less than 300 individuals. These questions were included for piloting purposes for a future study.

30

7.3

Salience

Section 4.3 explains the design of a test for increased salience of chlorination, and Appendix D
explains the econometric specification. Column (1) of Table 5 shows that participants who had
received the V+INF or P+INF intervention found it easier to remember chlorine-related words,
conditional on the total number of words remembered. This effect was specific to chlorine-related
words, rather than to future-oriented behaviors in general: Column (3) interacts treatment indicators with chlorine word indicators, and shows that the salience of chlorination increases differentially
to the salience of other future-oriented words (the base category is farm investment). Finally,
Column (4) suggests that neither treatment group had an effect on total words remembered, and
thus on participants’ memory in general.
Thus, we find an increase in the salience of chlorine-related words, but not savings-related
words, as a result of treatment. Taken together, it is thus plausible that salience was a contributing
factor to the observed treatment effect on chlorination. However, the observed treatment effect on
savings, as well as on various other non-chlorine measures, is difficult to explain through salience,
as the salience of savings was unaffected by treatment. Salience effects thus do not provide a
consistent explanation across our findings, unless the mapping from salience to behavior is both
non-linear and differential across domains.

8.

Conclusion

In this randomized field experiment, we study the effect of two light-touch interventions on behavioral and psychological outcomes among young women in Kenya. Specifically, we ask whether a
“Visualization” and a “Planning” intervention increase take-up of drinking water chlorination. Both
interventions increase chlorination of drinking water, and reduce the number of diarrhea episodes
in children (relative to the pure control, and relative to the active control group for Visualization).
Possible mechanisms include self-efficacy: the sessions likely strenghtened participants’ beliefs
in their capacity to control their own life and achieve desirable outcomes. A second potential
mechanism is increased salience of chlorination, though this does not explain our results on savings.
We rule out mechanisms related to increased information or changed beliefs about the effectiveness
of chlorination. We also find little evidence of changes in laboratory measures of time preferences
or planning skills. The fact that we found no changes in deeper underlying preferences and
cognitive functions suggests that the latter may not respond strongly to light-touch interventions.
In contrast, internal beliefs and attention appear more malleable.
We estimate high cost-effectiveness of the interventions: in terms of DALYs saved, our
interventions are roughly comparable to highly effective interventions such as the provision of

31

insecticide-treated bed nets, and deworming of school children. Importantly, we find impacts even in
villages which have free chlorine dispensers at water sources, suggesting that these interventions are
effective over and above existing infrastructural interventions. Future work may attempt to replicate
these effects, and extend the use of our interventions to other settings and behaviors of interest.

References
Alan, Sule, and Seda Ertac. 2018. “Fostering Patience in the Classroom: Results from Randomized Educational
Intervention.” Journal of Political Economy 126 (5): 1865–1911.
Anderson, Michael L. 2008. “Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the Effects of Early Intervention:
a Reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training Projects.” Journal of the American
Statistical Association 103 (484): 1481–1495.
Andreoni, James, and Charles Sprenger. 2012. “Estimating Time Preferences from Convex Budgets.” American
Economic Review 102 (7): 3333–3356.
Arnold, Benjamin, and John Colford Jr. 2007. “Treating Water with Chlorine at Point-Of-Use to Improve Water
Quality and Reduce Child Diarrhea in Developing Countries: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.”
The American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 76 (2): 354–364.
Ashraf, Nava, James Berry, and Jesse M Shapiro. 2010. “Can higher prices stimulate product use? Evidence
from a field experiment in Zambia.” American Economic Review 100 (5): 2383–2413.
Ashraf, Nava, Kelsey Jack, and Emir Kamenica. 2010. “Information and Subsidies: Complements or Substitutes?”
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 88:133–139.
Augenblick, Ned. 2017. “Short-Term Time Discounting of Unpleasant Tasks.” Working Paper, UC Berkeley.
Augenblick, Ned, Muriel Niederle, and Charles Sprenger. 2015. “Working Over Time: Dynamic Inconsistency
in Real Effort Tasks.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 (3): 1067–1115.
Bai, Liang, Benjamin Handel, Edward Miguel, and Gautam Rao. 2017. “Self-Control and Demand for Preventive
Health: Evidence from Hypertension in India.” NBER Working Paper No. 23727.
Baird, Sarah, Joan Hamory Hicks, Michael Kremer, and Edward Miguel. 2016. “Worms at Work: Long-Run
Impacts of a Child Health Investment.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (4): 1637–1680.
Bandura, Albert. 1977. “Self-Efficacy: Toward a Unifying Theory of Behavioral Change.” Psychological Review
84 (2): 191–215.
. 1997. Self-Efficacy: The Exercise of Control. New York: W.H. Freeman.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Eliana la Ferrara, and Victor Orozco. 2018. “The Entertaining Way to Behavioral Change:
Fighting HIV with MTV.” Working Paper, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Baranov, Victoria, Sonia Bhalotra, Pietro Biroli, and Joanna Maselko. 2017. “Mental Health and Women’s
Choices. Experimental Evidence from a Randomized Control Trial.” Working Paper, University of Melbourne.
Beaman, Lori, Jeremy Magruder, and Jonathan Robinson. 2014. “Minding Small Change Among Small Firms
in Kenya.” Journal of Development Economics 108:69–86.
Belloni, Alexandre, Victor Chernozhukov, and Christian Hansen. 2014. “High-Dimensional Methods and
Inference on Structural and Treatment Effects.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 28 (2): 29–50.
Benjamini, Yoav, Abba M Krieger, and Daniel Yekutieli. 2006. “Adaptive Linear Step-Up Procedures That
Control the False Discovery Rate.” Biometrika 93 (3): 491–507.
Bernard, Tanguy, Stefan Dercon, Kate Orkin, and Alemayehu Seyoum Taffesse. 2018. “The Future in Mind: Short
and Long-Run Impact of an Aspirations Intervention in Rural Ethiopia.” Working Paper, University of Oxford.
Blattman, Christopher, Julian Jamison, and Margaret Sheridan. 2017. “Reducing Crime and Violence: Experimental Evidence from Cognitive Behavioral Therapy in Liberia.” American Economic Review 107 (4): 1165–1206.

32

Bleakley, Hoyt. 2010. “Malaria Eradication in the Americas: A Retrospective Analysis of Childhood Exposure.”
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2 (2): 1–45.
Bobonis, Gustavo, Edward Miguel, and Charu Puri-Sharma. 2006. “Anemia and School Participation.” Journal
of Human Resources 41 (4): 692–721.
CDC. 2010. Chlorine Residual Testing Fact Sheet. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention SWS Project.
Charness, Gary, Uri Gneezy, and Alex Imas. 2013. “Experimental Methods: Eliciting Risk Preferences.” Journal
of Economic Behavior & Organization 87:43–51.
Cohen, Jessica, and Pascaline Dupas. 2010. “Free Distribution or Cost-Sharing? Evidence from a Randomized
Malaria Prevention Experiment.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (1): 1–45.
Daniel, Tinuke, Christina Stanton, and Leonard Epstein. 2013. “The Future Is Now: Reducing Impulsivity
And Energy Intake Using Episodic Future Thinking.” Psychological Science 24 (11): 2339–2342.
DellaVigna, Stefano, and Ulrike Malmendier. 2006. “Paying Not to Go to the Gym.” American Economic
Review 96 (3): 694–719.
DellaVigna, Stefano, and Devin Pope. 2017. “What Motivates Effort? Evidence and Expert Forecasts.” The
Review of Economic Studies 85 (2): 1029–1069.
de Quidt, Jonathan, Johannes Haushofer, and Christopher Roth. 2018. “Measuring and Bounding Experimenter
Demand.” American Economic Review 108 (11): 3266–3302.
Dillon, Andrew, Jed Friedman, and Pieter Serneels. 2014. “Health Information, Treatment, and Worker
Productivity: Experimental Evidence from Malaria Testing and Treatment among Nigerian Sugarcane
Cutters.” Policy Research Working Paper Series 7120, The World Bank.
Dinkelman, Taryn, and Claudia Martı́nez. 2014. “Investing in Schooling in Chile: The Role of Information
about Financial Aid for Higher Education.” Review of Economics and Statistics 96 (2): 244–257.
Duckworth, Angela, Heidi Grant, Benjamin Loew, Gabriele Oettingen, and Peter Gollwitzer. 2011. “SelfRegulation Strategies Improve Self-Discipline in Adolescents: Benefits of Mental Contrasting and
Implementation Intentions.” Educational Psychology 31 (1): 17–26.
Duckworth, Angela, Teri Kirby, Anton Gollwitzer, and Gabriele Oettingen. 2013. “From Fantasy to Action:
Mental Contrasting with Implementation Intentions (MCII) Improves Academic Performance in Children.”
Social Psychological and Personality Science 4 (6): 745–753.
Duflo, Esther, Pascaline Dupas, and Michael Kremer. 2015. “Education, HIV, and Early Fertility: Experimental
Evidence from Kenya.” American Economic Review 105 (9): 2257–97.
Dupas, Pascaline. 2009. “What Matters (and What Does Not) in Households’ Decision to Invest in Malaria
Prevention?” American Economic Review 99 (2): 224–230.
. 2011. “Do Teenagers Respond to HIV Risk Information? Evidence from a Field Experiment in Kenya.”
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3 (1): 1–36.
. 2014a. “Getting Essential Health Products to Their End Users: Subsidize, but How Much?” Science
345 (6202): 1279–1281.
. 2014b. “Short-Run Subsidies and Long-Run Adoption of New Health Products: Evidence from a Field
Experiment.” Econometrica 82 (1): 197–228.
Dupas, Pascaline, Vivian Hoffmann, Michael Kremer, and Alix Peterson Zwane. 2016. “Targeting Health Subsidies
through a Nonprice Mechanism: A Randomized Controlled Trial in Kenya.” Science 353 (6302): 889–895.
Ekers, David, Lisa Webster, Annemieke Van Straten, Pim Cuijpers, David Richards, and Simon Gilbody.
2014. “Behavioural Activation for Depression; an Update of Meta-Analysis of Effectiveness and Sub Group
Analysis.” PloS one 9, no. 6.
Esopo, Kristina, Daniel Mellow, Catherine Thomas, Hannah Uckat, Justin Abraham, Prachi Jain, Chaning
Jang, Nicholas Otis, Michala Riis-Vestergaard, Amanda Starcev, Kate Orkin, and Johannes Haushofer. 2018.
“Measuring Self-Efficacy, Executive Function, and Temporal Discounting in Kenya.” Behaviour Research
and Therapy 101:30–45.
Fink, Günther, and Felix Masiye. 2015. “Health and Agricultural Productivity: Evidence from Zambia.” Journal
of Health Economics 42:151–164.

33

Fischbacher, Urs. 2007. “z-Tree: Zurich Toolbox for Ready-Made Economic Experiments.” Experimental
Economics 10 (2): 171–178.
Gabaix, Xavier, and David Laibson. 2017. “Myopia and Discounting.” NBER Working Paper No. 23254.
Ghosal, Sayantan, Smarajit Jana, Anandi Mani, Sandip Mitra, and Sanchari Roy. 2019. “Sex Workers, Stigma
and Self-Image: Evidence from Kolkata Brothels.” Working Paper, University of Glasgow.
Gilbert, Daniel, and Timothy Wilson. 2009. “Why the Brain Talks to Itself: Sources of Error in Emotional Prediction.” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences 364 (1521): 1335–1341.
Giné, Xavier, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman. 2010. “Put Your Money Where Your Butt Is: A Commitment
Contract for Smoking Cessation.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2 (4): 213–35.
Gollwitzer, Peter M, and Paschal Sheeran. 2006. “Implementation Intentions and Goal Achievement: A
Meta-Analysis of Effects and Processes.” Advances in Experimental Social Psychology 38:69–119.
Hanna, Rema, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Joshua Schwartzstein. 2014. “Learning Through Noticing: Theory
and Evidence From a Field Experiment.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (3): 1311–1353.
Heller, Sara, Anuj Shah, Jonathan Guryan, Jens Ludwig, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Harold Pollack. 2017.
“Thinking, Fast and Slow? Some Field Experiments to Reduce Crime and Dropout in Chicago.” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (1): 1–54.
Hershfield, Hal, Daniel Goldstein, William Sharpe, Jesse Fox, Leo Yeykelis, Laura Carstensen, and Jeremy
Bailenson. 2011. “Increasing Saving Behavior Through Age-Progressed Renderings of the Future Self.”
Journal of Marketing Research 48 (SPL): S23–S37.
Jalan, Jyotsna, and E. Somanathan. 2008. “The importance of being informed: experimental evidence on
demand for environmental quality.” Journal of Development Economics 87 (1): 14–28.
Jensen, Robert. 2010. “The (Perceived) Returns to Education and the Demand for Schooling.” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 125 (2): 515–548.
. 2012. “Do Labor Market Opportunities Affect Young Women’s Work and Family Decisions?
Experimental Evidence from India.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (2): 753–792.
Jones, Michael. 1996. “Indicator and Stratification Methods for Missing Explanatory Variables in Multiple Linear
Regression.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 91 (433): 222–230.
Kahneman, Daniel, Alan Krueger, David Schkade, Norbert Schwarz, and Arthur Stone. 2004. “A Survey Method
for Characterizing Daily Life Experience: The Day Reconstruction Method.” Science 306 (5702): 1776–1780.
Kanter, Jonathan, Patrick Mulick, Andrew Busch, Kristoffer Berlin, and Christopher Martell. 2007. “The
Behavioral Activation for Depression Scale (BADS): Psychometric Properties and Factor Structure.” Journal
of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment 29 (3): 191.
King, Laura. 2001. “The Health Benefits of Writing About Life Goals.” Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin 27 (7): 798–807.
Kremer, Michael, and Edward Miguel. 2007. “The Illusion of Sustainability.” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 122 (3): 1007–65.
Kremer, Michael, Edward Miguel, Sendhil Mullainathan, Clair Null, and Alix Peterson Zwane. 2011a. “Social
Engineering: Evidence from a Suite of Take-Up Experiments in Kenya.” Working Paper, Harvard University.
Kremer, Michael, Edward Miguel, Clair Null, and Alix Peterson Zwane. 2011b. “Sustainability of Long-Term
Take-Up at Point-Of-Collection Chlorine Dispensers Provided Free of Charge in Rural Western Kenya.”
Proceedings of the Water Environment Federation 2011 (3): 249–250.
Laibson, David. 1997. “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 112
(2): 443–478.
Lantagne, D, K Preston, E Blanton, N Kotlarz, H Gezagehn, E Van Dusen, J Berens, and K Jellison. 2010.
“Hypochlorite solution expiration and stability in household water treatment in developing countries.”
Journal of Environmental Engineering 137 (2): 131–136.
Lejuez, Carl, Derek Hopko, Ron Acierno, Stacey Daughters, and Sherry Pagoto. 2011. “Ten Year Revision of the
Brief Behavioral Activation Treatment for Depression: Revised Treatment Manual.” Behavior Modification
35 (2): 111–161.

34

Locke, Edwin, and Gary Latham. 2002. “Building a Practically Useful Theory of Goal Setting and Task
Motivation: A 35-year Odyssey.” American Psychologist 57 (9): 705.
Lorig, Kate, Diana D Laurent, Kathryn Plant, Eswar Krishnan, and Philip L Ritter. 2014. “The Components of
Action Planning and Their Associations With Behavior and Health Outcomes.” Chronic Illness 10 (1): 50–59.
Luoto, Jill, David Levine, Jeff Albert, and Stephen Luby. 2014. “Nudging to Use: Achieving Safe Water
Behaviors in Kenya and Bangladesh.” Journal of Development Economics 110:13–21.
Luoto, Jill, Nusrat Najnin, Minhaj Mahmud, Jeff Albert, M Sirajul Islam, Stephen Luby, Leanne Unicomb,
and David I Levine. 2011. “What Point-of-Use Water Treatment Products Do Consumers Use? Evidence
from a Randomized Controlled Trial among the Urban Poor in Bangladesh.” PloS one 6 (10): e26132.
Madajewicz, Malgosia, Alexander Pfaff, Alexander Van Geen, Joseph Graziano, Iftikhar Hussein, Hasina
Momotaj, Roksana Sylvi, and Habibul Ahsan. 2007. “Can Information Alone Change Behavior? Response to
Arsenic Contamination of Groundwater in Bangladesh.” Journal of Development Economics 84 (2): 731–754.
Manos, Rachel, Jonathan Kanter, and Wen Luo. 2011. “The Behavioral Activation for Depression Scale–Short
Form: Development and Validation.” Behavior Therapy 42 (4): 726–739.
Markus, Hazel, and Paula Nurius. 1986. “Possible Selves.” American Psychologist 41 (9): 954.
McKelway, Madeline. 2018. “Women’s Self-Efficacy and Women’s Employment: Experimental Evidence from
India.” Working Paper, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Miguel, Edward, and Michael Kremer. 2004. “Worms: Identifying Impacts on Education and Health in the
Presence of Treatment Externalities.” Econometrica 72 (1): 159–217.
Milkman, Katherine, John Beshears, James Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte Madrian. 2011. “Using
Implementation Intentions Prompts to Enhance Influenza Vaccination Rates.” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 108 (26): 10415–10420.
. 2013. “Planning Prompts as a Means of Increasing Preventive Screening Rates.” Preventive Medicine
56 (1): 92–93.
Morisano, Dominique, Jacob Hirsh, Jordan Peterson, Robert Pihl, and Bruce Shore. 2010. “Setting, Elaborating,
and Reflecting on Personal Goals Improves Academic Performance.” Journal of Applied Psychology 95
(2): 255–264.
Nickerson, David, and Todd Rogers. 2010. “Do You Have a Voting Plan? Implementation Intentions, Voter
Turnout, and Organic Plan Making.” Psychological Science 21 (2): 194–199.
Null, Clair, and Daniele Lantagne. 2012. “Microbiological quality of chlorinated water after storage in ceramic
pots.” Journal of Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for Development 2 (4): 250–253.
Null, Clair, Christine Stewart, Amy Pickering, Holly Dentz, Benjamin Arnold, Charles Arnold, Jade
Benjamin-Chung, Thomas Clasen, Kathryn Dewey, Lia Fernald, et al. 2018. “Effects of Water Quality,
Sanitation, Handwashing, and Nutritional Interventions on Diarrhoea and Child Growth in Rural Kenya:
A Cluster-Randomised Controlled Trial.” The Lancet Global Health 6 (3): e316–e329.
O’Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin. 1999. “Doing It Now Or Later.” American Economic Review 89 (1):
103–124.
Oettingen, Gabriele, Doris Mayer, and Jennifer Thorpe. 2010. “Self-Regulation of Commitment to Reduce
Cigarette Consumption: Mental Contrasting of Future With Reality.” Psychology and Health 25 (8): 961–977.
Oettingen, Gabriele, Hyeon-ju Pak, and Karoline Schnetter. 2001. “Self-Regulation of Goal-Setting: Turning Free
Fantasies About the Future Into Binding Goals.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 80 (5): 736.
Ozier, Owen. 2018. “Exploiting Externalities to Estimate the Long-Term Effects of Early Childhood Deworming.”
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 10 (3): 235–62.
Phillips, Louise, Victor Wynn, Selwyn-Lloyd McPherson, and Ken Gilhooly. 2001. “Mental Planning and the
Tower of London Task.” The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology Section A 54 (2): 579–597.
Pop-Eleches, Cristian, Harsha Thirumurthy, James Habyarimana, Joshua Graff Zivin, Markus Goldstein,
Damien de Walque, Leslie Mackeen, Jessica Haberer, John Sidle, and Duncan Ngare. 2011. “Mobile Phone
Technologies Improve Adherence to Antiretroviral Treatment in Resource-Limited Settings: A Randomized
Controlled Trial of Text Message Reminders.” AIDS 25 (6) (6): 825–34.

35

Reich, John W, and Frank J Infurna. 2016. Perceived control: theory, research, and practice in the first 50
years. Oxford University Press.
Richard, Stephanie, Robert Black, Robert Gilman, Richard Guerrant, Gagandeep Kang, Claudio Lanata, Kåre
Mølbak, Zeba Rasmussen, R. Bradley Sack, Palle Valentiner-Branth, et al. 2013. “Diarrhea in Early
Childhood: Short-Term Association with Weight and Long-Term Association with Length.” American
Journal of Epidemiology 178 (7): 1129–1138.
Richards, David, and Mark Whyte. 2011. Reach Out: National Programme Student Materials to Support
the Delivery of Training for Psychological Wellbeing Practitioners Delivering Low Intensity Interventions.
Rethink Mental Illness.
Royer, Heather, Mark Stehr, and Justin Sydnor. 2015. “Incentives, Commitments, and Habit Formation in
Exercise: Evidence from a Field Experiment with Workers at a Fortune-500 Company.” American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics 7 (3): 51–84.
Schilbach, Frank. 2018. “Alcohol and Self-Control: A Field Experiment in India.” American Economic Review
(Forthcoming).
Schwarzer, Ralf, and Matthias Jerusalem. 2010. “The General Self-Efficacy Scale (GSE).” Anxiety, Stress, and
Coping 12:329–345.
Shallice, Tim. 1982. “Specific Impairments of Planning.” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London B: Biological Sciences 298 (1089): 199–209.
Sheldon, Kennon, and Sonja Lyubomirsky. 2006. “How to Increase and Sustain Positive Emotion: The Effects of
Expressing Gratitude and Visualizing Best Possible Selves.” The Journal of Positive Psychology 1 (2): 73–82.
Stadler, Gertraud, Gabriele Oettingen, and Peter Gollwitzer. 2009. “Physical Activity in Women: Effects of
a Self-Regulation Intervention.” American Journal of Preventive Medicine 36 (1): 29–34.
Stein, Jeffrey, Allison Tegge, Jamie Turner, and Warren Bickel. 2018. “Episodic Future Thinking Reduces Delay
Discounting and Cigarette Demand: An Investigation of the Good-Subject Effect.” Journal of Behavioral
Medicine 41 (2): 269–276.
Troeger, Christopher, Danny V Colombara, Puja C Rao, Ibrahim A Khalil, Alexandria Brown, Thomas G Brewer,
Richard L Guerrant, Eric R Houpt, Karen L Kotloff, Kavita Misra, William A Petri, and Jam Platts-Mills. 2018.
“Global Disability-Adjusted Life-Year Estimates of Long-Term Health Burden and Undernutrition Attributable
to Diarrhoeal Diseases in Children Younger than 5 Years.” The Lancet Global Health 6 (3): e255–e269 (March).
Wang, Haidong, Mohsen Naghavi, Christine Allen, Ryan Barber, Zulfiqar Bhutta, Austin Carter, Daniel Casey,
Fiona Charlson, Alan Chen, Matthew Coates, et al. 2016. “Global, Regional, and National Life Expectancy,
All-Cause Mortality, and Cause-Specific Mortality for 249 Causes of Death, 1980–2015: A Systematic
Analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2015.” The Lancet 388 (10053): 1459–1544.
Weobong, Benedict, Helen A Weiss, David McDaid, Daisy R Singla, Steven D Hollon, Abhijit Nadkarni, A-La Park,
Bhargav Bhat, Basavraj Katti, Arpita Anand, et al. 2017. “Sustained Effectiveness and Cost-Effectiveness of
the Healthy Activity Programme, a Brief Psychological Treatment for Depression Delivered by Lay Counsellors
in Primary Care: 12-month Follow-Up of a Randomised Controlled Trial.” PLoS Medicine 14, no. 9.
Wilson, Timothy, Thalia Wheatley, Jonathan Meyers, Daniel Gilbert, and Danny Axsom. 2000. “Focalism:
A Source of Durability Bias in Affective Forecasting.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 78
(5): 821–836.
Zwane, Alix Peterson, Jonathan Zinman, Eric Van Dusen, William Pariente, Clair Null, Edward Miguel, Michael
Kremer, Dean Karlan, Richard Hornbeck, Xavier Giné, et al. 2011. “Being Surveyed Can Change Later Behavior and Related Parameter Estimates.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108 (5): 1821–1826.

36

Table 1: Experimental integrity
Comparison with active control (AC+INF)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Active
Visualization Planning Column 2 vs.
Control
Treatment Treatment
Column 3
Group
Effect
Effect
p-value
Mean (SD)
Balance on recruitment census variables
Age
Married or cohabiting
Education level
High wealth index
Village of residence
Delay variables
Days between endline and baseline
Days between chlorine test and baseline
Chlorine test was conducted on the first day of village’s tests
Endline participation
Did not participate in endline
Did not participate in endline, conditional on attending baseline
Did not participate in chlorine test
Did not participate in chlorine test, conditional on attending baseline
Compliance
Completed both first and second intervention
Completed first intervention
Completed no intervention

26.73
(4.50)
0.89
(0.31)
5.85
(1.20)
0.55
(0.50)
89.08
(54.74)

=0.06

=0.01

(0.23)
0.00
(0.02)
=0.01
(0.06)
=0.01
(0.03)
=0.06
(6.30)

(0.24)
0.00
(0.02)
0.07
(0.06)
=0.02
(0.03)
0.50
(6.30)

67.73
(20.63)
78.11
(26.65)
0.68
(0.47)

0.62
(1.00)
0.57
(1.37)
0.01
(0.02)

0.08
(0.27)
0.08
(0.27)
0.12
(0.33)
0.12
(0.33)

0.02
(0.02)
0.02
(0.02)
0.01
(0.02)
0.01
(0.02)

0.74
(0.44)
0.78
(0.41)
0.22
(0.41)

0.01
(0.02)
0.01
(0.02)
=0.01
(0.02)

0.82

Comparison with pure control (PC)
(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

N

Pure
Control
Mean (SD)

V+INF
Treatment
Effect

P+INF
Treatment
Effect

AC+INF
Treatment
Effect

N

=0.36

=0.43

=0.33

2984

2116

0.88

2116

0.19

2116

0.75

2116

0.93

2116

1.80
(0.93)∗
2.52
(1.31)∗
=0.00
(0.02)

0.23

2116

0.16

1868

0.69

2009

0.03
(0.02)∗
0.03
(0.02)∗
0.03
(0.02)
0.03
(0.02)

0.39

2337

=0.02

(0.02)
0.01
(0.02)
=0.01
(0.02)

0.39

2337

0.33

2337

0.33

2337

0.35

2975

0.85

2975

0.85

2975

26.88
(4.63)
0.91
(0.28)
5.92
(1.10)
0.53
(0.50)
85.46
(57.21)
68.73
(24.07)
81.12
(27.54)
0.67
(0.47)
0.24
(0.43)
0.00
(0.05)
0.26
(0.44)
0.00
(0.05)

=
=
=
=
=
=

(0.25)
=0.02
(0.02)
=0.06
(0.06)
0.01
(0.03)
1.49
(4.79)

(0.26)∗
=0.02
(0.02)
0.03
(0.06)
=0.00
(0.03)
1.73
(4.84)

1.82
(1.06)∗
0.70
(1.26)
=0.01
(0.02)

2.12
(1.01)∗∗
1.71
(1.21)
=0.01
(0.02)

1.23
(1.00)
0.08
(1.19)
=0.01
(0.02)

=0.06

=0.04

=0.06

(0.02)∗∗∗
0.07
(0.01)∗∗∗
=0.04
(0.02)∗
0.10
(0.01)∗∗∗

=
=
=
=
=
=

(0.02)∗
0.08
(0.01)∗∗∗
=0.02
(0.02)
0.12
(0.01)∗∗∗

=
=
=
=
=
=

(0.25)
=0.03
(0.02)∗
=0.03
(0.06)
0.02
(0.03)
1.16
(4.55)

(0.02)∗∗∗
0.06
(0.01)∗∗∗
=0.04
(0.02)∗∗
0.09
(0.01)∗∗∗

=
=
=
=
=
=

2984
2984
2984
2984

2984
2646
2839

3750
3750
3750
3750

-

Notes: OLS estimates of balance across treatment groups. For each variable, we report the mean of the comparison group, the coefficients of interest, and standard errors in parentheses. Delay, attrition, and compliance specifications control for
a vector of observed characteristics; baseline balance specifications do not. All specifications cluster standard errors at the level of intervention cohort. The ”Balance on recruitment census variables” and ”Delay variables” samples are restricted
to those who attended endline, and for the AC+INF comparison additionally restricted to those who completed baseline and the first intervention session, since these are the samples used for the primary analyses. * denotes significance
at 10 pct., ** at 5 pct., and *** at 1 pct. level. Balance variables were collected at point of recruitment into the study, approximately four weeks before the first intervention. ‘High wealth index’ denotes participants who scored above
the median in a measure of the value of their holdings of a limited list of common household assets. Delay variables measure the number of days elapsed from when an individual participated in the first intervention session until i) the endline
measures in the laboratory, and ii) the test in their home for the presence of chlorine in stored drinking water. The third delay variable indicates the proportion of study participants who had their drinking water tested for chlorine on the
first day that the testing team came to their village, rather than during a subsequent visit. Endline participation variables show the proportion of the relevant sample who did not participate in i) the endline in the laboratory, and ii) the chlorine
test at home. For the AC+INF comparison, this sample is restricted to those who completed baseline and the first intervention session, since this is the sample used for the primary analysis. Participants only received a chlorine test once they
had completed endline in the laboratory, and so attrition from endline results in attrition from the chlorine test. Compliance variables show the proportion of the sample in active treatment groups who i) completed both of the two intervention
sessions, ii) completed only the first and did not return for the second, iii) failed to complete any of the interventions. A comparison is not shown relative to the pure control group since that group was not invited to intervention sessions.

Table 2: Behavioral outcomes
Comparison with active control (AC+INF)
(1)
Active
Control
Group
Mean (SD)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Visualization
Treatment
Effect

Planning
Treatment
Effect

Comparison with pure control (PC)
(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Column 2 vs.
Column 3
p-value

N

Pure
Control
Mean (SD)

V+INF
Treatment
Effect

P+INF
Treatment
Effect

AC+INF
Treatment
Effect

N

Health Outcomes
Pre-specified primary
Objective measure: water has been treated with chlorine (TCR)

Pre-specified exploratory
Objective measure: water has sufficient chlorine to be safe (FCR)

0.23
(0.42)

0.05
(0.02)∗∗

0.02
(0.02)

0.15

2012

0.22
(0.42)

0.06
(0.02)∗∗∗

0.04
(0.02)∗

0.03
(0.02)

2839

0.21
(0.40)

0.04
(0.02)∗∗
[0.07]∗
=0.09
(0.03)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗
0.00
(0.02)
[0.58]
=0.20
(0.42)
[0.56]
=0.04
(0.02)∗∗
[0.06]∗

0.01
(0.02)
[1.00]
=0.05
(0.03)∗
[0.63]
=0.02
(0.02)
[1.00]
0.03
(0.34)
[1.00]
=0.03
(0.02)
[0.82]

0.16

2012

0.18
(0.39)

2012

0.23
(0.64)

0.17

1999

0.22
(0.36)

0.54

200

1.19
(1.17)

0.48

2004

0.17
(0.31)

0.03
(0.02)
[0.81]
=0.07
(0.03)∗∗
[0.15]
=0.02
(0.02)
[1.00]
=0.07
(0.42)
[1.00]
0.02
(0.02)
[1.00]

0.03
(0.02)
[1.00]
=0.00
(0.04)
[1.00]
0.01
(0.02)
[1.00]
0.15
(0.45)
[1.00]
0.04
(0.02)∗∗
[0.35]

2839

0.13

0.06
(0.02)∗∗∗
[0.01]∗∗
=0.09
(0.03)∗∗∗
[0.02]∗∗
0.02
(0.02)
[0.65]
=0.30
(0.40)
[0.65]
0.01
(0.02)
[0.91]

24.89
(12.37)∗∗
[0.16]

3.28
(12.51)
[1.00]

0.10

2108

88.76
(228.12)

17.57
(12.67)
[0.42]

7.38
(12.86)
[0.23]

3.87
(11.90)
[0.99]

2972

0.00∗∗∗

2108

0.32
(0.47)

2108

0.21
(0.46)

0.00∗∗∗

2108

0.17
(0.38)

0.04
(0.03)
[1.00]
=0.02
(0.03)
[1.00]
0.01
(0.02)
[1.00]

2972

0.17

0.01
(0.03)
[1.00]
=0.01
(0.03)
[1.00]
0.00
(0.02)
[1.00]

2108

108.78
(182.99)

Number of diarrhea incidences per child u15 in last 3 months

0.24
(0.59)

Proportion of children u15 vaccinated in last 3 months

0.22
(0.35)

Number of ANC visits made in last 3 months (among pregnant women)

1.26
(1.19)

Proportion of children taken for healthcare check-up in last 3 months

0.21
(0.34)

2823

2800

272

2806

Savings Outcomes
Pre-specified secondary
Amount saved regularly (per week, KES)

Pre-specified exploratory
Indicator: Amount saved regularly is positive

93.96
(230.26)

0.36
(0.48)

Number of new ROSCAs joined in last 3 months

0.17
(0.44)

Indicator: Respondent saves for productive investments

0.17
(0.38)

0.13
(0.03)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗
0.04
(0.03)∗
[0.10]
0.11
(0.02)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

=0.02

(0.03)
[1.00]
0.01
(0.02)
[1.00]
=0.01
(0.02)
[1.00]

0.12
(0.03)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗
0.02
(0.03)
[0.65]
0.09
(0.02)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

2972

2972

Labor Outcomes
Pre-specified secondary
Total hours of work in last 3 months

Pre-specified exploratory
Total days of work in last 3 months

Average monthly earnings in last 3 months

106.11
(174.61)

21.22
(30.09)
1094.50
(2865.35)

=6.79

=23.83

0.06∗

=0.59

=3.91

0.04∗∗

(9.54)
[0.90]

(1.64)
[0.56]
3.11
(147.23)
[0.65]

(8.99)∗∗∗
[0.03]∗∗

(1.60)∗∗
[0.18]
=1.23
(163.19)
[1.00]

2108

21.73
(30.45)

0.97

2108

1167.22
(3155.76)

0.60

1420

0.00
(1.00)

=2.33
(10.13)
[0.42]

=23.59

=7.14

2972

=0.52

=3.94

=1.41

2972

(1.70)
[0.91]
=43.58
(166.41)
[0.91]

(9.46)∗∗
[0.04]∗∗

(1.61)∗∗
[0.15]
=105.44
(171.46)
[1.00]

(9.64)
[0.85]

(1.64)
[1.00]
=142.78
(174.39)
[1.00]

2972

Other Behavioral Outcomes
Pre-specified secondary
Index of investment in children’s education (z-score)

0.00
(1.00)

=0.02

(0.06)
[0.90]

0.01
(0.07)
[1.00]

0.09
(0.07)
[0.42]

0.12
(0.07)∗
[0.10]

0.12
(0.07)∗
[0.36]

1967

Notes: OLS estimates of treatment effects. For each variable, we report the mean of the comparison group, the coefficients of interest, and standard errors in parentheses. Square brackets contain additional p-values corrected for multiple
hypothesis testing using the false discovery rate. All columns include village-level fixed effects, control for a vector of individual characteristics, and cluster standard errors at the level of intervention cohort. For the comparison to the AC+INF
group, the specification also controls for the baseline value of the outcome, for those that were collected at baseline. For the comparison to the pure control group, the specification also includes fixed effects for i) the week and ii) the day
of the week of the endline survey, for measures collected in the endline session (all variables except the objective chlorine measures). * denotes significance at 10 pct., ** at 5 pct., and *** at 1 pct. level. Outcome measures are listed on the left,
and are described in detail in Section 4. Objective measures of chlorine come from data collected in participants’ homes, where stored household water was tested for the presence of Total and Free Chlorine Residual, which indicate whether chlorine
has been added to water (TCR), and whether sufficient chlorine is in the water to make it safe to drink (FCR). The number of diarrhea incidences reports how many independent episodes of diarrhea each child under-15 had on average in the last
three months. The index of investment in children’s education consists of measures of money spent on children’s education and average school days attended in the last 3 months, and is constructed only for those women with school-age children.

Table 3: Chlorine-related outcomes in dispenser vs. non-dispenser villages
Village has no chlorine dispenser
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
V+INF
P+INF
AC+INF
Pure
Control
Treatment Treatment Treatment
Mean (SD)
Effect
Effect
Effect
Objective measure: water has been treated with chlorine (TCR)
Objective measure: water has sufficient chlorine to be safe (FCR)
Number of diarrhea incidences per child u15 in last 3 months
Belief: Proportion of diarrhea incidences avoided through chlorination (z-score)
Chlorine knowledge score (z-score)

0.23
(0.42)
0.17
(0.37)
0.26
(0.66)
0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)

0.04
(0.03)
0.05
(0.03)∗
=0.09
(0.05)∗∗
0.16
(0.07)∗∗
0.16
(0.08)∗∗

0.02
(0.03)
0.02
(0.03)
=0.08
(0.05)∗
0.17
(0.07)∗∗
0.06
(0.08)

=0.01

(0.03)
0.00
(0.03)
=0.02
(0.05)
0.08
(0.08)
0.05
(0.08)

Village has chlorine dispenser
(5)
N

1534
1534
1502
1573
1573

(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
Pure
V+INF
P+INF
AC+INF
Control
Treatment Treatment Treatment
Mean (SD)
Effect
Effect
Effect
0.21
(0.41)
0.20
(0.40)
0.20
(0.61)
0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)

0.08
(0.03)∗∗
0.06
(0.03)∗
=0.08
(0.05)
0.08
(0.08)
0.05
(0.08)

0.05
(0.03)∗
0.03
(0.03)
=0.07
(0.05)
0.13
(0.08)
0.06
(0.08)

0.07
(0.03)∗∗
0.05
(0.03)
0.03
(0.05)
0.16
(0.08)∗
0.12
(0.08)

Comparison
(10)
N

(11)
(12)
(13)
V+INF
P+INF
AC+INF
Interaction Interaction Interaction
p-value
p-value
p-value

1305

[0.31]

[0.42]

[0.04]∗∗

1305

[0.81]

[0.80]

[0.24]

1321

[0.82]

[0.87]

[0.48]

1382

[0.37]

[0.60]

[0.56]

1382

[0.29]

[1.00]

[0.57]

Notes: OLS estimates of treatment effects. The outcome variables repeat those in Tables 1–3, but the table reports the analysis separately for villages which have at least one chlorine dispenser maintained at a village water source, and for villages which do not have chlorine dispensers.
For each variable, we report the mean of the comparison group, the coefficients of interest, and standard errors in parentheses. All columns include village-level fixed effects, control for a vector of individual characteristics, and cluster standard errors at the level of intervention cohort.
The specification also includes fixed effects for i) the week and ii) the day of the week of the endline survey, for measures collected in the endline session (all variables except the objective chlorine measures). * denotes significance at 10 pct., ** at 5 pct., and *** at 1 pct. level.
Outcome measures are listed on the left, and are described in detail in Section 4. Columns (11)–(13) report the p-values on the differential effect of the treatments in villages with vs. without chlorine dispensers using SUR.

Table 4: Psychological outcomes
Comparison with active control (AC+INF)
(2)
(1)
Active
Visualization
Control
Treatment
Group
Effect
Mean (SD)

Comparison with pure control (PC)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Planning
Treatment
Effect

Column 2 vs.
Column 3
p-value

N

Pure
Control
Mean (SD)

V+INF
Treatment
Effect

P+INF
Treatment
Effect

AC+INF
Treatment
Effect

N

0.04
(0.05)
[0.91]

0.31

2103

0.00
(1.00)

0.03
(0.06)
[1.00]

0.28

2103

0.00
(1.00)

Planning Skills
Pre-specified primary
Behavioral Activation Score (BADS) (z-score)

Pre-specified secondary
Tower of London: Total Moves (z-score)

0.00
(1.00)

=0.01

(0.05)
[0.83]

0.00
(1.00)

0.01
(0.05)
[0.85]

0.982
(0.005)

0.007
(0.006)
[0.83]

=0.04

(0.05)
[0.50]

=0.38

(0.05)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

0.11
(0.06)∗
[0.13]

=0.43

(0.05)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

0.04
(0.06)
[1.00]

=0.37

2955

2955

(0.05)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

Time Preferences
Pre-specified primary
β Effort

Pre-specified secondary
δEffort

0.999
(0.001)

β MP L

1.05
(0.46)

δMP L

0.98
(0.02)

=0.001

(0.001)
[0.26]
=0.02
(0.02)
[0.41]
=0.00
(0.00)
[0.41]

0.005
(0.007)
[0.91]

=0.002

(0.001)∗∗
[0.06]∗
0.02
(0.03)
[0.53]
=0.00
(0.00)
[0.40]

0.33

2068

0.953
(0.020)

0.16

2068

0.995
(0.002)

0.007
(0.018)
[1.00]

=0.001

(0.002)
[0.50]
=0.01
(0.03)
[0.50]
0.00
(0.00)∗
[0.08]∗

0.012
(0.018)
[0.32]

0.009
(0.018)
[1.00]

2906

0.003
(0.002)
[0.23]
0.01
(0.02)
[0.45]
0.00
(0.00)∗∗
[0.07]∗

2906

(0.002)
[0.25]
0.02
(0.03)
[0.25]
0.00
(0.00)
[0.14]

0.02
(0.06)
[0.45]

2955

0.12
(0.06)∗∗
0.09
(0.06)
0.35
(0.05)∗∗∗
0.03
(0.06)

2955

=0.002

0.21

2103

1.02
(0.43)

0.86

2103

0.98
(0.02)

0.38

2103

0.00
(1.00)

0.18
(0.06)∗∗∗
[0.01]∗∗

0.18
(0.06)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

0.61

2103

0.20

2103

0.08∗

2103

0.49

1926

0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)

0.13
(0.05)∗∗
0.12
(0.05)∗∗
0.36
(0.06)∗∗∗
0.01
(0.06)

0.16
(0.05)∗∗∗
0.07
(0.06)
0.28
(0.05)∗∗∗
=0.01
(0.06)

2955

2955

Self-Efficacy
Pre-specified secondary
General Self-Efficacy Score (GSE) (z-score)

0.00
(1.00)

0.16
(0.05)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

0.12
(0.05)∗∗
[0.06]∗

Alternative Mechanisms
Belief: Proportion of diarrhea incidences avoided through chlorination (z-score)
Chlorine knowledge score (z-score)
ANC/PNC knowledge score (z-score)
Risk Aversion Measure (z-score)

0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)

0.08
(0.05)
0.06
(0.05)
0.04
(0.05)
=0.03
(0.06)

0.06
(0.06)
=0.01
(0.05)
=0.05
(0.05)
=0.07
(0.06)

2955
2955
2735

Notes: OLS estimates of treatment effects. For each variable, we report the mean of the comparison group, the coefficients of interest, and standard errors in parentheses. Square brackets contain additional p-values corrected for multiple hypothesis
testing using the false discovery rate. All columns include village-level fixed effects, control for a vector of individual characteristics, and cluster standard errors at the level of the intervention cohort. For the comparison to the AC+INF group, the
specification also controls for the baseline value of the outcome, for those that were collected at baseline. For the comparison to the pure control group, the specification also includes fixed effects for i) the week and ii) the day of the week of the endline
survey, for measures collected in the endline session. * denotes significance at 10 pct., ** at 5 pct., and *** at 1 pct. level. Outcome measures are listed on the left, and are described in detail in Section 4. The BADS score measures a participant’s
ability and motivation to follow through on plans they make in their life. Tower of London is a lab game that measures a participant’s ability to plan ahead. Time preferences over effort are estimated structurally from a real effort task involving data
entry by SMSs. Time preferences over money are measured using Multiple Price Lists (MPL). The risk aversion measure is derived from responses to a coin flip for various monetary rewards. The General Self-Efficacy score measures a participant’s
belief in their own ability to achieve the outcomes they desire. The mechanisms variables check if the interventions differentially affected i) a participant’s belief in the efficacy of chlorine to prevent diarrhea, and ii) their knowledge of how to correctly
chlorinate water, to assess whether changes in beliefs or knowledge could have been the cause of changes in chlorination behavior.

Table 5: Salience & memory test outcomes
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Chlorine word Saving word Future word Total words
remembered remembered remembered remembered
Visualization

0.08
(0.01)∗∗∗

0.00
(0.01)

-0.01
(0.01)

-0.37
(0.23)

Planning

0.05
(0.01)∗∗∗

0.02
(0.01)

-0.01
(0.01)

-0.03
(0.24)

0.02
(0.01)

0.01
(0.01)

-0.03
(0.01)∗

-0.12
(0.22)

Active Control
V x Chlorine Word Interaction

0.09
(0.02)∗∗∗

P x Chlorine Word Interaction

0.06
(0.02)∗∗

AC x Chlorine Word Interaction

0.05
(0.02)∗

V x Saving Word Interaction

0.02
(0.02)

P x Saving Word Interaction

0.03
(0.02)

AC x Saving Word Interaction

0.04
(0.02)∗

Constant

5.15
(2.24)∗

2.27
(2.09)

3.36
(1.09)∗∗

-31.30
(34.04)

Notes: The table reports the probability in the salience test of remembering a chlorine-related word, or a
savings-related word. The OLS specifications control for the total number of words the participant remembered
in each list and include a ’chlorine word’ fixed effect. The coefficients of the interaction terms show the differential
probability of remembering a ’future-related’ word if that word is related to chlorine or saving. * denotes
significance at 10 pct., ** at 5 pct., and *** at 1 pct. level.

Online Appendix
A.

Cost-effectiveness per disability-adjusted life year saved

To compute the disability-adjusted life years saved with our interventions, we proceed as follows.
First, the cost of our interventions was USD 4 per household, or USD 1.33 per child because
households have three children on average. This includes the costs relevant to a potential scale-up,
i.e. the cost of running the sessions including overheads, but not our incentivized surveys. Troeger
et al. (2018) estimate the DALYs lost per child in Kenya due to diarrhea in 2016, the year our
study was conducted, to be 0.127. Our region is one of the poorer ones in Kenya and has worse
health outcomes than others, so using this figure will lead to a conservative estimate. We next
assume that the treatment effects of our interventions on diarrhea relative to the active control
group (−38 percent for visualization and −21 percent for planning) were never higher during the
study period of 3 months than what we measured at the 3-month endline, and then immediately
went to zero. This, too, is a conservative assumption and will lead to a lower-bound estimate.
Together, these figures suggest that DALYs saved per child due to the visualization intervention
3
are 0.127×38%× 12
=0.012065, and of the planning intervention 0.0066675. Combined with an
intervention cost of USD 1.33 per child for both interventions, this implies that the cost of one
1.33
USD1.33
DALY saved is USD
=USD110 for the visualization intervention and 0.0066675
=USD199 for the
0.012065
planning intervention. Notably, Troeger et al. (2018) estimate DALYs lost to diarrhea in children
under 5, while our pre-specified outcome is diarrhea in children under 15. Our data allows us to
re-run the estimation for diarrhea in children under 5: Appendix Table A.22 shows reductions in
under-5 diarrhea of 34 and 25 percent in the visualization and planning groups, respectively, relative
to the active control. Using these estimates instead of the under-15 ones, we obtain a cost per DALY
1.33
USD1.33
saved of USD
=USD123 for the visualization intervention, and 0.0079375
=USD168 for planning.
0.010795

B.

Description of WASH Benefits Kenya

The WASH Benefits Kenya study is a cluster-randomized controlled trial testing the effects of six
“water, sanitation and handwashing” (WASH) interventions on childhood development (Null et al.
2018). Villages were eligible if they were rural, most of the population relied on communal water
sources and had unimproved sanitation facilities, and there were no other ongoing water, sanitation,
handwashing, or nutrition programs. Between 2012 and 2014, 8,246 pregnant women were enrolled
from three counties in western Kenya: Bungoma, Kakamega and Vihiga. The six interventions were
(W) improved water quality (“Water Quality”); (S) improved sanitation; (H) handwashing with

42

soap; (WSH) combined water, sanitation and handwashing; (N) improved nutrition; (WSH+N)
combined water, sanitation, handwashing and nutrition. The study also included two control arms:
(A) an active control arm, who received monthly visits to measure children’s arm circumferences;
and (P) a passive comparison arm, who received no visits. The villages in our sample primarily
came from either (W) improved water quality or (P) passive comparison arm.
In all Villages in Arm W, “Water Quality”, chlorine dispensers were installed at public water
sources used by study participants. All community members were able to use the dispensers free
of charge. After filling water carrying containers, usually a 20 l jerrycan, users turn the knob on
the dispenser to add 3 ml of 1.25 percent sodium hypochlorite (chlorine), which yields 2.5 ml/l
of free chlorine residual after 30 mins for 20 l of water (Kremer et al. 2011a). This is sufficient
chlorine to sanitize the water for drinking. Community promoters encouraged use of the chlorine
dispensers, which to this date are monitored and maintained by Evidence Action’s “Dispensers
for Safe Water” program. Sample households additionally received a six-month supply of bottled
chlorine every six months, to be used for sanitizing water at home, in case the household drank
harvested rainwater or chose not to use the water source with the installed dispenser.
About 20 percent of our sample was recruited uniformly from 71 villages in the remaining
six WASH Benefits treatment arms in Mumias district, Kakamega county. The inclusion of participants from villages treated by the remaining six arms of the WASH intervention was not planned
but occurred as a result of a coding error at the sampling stage. During the WASH Benefits study,
48 of these 71 villages received one of sanitation, handwashing or nutrition interventions, but no
dispensers. We group these 48 villages with the passive comparison villages in our analysis. First,
these additional interventions all took place at the household level. We exclude households which
participated directly in the original WASH study from participation in the present study. Second,
all interventions other than dispensers finished three to four years before our study. The other
23 villages received dispensers, as well as combinations of sanitation, handwashing or nutrition
interventions. We group these villages with dispenser villages, as Evidence Action continued to
maintain dispensers in these villages.
We include these villages in our main estimation of treatment effects, grouping treatment arms
by whether or not they received the water quality interventions. As a robustness check, we exclude
these 71 villages from the heterogeneity analysis by “Water Quality” assignment in Appendix F.
We find little difference in the sign or magnitude of coefficients, and small differences in statistical
significance, likely driven by reduced power from the smaller sample size.

43

C.

Experimental integrity
Table A.1: Summary of participation
Recruited
Completed baseline
Completed baseline & Intervention 1
Completed baseline & Intervention 1 & Intervention 2
Completed baseline & endline
Completed endline
Completed baseline & endline & chlorine test
Completed endline & chlorine test
Completed chlorine test

Pure Control Active Control Visualization Planning Total
775
992
992
991
3,750
–
777
783
777
2,337
–
777
783
777
2,337
–
736
734
711
2,181
716
708
692
2,116
588
811
800
785
2,984
662
647
641
1,950
568
771
754
738
2,831
571
771
756
741
2,839

44

Table A.2: Baseline balance: main outcomes
Comparison with active control (AC+INF)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Active
Visualization Planning Column 2 vs.
Control
Treatment Treatment
Column 3
Group
Effect
Effect
p-value
Mean (SD)
Baseline score
Tower of London: Total Moves

General Self-Efficacy Score (GSE)

23.32
(6.83)
42.84
(11.59)

β MP L

0.99
(0.37)

δMP L

0.98
(0.02)

Self report: added chlorine in last month

0.65
(0.48)

Chlorine knowledge score (z-score)

0.00
(1.00)

Number of diarrhea incidences per child u15 in last 3 months

0.10
(0.25)

=0.48

(0.46)
[0.98]
=0.07
(0.68)
[1.00]
0.01
(0.02)
[1.00]
0.00
(0.00)
[1.00]
=0.04
(0.03)
[0.56]
0.09
(0.05)
[0.56]
0.00
(0.01)
[1.00]

=0.30

(0.42)
[1.00]
0.90
(0.74)
[1.00]
0.00
(0.02)
[1.00]
0.00
(0.00)
[1.00]
=0.04
(0.03)
[1.00]
0.01
(0.05)
[1.00]
=0.00
(0.01)
[1.00]

(5)
N

0.70

2197

0.19

2175

0.64

2142

0.52

2142

0.82

2184

0.18

2337

0.55

2084

Notes: OLS estimates of baseline values of main outcomes. For each variable, we report the mean of the comparison group, the coefficients of interest, and
standard errors in parentheses. Square brackets contain additional p-values corrected for multiple hypothesis testing using the false discovery rate. All columns
include village-level fixed effects, control for a vector of individual characteristics, and cluster standard errors at the level of the intervention cohort. * denotes
significance at 10 pct., ** at 5 pct., and *** at 1 pct. level. Outcome measures are listed on the left, and are described in detail in Section 4. The Tower of
London is a lab game that measures a participant’s ability to plan ahead. The General Self-Efficacy score measures a participant’s belief in their own ability
to achieve the outcomes they desire. Time preference parameters β and δ measured over money are derived from responses to Multiple Price Lists (MPL).

Table A.3: Baseline balance: dispenser vs. non-dispenser villages
(1)
(2)
Village without
Village with
Chlorine Dispenser Chlorine Dispenser
Mean (SD)
Difference
Observables
Age
Married/ Cohabiting
Education Level
High Wealth Index

26.25
(4.68)
0.89
(0.31)
5.84
(1.18)
0.51
(0.50)

0.21
(0.15)
=0.01
(0.01)
0.10
(0.04)∗∗∗
0.01
(0.02)

(3)
N

3750
3750
3750
3750

Notes: OLS estimates of baseline balance on observed characteristics for villages with and
without chlorine dispensers. For each variable, we report the mean of villages without
a chlorine dispenser, with the standard deviation in parentheses. Column 2 reports the
difference for villages with a chlorine dispenser, with standard errors in parentheses. All
standard errors are clustered at the level of intervention cohort. * denotes significance at
10 pct., ** at 5 pct., and *** at 1 pct. level.

Table A.4: Attrition analysis: treatments vs. active control
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Did not participate in endline Did not participate in chlorine test Did not participate in endline Did not participate in chlorine test Did not participate in endline Did not participate in chlorine test
Visualization

0.02
(0.02)

0.01
(0.02)

0.02
(0.02)

0.01
(0.02)

0.02
(0.12)

Planning

0.03
(0.02)∗

0.03
(0.02)

0.03
(0.02)∗

0.03
(0.02)

0.14
(0.14)

Age

=0.01

=0.01

=0.03

=0.02

=0.00

=0.01

(0.00)∗∗∗

Married or cohabiting

(0.02)

Education level

(0.01)

(0.00)∗∗∗
(0.02)

(0.01)

V x Age Interaction

=0.01

(0.00)∗∗∗
0.00
(0.03)

=0.00

(0.01)

0.00
(0.00)

P x Age Interaction

=0.01

(0.03)

=0.03

(0.03)

Constant

0.09
(0.01)∗∗∗

0.15
(0.02)∗∗∗

0.31
(0.06)∗∗∗

0.39
(0.07)∗∗∗

=0.01

(0.01)

0.00
(0.00)

=0.01

(0.01)

P x Wealth Interaction

0.01
(0.04)

=0.01

=0.01

V x Wealth Interaction

(0.00)∗∗

=0.08

0.01
(0.01)

P x Education Interaction

=0.01

=0.09

(0.06)

V x Education Interaction

0.15
(0.15)

=0.00

(0.05)∗

P x Married Interaction

(0.14)

=0.00

(0.00)

V x Married Interaction

=0.05

0.27
(0.08)∗∗∗

(0.00)

(0.05)
(0.06)
0.00
(0.01)

=0.01

(0.02)
0.00
(0.04)

=0.01

(0.04)

0.37
(0.10)∗∗∗

Notes: OLS estimates of the probability of attriting relative to the AC+INF control group. For each variable, we report the mean of the comparison group, the coefficients of interest, and standard errors in parentheses. Each column represents a different specification, with
or without controls and interaction terms to assess whether i) there was differential attrition for groups with certain observed characterstics (Columns (3) and (4)) and ii) there was any differential effect of an observed characteristic on the probability of attriting for any treatment
group (Columns (5) and (6)). All standard errors are clustered at the level of intervention cohort. * denotes significance at 10 pct., ** at 5 pct., and *** at 1 pct. level.

Table A.5: Attrition analysis: active treatments vs. pure control
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(1)
Did not participate in endline Did not participate in chlorine test Did not participate in endline Did not participate in chlorine test Did not participate in endline Did not participate in chlorine test

=0.05

=0.04

=0.06

=0.04

=0.02

=0.04

=0.02

=0.04

=0.02

=0.04

=0.06

=0.04

=0.06

=0.04

=0.16

=0.09

Age

=0.01

=0.01

=0.01

=0.01

Married or cohabiting

=0.08

=0.08

=0.10

=0.13

Education level

=0.01

=0.01

=0.01

=0.01

=0.00

=0.00

V+INF

(0.02)∗∗∗

P+INF

(0.02)∗

AC+INF

(0.02)∗∗∗

(0.02)∗
(0.02)

(0.02)∗

(0.02)∗∗∗
(0.02)∗∗

(0.02)∗∗∗

(0.00)∗∗∗
(0.02)∗∗∗
(0.01)∗∗

(0.02)∗
(0.02)

(0.02)∗∗
(0.00)∗∗∗
(0.02)∗∗∗
(0.01)∗∗

V+INF x Age Interaction

(0.16)
(0.18)

(0.17)
(0.00)∗∗
(0.06)∗
(0.01)
(0.00)

0.01
(0.17)
0.01
(0.18)
(0.17)

(0.00)∗
(0.06)∗∗
(0.01)
(0.00)

48

P+INF x Age Interaction

0.00
(0.00)

AC+INF x Age Interaction

0.00
(0.00)

V+INF x Married Interaction

0.01
(0.07)

0.03
(0.08)

P+INF x Married Interaction

0.04
(0.08)

0.08
(0.08)

AC+INF x Married Interaction

0.05
(0.07)

0.09
(0.08)

V+INF x Education Interaction

0.00
(0.02)

=0.01

P+INF x Education Interaction

(0.02)

AC+INF x Education Interaction

0.00
(0.02)

V+INF x Wealth Interaction

0.00
(0.04)

=0.02

P+INF x Wealth Interaction

(0.04)

AC+INF x Wealth Interaction
Constant

0.26
(0.02)∗∗∗

0.29
(0.02)∗∗∗

0.59
(0.06)∗∗∗

0.62
(0.06)∗∗∗

0.00
(0.00)

=0.00

(0.00)

=0.01

(0.02)

=0.02

(0.02)

=0.00

(0.02)

=0.00

(0.04)

=0.02

(0.04)

0.02
(0.04)

0.00
(0.04)

0.61
(0.13)∗∗∗

0.61
(0.14)∗∗∗

Notes: OLS estimates of the probability of attriting relative to the pure control group. For each variable, we report the mean of the comparison group, the coefficients of interest, and standard errors in parentheses. Each column represents a different specification, with or without
controls and interaction terms to assess whether i) there was differential attrition for groups with certain observed characterstics (Columns (3) and (4)) and ii) there was any differential effect of an observed characteristic on the probability of attriting for any treatment group (Columns
(5) and (6)). All standard errors are clustered at the level of intervention cohort. * denotes significance at 10 pct., ** at 5 pct., and *** at 1 pct. level.

D.

Detailed descriptions of outcome measures

D.1

Tower of London planning task

In our computerized version of the task, participants see a screen with two parts: on the left side is
the word “start” with a picture of three “pegs” and various shapes positioned on the pegs; on the
right side is the word “goal” with a similar picture of three “pegs” and the same shapes positioned
differently on the pegs. To complete the task, participants must reposition the shapes underneath
the “start” on the left to match the “goal” position on the right. They are instructed to complete
each round in as few moves as possible, with the minimum number of moves shown as a number
on the screen. In addition to a practice round, participants attempt four rounds of increasing complexity, beginning with one shape requiring only one move, and concluding with three shapes in a
pattern that necessitates at least four moves. In all rounds, participants are limited to a maximum of
10 moves. If this occurs, the round ends and the participant is required to contact a staff member to
ensure she understands the task before continuing to the next round. Therefore, the distribution of
scores is censored at both ends. Performance on the Tower of London task is computed as the total
number of moves used across the four rounds. An example of the participant’s screen is shown in Figure A.1. Payment was based on a randomly selected round, with a payment of KES 250 for completing the task with the minimum number of moves, and a KES 50 deduction for each additional move.

D.2

Effort discounting task

Following recent innovations in the elicitation of time preferences (Andreoni and Sprenger 2012;
Augenblick, Niederle, and Sprenger 2015), we estimate time preferences in the effort domain, using
the methodology of Augenblick (2017): participants choose how many units of an effort task they
want to complete at a time t for a piece rate w, where t is 0, 1, 7, or 8 days from today, and
the piece rate w is KES 2, 6, or 10. Variation in time identifies the discount rate, while variation
in piece rates identifies the curvature of the utility function. One time and one piece rate are
randomly implemented at the end (described below). Figure A.2 provides an example of the
participant interface for the task.34 In contrast to Augenblick (2017), we hold the time of decision
constant and vary the time of effort provision, which requires us to control for weekday effects.
All questions required a minimum effort allocation of one task at each time to control for the
fixed costs of starting, and allow a maximum of 50 tasks.
Developing an effort task that is adapted to a field setting in a developing country, with low
levels of literacy, was challenging: the required variation in timing meant that effort could not
34

To consider the possibility that respondents feel obligated to carry out some effort regardless of the wage,
a subsample of participants was also asked how many units of effort they would supply for a piece rate of KES
0 (but still receiving the KES 100 completion bonus explained below).

be completed in the laboratory. We needed to monitor and enforce when participants supply
effort, and how much, while they are in their homes, and do not have access to a computer. We
thus developed a new effort task that is adapted to our setting: participants completed data
entry tasks by SMS, using toll-free numbers administered by the Busara Center.35 Each SMS was
supposed to contain a 30-digit random number string, which takes approximately two minutes
to type. Participants were given a sheet with 50 such strings, including a counter to keep track.
To ensure comprehension, participants completed one practice SMS during the survey. At the end
of the survey, one decision (out of 12) was randomly selected to be the “decision that counts”: at
the selected piece rate and time horizon, participants had to send the exact number of SMS they
chose. If they did, they received the full piece rate payment plus a KES 100 completion bonus.
If they failed to implement the decision they made, they lost both the payment for this task and
the completion bonus (see Augenblick 2017 for a full description of this method).36 Earnings from
this task were paid 14 days from the survey date, regardless of the selected effort time horizon.
We estimate time preferences over effort following the approach of Augenblick (2017) by assuming quasi-linear utility (linear in money, convex in effort) and a power cost of effort function. We
additionally assume quasi-hyperbolic discounting. Following DellaVigna and Pope (2017), we allow
for a non-monetary reward s, which participants receive for each task in addition to the piece rate.
The non-monetary reward captures a range of motives, from norm or sense of duty, to reciprocity
towards the employer (for the flat payment), to intrinsic motivation and personal competitiveness.
It was motivated by the observation that participants supply non-zero amounts of effort even for
low piece rates (DellaVigna and Pope 2017). The optimal level of effort is thus given by
1
e*=argmax(s+Dm(14)·φ·w)·e−β I(t>0) ·δt ·( eγ +dw ·e)
γ

(2)

where β and δ capture (hyperbolic) temporal discounting of effort, w is the piece rate, Dm(14)
captures monetary discounting of the payment in 14 days (this is constant for all questions, and
thus allowed to differ from effort discounting), t is the time of effort provision, γ >1 captures
convex costs of effort, φ is a slope parameter, and dw are weekday indicators which allow the
opportunity cost of time to vary across weekdays. Within the non-linear objective function above,
35

Although we did not screen on phone access, all participants in our sample have access to a mobile phone: 71 percent own one, 96 percent have one in their household, and the remainder shares the phone of friends or relatives. Since
phones are often used by multiple individuals, phone access should be understood as continuous rather than binary.
36
The field setting with SMS required some tolerance: while a laboratory computer can confirm correct and
incorrect entries, and display the number of tasks still to complete, we relied on participants to do this themselves.
We thus allowed for 75 percent accuracy in entering the number strings, and a tolerance of 10 in the number
of completed SMS (subject to positive completion). The permissible time window started on the calendar day
before the task was due, and ended with the calendar day of the task itself. Participants were told that there
would be some tolerance for mistakes, but not how much.

50

we estimate additive treatment effects of V, P, and AC on the parameters β, δ, s, and γ.37
66 percent of participants identifiably sent at least one SMS (that was not a practice SMS
during the session), 60 percent sent the correct number of SMS during the correct time window,
and 41 percent additionally satisfied the required accuracy threshold (see footnote 36) and got
paid. The key challenge for the verification of the effort task was matching SMS to participants:
despite various safety provisions (including name and subject ID in each SMS, asking participants
to report all phone numbers they might use), 59049 SMS from 3144 phone numbers could not
be matched to any of our 2983 participants. This challenge arises from a field setting where
individuals commonly share multiple phones within or across households (see footnote 35).
To test for difficulties in access to phones, we included a small module in the endline survey in
which participants were asked about their access to a mobile phone, particularly at the times necessary to complete the SMS task. To alleviate the concern that respondents did not understand the
payment scheme, we included three multiple-choice comprehension questions immediately before
the task that asked participants to calculate the payout in different circumstances. Respondents
could not participate in the task until they had answered the comprehension questions correctly.
Table A.9 shows phone access and task comprehension by treatment group. We find high rates
of phone access and comprehension across all treatment groups, and no large differences across
treatment groups. The exception is the pure control group, which showed lower comprehension
at endline compared to the active treatment groups, presumably because it was their first time
completing the task, while the other groups had already experienced it at baseline. We therefore
interpret differences in time preferences between this group and the others with caution.

D.3

Money discounting task

In addition to the effort discounting task, we included a conventional Multiple Price List (MPL)
task to measure monetary discounting. Participants were asked to make 10 choices between
payments at earlier and later dates. The payment at the early date was always KES 100, while
the payment at the later date increased gradually from KES 110 to KES 300, using gross interest
rates 1.1, 1.25, 1.75, 2, and 3. Each decision was first made in a near time-frame (today vs. four
weeks from today), and later in a future time-frame (four weeks vs. eight weeks from today). The
list of decisions is presented in Table A.6. One decision was randomly selected to be paid out.
As outcome measures from the MPL we estimate β and δ in the quasi-hyperbolic discounting
model of Laibson (1997), assuming linearity of utility in money.
37

To control for the effect of introducing a 0 KES piece rate for a subsample of participants (Footnote 34), we
additionally allow treatment effects of being exposed to the zero rate on the parameters γ and s. These parameters
measure the intercept and curvature of the effort supply function, and may thus be affected by variations in the
set of wages. In contrast, time preferences are assumed to be orthogonal to wage variation effects.

51

D.4

Alternative mechanisms

D.4.1

Beliefs about effectiveness of chlorination

We assess differential beliefs across treatment groups about the proportion of pediatric diarrhea
cases which can be prevented by water chlorination. At baseline, all participants in the active
treatment groups (“V+INF”, “P+INF”, and “AC+INF”) are told that water chlorination reduces
childhood diarrhea by approximately one third. At endline they are asked this question in a
multiple-choice format. We take the proportion of cases the participant believes chlorine can avert
as a measure of belief about chlorine effectiveness.
D.4.2

Knowledge of how to use chlorine

We assess differential knowledge across treatment groups of how to use chlorine to sanitize water.
We ask two multiple-choice questions at endline, to which all three active treatment groups were
told the correct answer at baseline: i) how much chlorine to add to water; ii) the amount of time
that needs to pass after chlorine is added for water to be safe to drink.
D.4.3

Risk Preferences

We include a modified Eckel-Grossman task to account for changes in risk preferences (Charness,
Gneezy, and Imas 2013). Participants choose between one of three 50/50 lotteries, represented
as bets on a coin flip. We construct an ordinal measure of risk aversion based on the expected
payout the participant is willing to forgo for an increase in certainty of payout.
D.4.4

Salience of Chlorination

We test for the possibility that our treatments differentially increased the salience of water
chlorination. During the endline survey, enumerators read out three lists of nine words each to
every participant, and asked her to recall as many words as possible directly after reading each
list. Participants were paid KES 5 for every word they remembered. Each list contained three
categories of future-related words (chlorine, savings, and farm investment), as well as non-future
related filler words. The word lists are available in original Swahili and English translation in
Table A.7. We estimate salience effects using equation 3:
3
X
wim =a0 + aj Tji +ψ0Xim +δm +θim

(3)

j=1

where wim is an indicator for participant i correctly recalling the word related to chlorine in list
m; Xim refers to the number of words that the individual correctly recounted from that list; δm is
52

a fixed effect for list m; and Tj are treatment indicators. We test H0 :α1 =α2 =α3, with the null
hypothesis corresponding to no differential salience of chlorine across (active) treatment groups.
In case our treatments differentially affected the salience of chlorine, we further test whether
this is due to an increased salience of future-oriented behaviors in general - which may result from
our main psychological mechanisms of interest. To this end, we estimate whether the differential
treatment effect on chlorine words also holds for two other future-oriented behaviors (saving and
farm investment), which were not emphasized in the sessions. We estimate
wimn =a0 +

3
3
X
X
aj Tji +λchlorinen +ψXim + bk Tki ·chlorinen +δm +θimn
j=1

(4)

k=1

where wimn is an indicator for participant i correctly recalling the words in list m from future
oriented behavior n (chlorination, savings or farm investment); and chlorinen is a dummy for the
word being related to chlorine. The aj coefficients capture increased future orientation due to
treatment, while the bj coefficients indicate that salience increased differentially for chlorination.
We test Ho : b1 = b2 = b3, with the null hypothesis corresponding to no differential salience of
chlorine across (active) treatments.

53

Figure A.1: Tower of London Example Screen

Table A.6: Monetary Discounting Decisions
Front-end Delay between Early Maximum Late Implied interest
delay (t) payments (k)
(m)
(m(1+r))
rate (1+r)
Frame 1
0
28
100
110
1.1
0
28
100
125
1.25
0
28
100
175
1.75
0
28
100
200
2
0
28
100
300
3
Frame 2
28
28
100
110
1.1
28
28
100
125
1.25
28
28
100
175
1.75
28
28
100
200
2
28
28
100
300
3

54

Figure A.2: Effort discounting task example screen

Figure A.3: Effort discounting: raw responses
Mean effort allocation
5 10 15 20 25

Tomorrow

Base

PC

AC+INF

***

Base

PC

AC+INF

0

***

0

Mean effort allocation
5 10 15 20 25

Today

V+INF

P+INF

PC

AC+INF

***

***

Base

PC

AC+INF

**

***

V+INF

P+INF

0

Base

Mean effort allocation
5 10 15 20 25

***
***

P+INF

8 days

0

Mean effort allocation
5 10 15 20 25

7 days

V+INF

V+INF

P+INF

* denotes significance at 10 pct., ** at 5 pct., *** at 1 pct. level

55

Table A.7: Word lists for salience test
List Position English Translation Swahili
A
1
Fence
Fence
A
2
Panadol
Panadol
A
3
WaterGuard
WaterGuard
A
4
Playing
Kucheza
A
5
Saving
Kuwekeza
A
6
Tarmac
Lami
A
7
Dairy Cow
Ng’ombe wa maziwa
A
8
Safaricom
Safaricom
A
9
Resting
Kupumzika
B
1
Patterned Cloth
Kitenge
B
2
Thermos
Thermos
B
3
Savings Group
Chama
B
4
Baby Oil
Mafuta ya mtoto
B
5
Poultry Farming
Kilimo cha kuku
B
6
Petrol
Petroli
B
7
Chlorine
Klorini
B
8
Machete
Panga
B
9
Shoe Polish
Rangi ya viatu
C
1
Saucepan
Sufuria
C
2
Stool
Stool
C
3
Farm Lease
Kukodisha shamba
C
4
Transport
Transport
C
5
Dispenser
Dispensa
C
6
Photocopier
Photocopier
C
7
Piggybank
Benki ya nyumbani
C
8
Airtime
Airtime
C
9
Community Hall
Ukumbi wa jamii

Group
Filler
Filler
Chlorine
Filler
Saving
Filler
Farm Investment
Filler
Filler
Filler
Filler
Savings
Filler
Farm investment
Filler
Chlorine
Filler
Filler
Filler
Filler
Farm investment
Filler
Chlorine
Filler
Savings
Filler
Filler

Table A.8: Raw means of z-scored outcome variables
(1)
(2)
Active
Pure
Control
Control
Group
Mean (SD)
Mean (SD)
Behavioral Activation score (BADS) (9–63)
Tower of London: Total moves (9–36)
Risk aversion measure (1–3)
General Self-Efficacy score (GSE) (0–72)
Belief: Proportion of diarrhea incidences avoided through chlorination (0–1)
Chlorine knowledge score (0–2)
ANC/PNC knowledge score (0–2)
Index of investment in children’s education (-3–3)

29.38
(5.90)
20.89
(6.58)
1.74
(0.82)
43.35
(12.11)
0.74
(0.39)
1.14
(0.68)
1.25
(0.84)
0.03
(1.14)

28.90
(5.67)
23.86
(6.79)
1.70
(0.83)
43.32
(9.83)
0.71
(0.41)
1.07
(0.69)
0.93
(0.87)
=0.07
(0.95)

Notes: Mean and standard deviation of the control group by which the z-scored outcome variables are standardized.

Table A.9: Phone access & task comprehension questions
Comparison with active control (AC+INF)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
Active
Visualization Planning Column 2 vs.
Control
Treatment Treatment
Column 3
Group
Effect
Effect
p-value
Mean (SD)
SMS Task Checks
Participant uses a phone she owns

Participant uses a phone belonging to her household

Proportion for whom accessing a phone for 30mins is very difficult or impossible

Proportion for whom accessing a phone for 1hr is very difficult or impossible

Proportion for whom accessing a phone for 4hrs is very difficult or impossible

SMS Comprehension questions correct first time

Number of attempts at SMS comprehension questions

=0.03

0.15

=0.00

0.24

0.00
(0.02)

0.21

0.04
(0.02)∗

0.03
(0.02)

0.52

0.02
(0.03)

0.01
(0.03)

0.54

0.71
(0.45)

0.01
(0.02)

0.96
(0.19)

0.01
(0.01)

0.12
(0.33)

0.03
(0.02)

0.17
(0.37)
0.32
(0.46)
0.81
(0.39)
0.78
(1.89)

=0.04

(0.03)

0.23
(0.12)∗

Comparison with pure control (PC)
(5)
N

2108

0.00
(0.02)

2108

0.96
(0.21)

0.02
(0.01)

2107

0.13
(0.33)

0.02
(0.02)

0.19
(0.39)

0.02
(0.02)

(0.01)

2107

2105

0.35
(0.48)

0.29

2103

0.72
(0.45)

0.51

2103

1.22
(2.36)

(0.03)

0.14
(0.12)

(7)

0.70
(0.46)

(0.03)

=0.01

(6)

Pure
V+INF
Control
Treatment
Mean (SD)
Effect

=0.02

(0.03)
0.04
(0.03)

=0.21

(0.13)

(8)

(9)

(10)

P+INF
Treatment
Effect

AC+INF
Treatment
Effect

N

=0.03

=0.00

2972

(0.03)
0.00
(0.01)

=0.00

(0.02)

0.00
(0.02)

=0.03

(0.03)
0.07
(0.03)∗∗∗

=0.27

(0.13)∗∗

(0.03)
0.01
(0.01)

2972

=0.01

2970

=0.03

2970

=0.04

2967

(0.02)

(0.02)

(0.03)

0.07
(0.03)∗∗∗

=0.38

2955

2955

(0.13)∗∗∗

Notes: OLS estimates of responses to questions asked as validation checks for the SMS effort task. For each variable, we report the mean of the comparison group, the coefficients of interest, and standard errors in parentheses. All columns include
village-level fixed effects and a vector of individual characteristics, and cluster standard errors at the level of intervention cohort. * denotes significance at 10 pct., ** at 5 pct., and *** at 1 pct. level.

D.5

Schedule of tasks and treatments

Participants were invited to a 7:30AM or 12:30PM session at a village hall in their area. Sessions
lasted between two and four hours. Participants received short breaks between each item on the
agenda.
During zTree portions of the session, each participant sat in front of a Windows tablet
computer, sufficiently spaced to prevent participants from seeing the answers of their neighbors.
One enumerator read instructions and answer options aloud in Kiswahili from the center of the room,
while several others were available to answer individual questions or assist with the technology.
During the SurveyCTO questionnaires at endline, five to eight enumerators went through
questionnaires with participants individually, in the order that participants arrived.
Interventions were carried out in cohorts of approximately five, in a circle outside when weather
permitted. Groups were physically separated to ensure participants could not be overheard. All
participants received the same intervention on a given day.
Baseline and Intervention Session 1:
At baseline, the demographic questionnaire, behavioral tasks and psychological measures were
carried out on the zTree experimental interface.
1. Welcome, identification and screening
2. Consent
3. Demographics questionnaire
(a) Marital status / household composition
(b) Assets module
(c) Water use
(d) Chlorination behavior
(e) Pregnancy health behaviors
4. Behavioral tasks and psychological scales
(a) Tower of London
(b) General Self-Efficacy scale
(c) Effort discounting measure
(d) Monetary discounting measure (Multiple Price List)
5. Administration of intervention: Part 1
6. Debrief
7. Payment
59

Intervention Session 2:
1. Welcome, identification and screening
2. Administration of intervention: Part 2
3. Debrief
Endline:
At endline, the behavioral tasks and psychological measures were carried out on the zTree
experimental interface, as at baseline. The salience task and individual survey were administered
one-on-one with an enumerator.
1. Welcome, identification and screening
2. Consent
3. Salience task
4. Group tasks and measures
(a) Behavioral Activation for Depression Scale (BADS)
(b) General Self-Efficacy (GSE) scale
(c) Tower of London
(d) Risk measure
(e) Effort discounting measure
(f) Monetary discounting measure (Multiple Price Lists)
5. Individual Survey
(a) Savings
(b) Labor supply and search
(c) Fertility & antenatal/postnatal care
(d) Child education & health
(e) Participant education
(f) Phone access

E.

Treatment effects on the treated
Table A.10: Behavioral outcomes (TOT)
Comparison with pure control (PC)
(1)
Pure
Control
Mean (SD)
Health outcomes
Pre-specified primary
Objective measure: water has been treated with chlorine (TCR)

Pre-specified exploratory
Objective measure: water has sufficient chlorine to be safe (FCR)

2839

0.18
(0.39)

0.07
(0.02)∗∗∗
[0.01]∗∗∗
=0.10
(0.04)∗∗∗
[0.01]∗∗
0.02
(0.02)
[0.61]
=0.34
(0.29)
[0.42]
0.01
(0.02)
[0.89]

0.03
(0.02)
[0.66]
=0.08
(0.04)∗∗
[0.11]
=0.02
(0.02)
[0.89]
=0.07
(0.28)
[1.00]
0.02
(0.02)
[0.89]

0.03
(0.02)
[1.00]
=0.00
(0.04)
[1.00]
0.01
(0.02)
[1.00]
0.19
(0.35)
[1.00]
0.05
(0.02)∗∗
[0.26]

2839

19.80
(13.71)
[0.35]

8.24
(13.99)
[0.23]

4.29
(12.89)
[0.97]

2972

0.01
(0.03)
[1.00]
=0.01
(0.03)
[1.00]
0.00
(0.02)
[1.00]

0.04
(0.03)
[1.00]
=0.02
(0.03)
[1.00]
0.01
(0.02)
[1.00]

2972

Number of ANC visits made in last 3 months (among pregnant women)

1.19
(1.17)

Proportion of children taken for healthcare check-up in last 3 months

0.17
(0.31)

88.76
(228.12)

0.32
(0.47)

Number of new ROSCAs joined in last 3 months

0.21
(0.46)

Indicator: Respondent saves for productive investments

0.17
(0.38)

108.78
(182.99)

21.73
(30.45)

Average monthly earnings in last 3 months

1167.22
(3155.76)

Other behavioral outcomes
Pre-specified secondary
Index of investment in children’s education (z-score)

N

0.03
(0.02)

0.22
(0.36)

Pre-specified exploratory
Total days of work in last 3 months

(5)

0.04
(0.02)∗

Proportion of children u15 vaccinated in last 3 months

Labor outcomes
Pre-specified secondary
Total hours of work in last 3 months

(4)
AC+INF
Treatment
Effect

0.07
(0.02)∗∗∗

0.23
(0.64)

Pre-specified exploratory
Indicator: Amount saved regularly is positive

(3)
P+INF
Treatment
Effect

0.22
(0.42)

Number of diarrhea incidences per child u15 in last 3 months

Savings outcomes
Pre-specified secondary
Amount saved regularly (per week, KES)

(2)
V+INF
Treatment
Effect

0.00
(1.00)

0.14
(0.03)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗
0.02
(0.03)
[0.61]
0.10
(0.02)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

=2.65
(10.98)
[0.37]

=26.73

(10.28)∗∗∗
[0.03]∗∗

=8.01
(10.46)
[0.80]

=0.59

=4.46

=1.58

(1.85)
[0.89]
=48.98
(180.37)
[0.89]

0.09
(0.07)
[0.35]

(1.75)∗∗
[0.11]
=119.15
(186.27)
[1.00]

0.14
(0.08)∗
[0.08]∗

(1.77)
[1.00]
=160.94
(189.09)
[1.00]

0.14
(0.07)∗
[0.26]

2823

2800

272

2806

2972

2972

2972

2972

2972

1967

Notes: Treatment-on-the-treated estimates of treatment effects. For each variable, we report the mean of the comparison group, the coefficients of interest, and standard
errors in parentheses. Square brackets contain additional p-values corrected for multiple hypothesis testing using the false discovery rate. All columns include village-level
fixed effects, control for a vector of individual characteristics, and cluster standard errors at the level of intervention cohort. The specification also includes fixed effects
for i) the week and ii) the day of the week of the endline survey, for measures collected in the endline session (all variables except the objective chlorine measures). *
denotes significance at 10 pct., ** at 5 pct., and *** at 1 pct. level. Outcome measures are listed on the left, and are described in detail in Section 4. Objective measures
of chlorine come from data collected in participants’ homes, where stored household water was tested for the presence of Total and Free Chlorine Residual, which indicate
whether chlorine has been added to water (TCR), and whether sufficient chlorine is in the water to make it safe to drink (FCR). The number of diarrhea incidences reports
how many independent episodes of diarrhea each child under-15 had on average in the last three months. The index of investment in children’s education consists of
measures of money spent on children’s education and average school days attended in the last 3 months, and is constructed only for those women with school-age children.

61

Table A.11: Psychological outcomes (TOT)
Comparison with pure control (PC)

Planning skills
Pre-specified primary
Behavioral Activation Score (BADS) (z-score)

Pre-specified secondary
Tower of London: Total Moves (z-score)

Time preferences
Pre-specified primary
β Effort

Pre-specified secondary
δEffort

(1)
Pure
Control
Mean (SD)

(2)
V+INF
Treatment
Effect

0.00
(1.00)

0.03
(0.06)
[1.00]

0.00
(1.00)

0.964
(0.017)

0.995
(0.002)

β MP L

1.02
(0.43)

δMP L

0.98
(0.02)

Self-efficacy
Pre-specified secondary
General Self-Efficacy Score (GSE) (z-score)

Alternative mechanisms
Belief: Proportion of diarrhea incidences avoided through chlorination (z-score)
Chlorine knowledge score (z-score)
ANC/PNC knowledge score (z-score)

Risk Aversion Measure (z-score)

=0.43

(0.06)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

0.003
(0.015)
[1.00]

=0.000

(0.002)
[0.60]
=0.01
(0.03)
[0.60]
0.00
(0.00)∗
[0.07]∗

(3)
P+INF
Treatment
Effect

0.12
(0.06)∗∗
[0.10]

=0.48

(0.06)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

0.005
(0.014)
[0.54]

(4)
AC+INF
Treatment
Effect

(5)

0.04
(0.06)
[1.00]

2955

N

=0.41

2955

=0.004

2906

(0.06)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

(0.013)
[1.00]

0.000
(0.002)
[0.67]
0.02
(0.03)
[0.26]
0.00
(0.00)
[0.12]

0.004
(0.002)∗
[0.09]∗
0.01
(0.02)
[0.40]
0.00
(0.00)∗∗
[0.06]∗

2906

2955

2955

0.00
(1.00)

0.20
(0.07)∗∗∗
[0.01]∗∗∗

0.21
(0.06)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

0.02
(0.07)
[0.40]

2955

0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)

0.14
(0.06)∗∗
0.13
(0.06)∗∗
0.40
(0.06)∗∗∗

0.18
(0.06)∗∗∗
0.08
(0.06)
0.32
(0.06)∗∗∗

0.13
(0.06)∗∗
0.10
(0.06)∗
0.39
(0.06)∗∗∗

2955

0.00
(1.00)

0.01
(0.06)

0.04
(0.06)

2735

=0.01

(0.06)

2955
2955

Notes: Treatment-on-the-treated estimates of treatment effects. For each variable, we report the mean of the comparison group, the coefficients of interest, and standard errors
in parentheses. Square brackets contain additional p-values corrected for multiple hypothesis testing using the false discovery rate. All columns include village-level fixed effects,
control for a vector of individual characteristics, and cluster standard errors at the level of the intervention cohort. The specification also includes fixed effects for i) the week
and ii) the day of the week of the endline survey, for measures collected in the endline session. * denotes significance at 10 pct., ** at 5 pct., and *** at 1 pct. level. Outcome
measures are listed on the left, and are described in detail in Section 4. The BADS score measures a participant’s ability and motivation to follow through on plans they make in
their life. Tower of London is a lab game that measures a participant’s ability to plan ahead. Time preferences over effort (β Effort and δEffort) are estimated structurally, which
makes a standard 2SLS approach infeasible. Instead, we report estimated treatment effects when the treatment indicator switches on for compliance with treatment, rather than
assigned treatment. Due to the obvious selection issues, we prefer the estimates in Table 4. Time preferences over money are measured using Multiple Price Lists (MPL). The
risk aversion measure is derived from responses to a coin flip for various monetary rewards. The General Self-Efficacy score measures a participant’s belief in their own ability to
achieve the outcomes they desire. The mechanisms variables check if the interventions differentially affected i) a participant’s belief in the efficacy of chlorine to prevent diarrhea,
and ii) their knowledge of how to correctly chlorinate water, to assess whether changes in beliefs or knowledge could have been the cause of changes in chlorination behavior.

F.

Robustness checks
Table A.12: Robustness of chlorination effects to within-village testing order
Comparison with active control (AC+INF)
(1)
Chlorine
present
in water

(2)
Chlorine
present
in water

(3)
Chlorine
present
in water

Comparison with pure control (PC)
(4)
Chlorine
present
in water

(5)
Chlorine
present
in water

(6)
Chlorine
present
in water

Visualization

0.05
(0.02)∗∗

0.05
(0.02)∗∗

0.05
(0.02)∗∗

0.06
(0.02)∗∗∗

0.06
(0.02)∗∗∗

0.06
(0.02)∗∗∗

Planning

0.02
(0.02)

0.02
(0.02)

0.02
(0.02)

0.04
(0.02)∗

0.04
(0.02)∗

0.04
(0.02)∗

0.03
(0.02)

0.03
(0.02)

0.03
(0.02)

Active Control
Days after first
day of testing
within village

=0.00

=0.00

(0.00)
Dummy: test done on
first day of testing
within village
Observations

2012

2012

(0.00)
0.02

0.02

(0.03)

(0.02)

2012

Notes: * denotes significance at 10 pct., ** at 5 pct., and *** at 1 pct. level.

2839

2839

2839

Table A.13: Chlorine-related outcomes in dispenser vs. non-dispenser villages: restricting to WASH villages in the Water Quality
and Passive Comparison arms
Village has no chlorine dispenser
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Pure
V+INF
P+INF
AC+INF
Control
Treatment Treatment Treatment
Mean (SD)
Effect
Effect
Effect
Objective measure: water has been treated with chlorine (TCR)
Objective measure: water has sufficient chlorine to be safe (FCR)
Number of diarrhea incidences per child u15 in last 3 months
Belief: Proportion of diarrhea incidences avoided through chlorination (z-score)
Chlorine knowledge score (z-score)

0.26
(0.44)
0.16
(0.37)
0.26
(0.69)
=0.04
(1.02)
0.08
(1.02)

=0.01

(0.03)
0.01
(0.03)
=0.07
(0.06)
0.20
(0.09)∗∗
0.16
(0.09)∗

0.01
(0.03)
0.02
(0.03)
=0.07
(0.06)
0.19
(0.09)∗∗
0.03
(0.09)

=0.04

(0.03)
=0.01
(0.03)
=0.03
(0.06)
0.14
(0.09)
0.01
(0.09)

Village has chlorine dispenser
(5)
N

1066
1066
1046
1092
1092

(6)
Pure
Control
Mean (SD)
0.18
(0.38)
0.17
(0.38)
0.21
(0.64)
0.01
(1.01)
0.02
(1.01)

Comparison

(7)
V+INF
Treatment
Effect

(8)
P+INF
Treatment
Effect

(9)
AC+INF
Treatment
Effect

(10)

0.11
(0.03)∗∗∗
0.09
(0.04)∗∗
=0.09
(0.05)∗
0.07
(0.09)
0.01
(0.09)

0.07
(0.03)∗∗
0.05
(0.03)
=0.06
(0.05)
0.09
(0.09)
0.04
(0.09)

0.10
(0.03)∗∗∗
0.08
(0.03)∗∗
=0.01
(0.05)
0.11
(0.09)
0.10
(0.09)

1091

[0.01]∗∗∗

[0.15]

[0.00]∗∗∗

1091

[0.07]∗

[0.58]

[0.04]∗∗

1105

[0.84]

[0.93]

[0.80]

1160

[0.32]

[0.48]

[0.87]

1160

[0.22]

[0.90]

[0.47]

N

(11)
V+INF
Interaction
p-value

(12)
P+INF
Interaction
p-value

(13)
AC+INF
Interaction
p-value

Notes: Robustness check restricting the sample to individuals from villages in the Water Quality and Passive Comparison arms of the WASH Benefits study. The outcome variables repeat those in Tables 1–3, but the table reports the analysis separately for villages which have at least one chlorine dispenser
maintained at a village water source, and for villages which do not have chlorine dispensers. OLS estimates of treatment effects. For each variable, we report the mean of the comparison group, the coefficients of interest, and standard errors in parentheses. All columns include village-level fixed effects,
control for a vector of individual characteristics, and cluster standard errors at the level of intervention cohort. The specification also includes fixed effects for i) the week and ii) the day of the week of the endline survey, for measures collected in the endline session (all variables except the objective chlorine
measures). * denotes significance at 10 pct., ** at 5 pct., and *** at 1 pct. level. Outcome measures are listed on the left, and are described in detail in Section 4. Columns (11)–(13) report the p-values on the differential effect of the treatments in villages with vs. without chlorine dispensers using SUR.

Table A.14: Behavioral outcomes for alternative attrition definition
Comparison with active control (AC+INF)
(1)
Active
Control
Group
Mean (SD)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Visualization
Treatment
Effect

Planning
Treatment
Effect

Comparison with pure control (PC)
(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Column 2 vs.
Column 3
p-value

N

Pure
Control
Mean (SD)

V+INF
Treatment
Effect

P+INF
Treatment
Effect

AC+INF
Treatment
Effect

N

Health Outcomes
Pre-specified primary
Objective measure: water has been treated with chlorine (TCR)

Pre-specified exploratory
Objective measure: water has sufficient chlorine to be safe (FCR)

0.23
(0.42)

0.05
(0.02)∗∗

0.02
(0.02)

0.15

2012

0.22
(0.42)

0.06
(0.02)∗∗∗

0.04
(0.02)∗

0.02
(0.02)

2585

0.21
(0.40)

0.04
(0.02)∗∗
[0.07]∗
=0.09
(0.03)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗
0.00
(0.02)
[0.58]
=0.20
(0.42)
[0.56]
=0.04
(0.02)∗∗
[0.06]∗

0.01
(0.02)
[1.00]
=0.05
(0.03)∗
[0.63]
=0.02
(0.02)
[1.00]
0.03
(0.34)
[1.00]
=0.03
(0.02)
[0.82]

0.16

2012

0.18
(0.39)

2012

0.23
(0.64)

0.17

1999

0.22
(0.36)

0.54

200

1.19
(1.17)

0.48

2004

0.17
(0.31)

0.04
(0.02)∗
[0.26]
=0.06
(0.03)∗
[0.26]
=0.01
(0.02)
[1.00]
=0.20
(0.46)
[1.00]
0.01
(0.02)
[1.00]

0.03
(0.02)
[1.00]
0.00
(0.04)
[1.00]
0.00
(0.02)
[1.00]
=0.08
(0.51)
[1.00]
0.04
(0.02)∗∗
[0.65]

2585

0.13

0.06
(0.02)∗∗∗
[0.01]∗∗∗
=0.09
(0.03)∗∗∗
[0.01]∗∗
0.01
(0.02)
[0.88]
=0.50
(0.42)
[0.39]
=0.00
(0.02)
[0.99]

24.89
(12.37)∗∗
[0.16]

3.28
(12.51)
[1.00]

0.10

2108

88.76
(228.12)

25.62
(13.15)∗
[0.18]

4.83
(13.19)
[0.31]

3.98
(12.07)
[1.00]

2693

0.00∗∗∗

2108

0.32
(0.47)

2108

0.21
(0.46)

0.00∗∗∗

2108

0.17
(0.38)

0.04
(0.03)
[1.00]
=0.02
(0.03)
[1.00]
0.01
(0.02)
[1.00]

2693

0.17

0.01
(0.03)
[1.00]
=0.01
(0.03)
[1.00]
0.00
(0.02)
[1.00]

2108

108.54
(182.02)

Number of diarrhea incidences per child u15 in last 3 months

0.24
(0.59)

Proportion of children u15 vaccinated in last 3 months

0.22
(0.35)

Number of ANC visits made in last 3 months (among pregnant women)

1.26
(1.19)

Proportion of children taken for healthcare check-up in last 3 months

0.21
(0.34)

2569

2550

242

2557

Savings Outcomes
Pre-specified secondary
Amount saved regularly (per week, KES)

Pre-specified exploratory
Indicator: Amount saved regularly is positive

93.96
(230.26)

0.36
(0.48)

Number of new ROSCAs joined in last 3 months

0.17
(0.44)

Indicator: Respondent saves for productive investments

0.17
(0.38)

0.13
(0.03)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗
0.04
(0.03)∗
[0.10]
0.11
(0.02)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

=0.02

(0.03)
[1.00]
0.01
(0.02)
[1.00]
=0.01
(0.02)
[1.00]

0.16
(0.03)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗
0.03
(0.03)
[0.51]
0.12
(0.02)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

2693

2693

Labor Outcomes
Pre-specified secondary
Total hours of work in last 3 months

Pre-specified exploratory
Total days of work in last 3 months

Average monthly earnings in last 3 months

105.87
(173.63)

21.22
(30.09)
1094.50
(2865.35)

=6.79

=23.66

0.06∗

=0.59

=3.91

0.04∗∗

(9.48)
[0.90]

(1.64)
[0.56]
3.11
(147.23)
[0.65]

(8.95)∗∗∗
[0.03]∗∗

(1.60)∗∗
[0.18]
=1.23
(163.19)
[1.00]

2108

21.73
(30.45)

0.97

2108

1167.22
(3155.76)

0.60

1420

0.00
(1.00)

=7.30
(10.19)
[0.19]

=23.35

=3.01
(10.00)
[1.00]

=0.85

=3.80

=0.77

(1.75)
[0.88]
=106.79
(167.76)
[0.82]

(9.68)∗∗
[0.05]∗

(1.66)∗∗
[0.26]
=110.57
(175.38)
[1.00]

(1.70)
[1.00]
=110.87
(182.42)
[1.00]

2693

2693

2693

Other Behavioral Outcomes
Pre-specified secondary
Index of investment in children’s education (z-score)

0.00
(1.00)

=0.02

(0.06)
[0.90]

0.01
(0.07)
[1.00]

0.11
(0.07)∗
[0.18]

0.13
(0.08)∗
[0.08]∗

0.13
(0.07)∗
[0.33]

1825

Notes: OLS estimates of treatment effects. For each variable, we report the mean of the comparison group, the coefficients of interest, and standard errors in parentheses. Square brackets contain additional p-values corrected for multiple
hypothesis testing using the false discovery rate. All columns include village-level fixed effects, control for a vector of individual characteristics, and cluster standard errors at the level of intervention cohort. For the comparison to the AC+INF
group, the specification also controls for the baseline value of the outcome, for those that were collected at baseline. For the comparison to the pure control group, the specification also includes fixed effects for i) the week and ii) the day
of the week of the endline survey, for measures collected in the endline session (all variables except the objective chlorine measures). For the comparison to the pure control, the sample is restricted in the active treatment groups to those
who attended the baseline and first intervention. * denotes significance at 10 pct., ** at 5 pct., and *** at 1 pct. level. Outcome measures are listed on the left, and are described in detail in Section 4. Objective measures of chlorine come
from data collected in participants’ homes, where stored household water was tested for the presence of Total and Free Chlorine Residual, which indicate whether chlorine has been added to water (TCR), and whether sufficient chlorine
is in the water to make it safe to drink (FCR). The number of diarrhea incidences reports how many independent episodes of diarrhea each child under-15 had on average in the last three months. The index of investment in children’s education
consists of measures of money spent on children’s education and average school days attended in the last 3 months, and is constructed only for those women with school-age children.

Table A.15: Psychological outcomes for alternative attrition definition
Comparison with active control (AC+INF)
(1)
(2)
Active
Visualization
Control
Treatment
Group
Effect
Mean (SD)

(3)

(4)

Planning
Treatment
Effect

0.04
(0.05)
[0.91]

Comparison with pure control (PC)
(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Column 2 vs.
Column 3
p-value

N

Pure
Control
Mean (SD)

V+INF
Treatment
Effect

P+INF
Treatment
Effect

AC+INF
Treatment
Effect

N

0.31

2103

0.00
(1.00)

0.05
(0.06)
[1.00]

0.28

2103

0.00
(1.00)

Planning Skills
Pre-specified primary
Behavioral Activation Score (BADS) (z-score)

Pre-specified secondary
Tower of London: Total Moves (z-score)

0.00
(1.00)

=0.01

(0.05)
[0.83]

0.00
(1.00)

0.01
(0.05)
[0.85]

0.982
(0.005)

0.007
(0.006)
[0.83]

=0.04

(0.05)
[0.50]

=0.46

(0.05)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

0.11
(0.06)∗
[0.15]

=0.48

(0.05)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

0.06
(0.06)
[1.00]

=0.43

2686

2686

(0.05)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

Time Preferences
Pre-specified primary
β Effort

Pre-specified secondary
δEffort

0.999
(0.001)

β MP L

1.05
(0.46)

δMP L

0.98
(0.02)

=0.001

(0.001)
[0.26]
=0.02
(0.02)
[0.41]
=0.00
(0.00)
[0.41]

0.005
(0.007)
[0.91]

=0.002

(0.001)∗∗
[0.06]∗
0.02
(0.03)
[0.53]
=0.00
(0.00)
[0.40]

0.33

2068

0.953
(0.020)

0.16

2068

0.995
(0.002)

0.007
(0.018)
[1.00]

=0.001

(0.002)
[0.46]
=0.01
(0.03)
[0.46]
0.00
(0.00)∗∗
[0.05]∗

0.012
(0.018)
[0.32]

0.009
(0.018)
[1.00]

2906

0.003
(0.002)
[0.21]
0.02
(0.02)
[0.40]
0.00
(0.00)∗∗
[0.02]∗∗

2906

(0.002)
[0.27]
0.03
(0.03)
[0.17]
0.00
(0.00)
[0.17]

0.01
(0.06)
[0.51]

2686

0.10
(0.06)∗
0.12
(0.06)∗∗
0.39
(0.05)∗∗∗
0.04
(0.06)

2686

=0.002

0.21

2103

1.02
(0.43)

0.86

2103

0.98
(0.02)

0.38

2103

0.00
(1.00)

0.21
(0.07)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

0.19
(0.06)∗∗∗
[0.01]∗∗∗

0.61

2103

0.20

2103

0.08∗

2103

0.49

1926

0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)

0.17
(0.05)∗∗∗
0.18
(0.05)∗∗∗
0.43
(0.06)∗∗∗
0.01
(0.06)

0.16
(0.06)∗∗∗
0.10
(0.06)∗
0.35
(0.05)∗∗∗
=0.02
(0.06)

2686

2686

Self-Efficacy
Pre-specified secondary
General Self-Efficacy Score (GSE) (z-score)

0.00
(1.00)

0.16
(0.05)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

0.12
(0.05)∗∗
[0.06]∗

Alternative Mechanisms
Belief: Proportion of diarrhea incidences avoided through chlorination (z-score)
Chlorine knowledge score (z-score)
ANC/PNC knowledge score (z-score)
Risk Aversion Measure (z-score)

0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)

0.08
(0.05)
0.06
(0.05)
0.04
(0.05)
=0.03
(0.06)

0.06
(0.06)
=0.01
(0.05)
=0.05
(0.05)
=0.07
(0.06)

2686
2686
2473

Notes: OLS estimates of treatment effects. For each variable, we report the mean of the comparison group, the coefficients of interest, and standard errors in parentheses. Square brackets contain additional p-values corrected for multiple hypothesis
testing using the false discovery rate. All columns include village-level fixed effects, control for a vector of individual characteristics, and cluster standard errors at the level of the intervention cohort. For the comparison to the AC+INF group, the
specification also controls for the baseline value of the outcome, for those that were collected at baseline. For the comparison to the pure control group, the specification also includes fixed effects for i) the week and ii) the day of the week of the endline survey,
for measures collected in the endline session. For the comparison to the pure control, the sample is restricted in the active treatment groups to those who attended the baseline and first intervention. * denotes significance at 10 pct., ** at 5 pct., and ***
at 1 pct. level. Outcome measures are listed on the left, and are described in detail in Section 4. The BADS score measures a participant’s ability and motivation to follow through on plans they make in their life. Tower of London is a lab game that measures
a participant’s ability to plan ahead. Time preferences over effort are estimated structurally from a real effort task involving data entry by SMSs. Time preferences over money are measured using Multiple Price Lists (MPL). The risk aversion measure
is derived from responses to a coin flip for various monetary rewards. The General Self-Efficacy score measures a participant’s belief in their own ability to achieve the outcomes they desire. The mechanisms variables check if the interventions differentially
affected i) a participant’s belief in the efficacy of chlorine to prevent diarrhea, and ii) their knowledge of how to correctly chlorinate water, to assess whether changes in beliefs or knowledge could have been the cause of changes in chlorination behavior.

Table A.16: LASSO specification: behavioral outcomes
Comparison with active control (AC+INF)
(1)
Active
Control
Group
Mean (SD)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Visualization
Treatment
Effect

Planning
Treatment
Effect

Comparison with pure control (PC)
(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Column 2 vs.
Column 3
p-value

N

Pure
Control
Mean (SD)

V+INF
Treatment
Effect

P+INF
Treatment
Effect

AC+INF
Treatment
Effect

N

Health Outcomes
Pre-specified primary
Objective measure: water has been treated with chlorine (TCR)

Pre-specified exploratory
Objective measure: water has sufficient chlorine to be safe (FCR)

0.23
(0.42)

0.05
(0.02)∗∗

0.02
(0.02)

0.15

2012

0.22
(0.42)

0.06
(0.02)∗∗∗

0.04
(0.02)∗

0.03
(0.02)

2839

0.21
(0.40)

0.04
(0.02)∗∗
[0.07]∗
=0.09
(0.03)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗
0.00
(0.02)
[0.58]
=0.20
(0.42)
[0.56]
=0.04
(0.02)∗∗
[0.06]∗

0.01
(0.02)
[1.00]
=0.05
(0.03)∗
[0.63]
=0.02
(0.02)
[1.00]
0.03
(0.34)
[1.00]
=0.03
(0.02)
[0.82]

0.16

2012

0.18
(0.39)

2012

0.23
(0.64)

0.17

1999

0.22
(0.36)

0.54

200

1.19
(1.17)

0.48

2004

0.17
(0.31)

0.03
(0.02)
[0.81]
=0.07
(0.03)∗∗
[0.14]
=0.02
(0.02)
[1.00]
0.03
(0.41)
[1.00]
0.02
(0.02)
[1.00]

0.03
(0.02)
[1.00]
=0.00
(0.04)
[1.00]
0.01
(0.02)
[1.00]
0.16
(0.44)
[1.00]
0.04
(0.02)∗∗
[0.33]

2839

0.13

0.06
(0.02)∗∗∗
[0.01]∗∗
=0.09
(0.03)∗∗∗
[0.02]∗∗
0.01
(0.02)
[0.83]
=0.25
(0.40)
[0.83]
0.01
(0.02)
[0.91]

24.89
(12.37)∗∗
[0.16]

3.28
(12.51)
[1.00]

0.10

2108

88.76
(228.12)

17.71
(12.68)
[0.42]

7.55
(12.87)
[0.23]

4.03
(11.91)
[0.96]

2972

0.00∗∗∗

2108

0.32
(0.47)

2108

0.21
(0.46)

0.00∗∗∗

2108

0.17
(0.38)

0.04
(0.03)
[0.89]
=0.02
(0.03)
[1.00]
0.01
(0.02)
[1.00]

2972

0.17

0.02
(0.03)
[1.00]
=0.01
(0.03)
[1.00]
0.00
(0.02)
[1.00]

2108

108.78
(182.99)

Number of diarrhea incidences per child u15 in last 3 months

0.24
(0.59)

Proportion of children u15 vaccinated in last 3 months

0.22
(0.35)

Number of ANC visits made in last 3 months (among pregnant women)

1.26
(1.19)

Proportion of children taken for healthcare check-up in last 3 months

0.21
(0.34)

2823

2800

272

2806

Savings Outcomes
Pre-specified secondary
Amount saved regularly (per week, KES)

Pre-specified exploratory
Indicator: Amount saved regularly is positive

93.96
(230.26)

0.36
(0.48)

Number of new ROSCAs joined in last 3 months

0.17
(0.44)

Indicator: Respondent saves for productive investments

0.17
(0.38)

0.13
(0.03)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗
0.04
(0.03)∗
[0.10]
0.11
(0.02)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

=0.02

(0.03)
[1.00]
0.01
(0.02)
[1.00]
=0.01
(0.02)
[1.00]

0.12
(0.03)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗
0.02
(0.03)
[0.83]
0.09
(0.02)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

2972

2972

Labor Outcomes
Pre-specified secondary
Total hours of work in last 3 months

Pre-specified exploratory
Total days of work in last 3 months

Average monthly earnings in last 3 months

106.11
(174.61)

21.22
(30.09)
1094.50
(2865.35)

=6.79

=23.83

0.06∗

=0.59

=3.91

0.04∗∗

(9.54)
[0.90]

(1.64)
[0.56]
3.11
(147.23)
[0.65]

(8.99)∗∗∗
[0.03]∗∗

(1.60)∗∗
[0.18]
=1.23
(163.19)
[1.00]

2108

21.73
(30.45)

0.97

2108

1167.22
(3155.76)

0.60

1420

0.00
(1.00)

=2.23
(10.14)
[0.42]

=23.47

=7.00

2972

=0.51

=4.01

=1.45

2972

(1.71)
[0.91]
=43.58
(166.41)
[0.91]

(9.45)∗∗
[0.04]∗∗

(1.60)∗∗
[0.14]
=105.44
(171.46)
[1.00]

(9.64)
[0.88]

(1.64)
[1.00]
=142.78
(174.39)
[1.00]

2972

Other Behavioral Outcomes
Pre-specified secondary
Index of investment in children’s education (z-score)

0.00
(1.00)

=0.02

(0.06)
[0.90]

0.01
(0.07)
[1.00]

0.09
(0.07)
[0.42]

0.12
(0.07)∗
[0.10]

0.12
(0.07)∗
[0.36]

1967

Notes: OLS estimates of treatment effects. For each variable, we report the mean of the comparison group, the coefficients of interest, and standard errors in parentheses. Square brackets contain additional p-values corrected for multiple
hypothesis testing using the false discovery rate. All columns include village-level fixed effects, control for a vector of individual characteristics, and cluster standard errors at the level of intervention cohort. For the comparison to the AC+INF
group, the specification also controls for the baseline value of the outcome, for those that were collected at baseline. For the comparison to the pure control group, the specification also includes fixed effects for i) the week and ii) the day
of the week of the endline survey, for measures collected in the endline session (all variables except the objective chlorine measures). The specification also includes additional controls selected by LASSO to account for differential attrition.
* denotes significance at 10 pct., ** at 5 pct., and *** at 1 pct. level. Outcome measures are listed on the left, and are described in detail in Section 4. Objective measures of chlorine come from data collected in participants’ homes, where
stored household water was tested for the presence of Total and Free Chlorine Residual, which indicate whether chlorine has been added to water (TCR), and whether sufficient chlorine is in the water to make it safe to drink (FCR). The
number of diarrhea incidences reports how many independent episodes of diarrhea each child under-15 had on average in the last three months. The index of investment in children’s education consists of measures of money spent on children’s
education and average school days attended in the last 3 months, and is constructed only for those women with school-age children.

Table A.17: LASSO specification: psychological outcomes
Comparison with active control (AC+INF)
(1)
(2)
Active
Visualization
Control
Treatment
Group
Effect
Mean (SD)

(3)

(4)

Planning
Treatment
Effect

0.04
(0.05)
[0.91]

Comparison with pure control (PC)
(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Column 2 vs.
Column 3
p-value

N

Pure
Control
Mean (SD)

V+INF
Treatment
Effect

P+INF
Treatment
Effect

AC+INF
Treatment
Effect

N

0.31

2103

0.00
(1.00)

0.03
(0.06)
[1.00]

0.28

2103

0.00
(1.00)

Planning Skills
Pre-specified primary
Behavioral Activation Score (BADS) (z-score)

Pre-specified secondary
Tower of London: Total Moves (z-score)

0.00
(1.00)

=0.01

(0.05)
[0.83]

0.00
(1.00)

0.01
(0.05)
[0.85]

0.982
(0.005)

0.007
(0.006)
[0.83]

=0.04

(0.05)
[0.50]

=0.38

(0.05)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

0.11
(0.06)∗
[0.13]

=0.43

(0.05)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

0.04
(0.06)
[1.00]

=0.37

2955

2955

(0.05)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

Time Preferences
Pre-specified primary
β Effort

Pre-specified secondary
δEffort

0.999
(0.001)

β MP L

1.05
(0.46)

δMP L

0.98
(0.02)

=0.001

(0.001)
[0.26]
=0.02
(0.02)
[0.41]
=0.00
(0.00)
[0.41]

0.005
(0.007)
[0.91]

=0.002

(0.001)∗∗
[0.06]∗
0.02
(0.03)
[0.53]
=0.00
(0.00)
[0.40]

0.33

2068

0.953
(0.020)

0.16

2068

0.995
(0.002)

0.007
(0.018)
[1.00]

=0.001

(0.002)
[0.50]
=0.01
(0.03)
[0.50]
0.00
(0.00)∗
[0.08]∗

0.012
(0.018)
[0.32]

0.009
(0.018)
[1.00]

2906

0.003
(0.002)
[0.21]
0.01
(0.02)
[0.40]
0.00
(0.00)∗∗
[0.07]∗

2906

(0.002)
[0.25]
0.02
(0.03)
[0.25]
0.00
(0.00)
[0.14]

0.02
(0.06)
[0.40]

2955

0.12
(0.06)∗∗
0.09
(0.06)
0.35
(0.05)∗∗∗
0.03
(0.06)

2955

=0.002

0.21

2103

1.02
(0.43)

0.86

2103

0.98
(0.02)

0.38

2103

0.00
(1.00)

0.18
(0.06)∗∗∗
[0.01]∗∗

0.18
(0.06)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

0.61

2103

0.20

2103

0.08∗

2103

0.49

1926

0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)

0.13
(0.05)∗∗
0.12
(0.05)∗∗
0.36
(0.06)∗∗∗
0.01
(0.06)

0.16
(0.05)∗∗∗
0.07
(0.06)
0.28
(0.05)∗∗∗
=0.01
(0.06)

2955

2955

Self-Efficacy
Pre-specified secondary
General Self-Efficacy Score (GSE) (z-score)

0.00
(1.00)

0.16
(0.05)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

0.12
(0.05)∗∗
[0.06]∗

Alternative Mechanisms
Belief: Proportion of diarrhea incidences avoided through chlorination (z-score)
Chlorine knowledge score (z-score)
ANC/PNC knowledge score (z-score)
Risk Aversion Measure (z-score)

0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)

0.08
(0.05)
0.06
(0.05)
0.04
(0.05)
=0.03
(0.06)

0.06
(0.06)
=0.01
(0.05)
=0.05
(0.05)
=0.07
(0.06)

2955
2955
2735

Notes: OLS estimates of treatment effects. For each variable, we report the mean of the comparison group, the coefficients of interest, and standard errors in parentheses. Square brackets contain additional p-values corrected for multiple hypothesis
testing using the false discovery rate. All columns include village-level fixed effects, control for a vector of individual characteristics, and cluster standard errors at the level of the intervention cohort. For the comparison to the AC+INF group, the
specification also controls for the baseline value of the outcome, for those that were collected at baseline. For the comparison to the pure control group, the specification also includes fixed effects for i) the week and ii) the day of the week of the endline
survey, for measures collected in the endline session. The specification also includes additional controls selected by LASSO to account for differential attrition. * denotes significance at 10 pct., ** at 5 pct., and *** at 1 pct. level. Outcome measures
are listed on the left, and are described in detail in Section 4. The BADS score measures a participant’s ability and motivation to follow through on plans they make in their life. Tower of London is a lab game that measures a participant’s ability
to plan ahead. Time preferences over effort are estimated structurally from a real effort task involving data entry by SMSs. Time preferences over money are measured using Multiple Price Lists (MPL). The risk aversion measure is derived from
responses to a coin flip for various monetary rewards. The General Self-Efficacy score measures a participant’s belief in their own ability to achieve the outcomes they desire. The mechanisms variables check if the interventions differentially affected
i) a participant’s belief in the efficacy of chlorine to prevent diarrhea, and ii) their knowledge of how to correctly chlorinate water, to assess whether changes in beliefs or knowledge could have been the cause of changes in chlorination behavior.

Table A.18: LASSO specification: behavioral outcomes for alternative attrition definition
Comparison with active control (AC+INF)
(1)
Active
Control
Group
Mean (SD)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Visualization
Treatment
Effect

Planning
Treatment
Effect

Comparison with pure control (PC)
(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Column 2 vs.
Column 3
p-value

N

Pure
Control
Mean (SD)

V+INF
Treatment
Effect

P+INF
Treatment
Effect

AC+INF
Treatment
Effect

N

Health Outcomes
Pre-specified primary
Objective measure: water has been treated with chlorine (TCR)

Pre-specified exploratory
Objective measure: water has sufficient chlorine to be safe (FCR)

0.23
(0.42)

0.05
(0.02)∗∗

0.02
(0.02)

0.15

2012

0.22
(0.42)

0.06
(0.02)∗∗∗

0.04
(0.02)∗

0.21
(0.40)

0.04
(0.02)∗∗
[0.07]∗
=0.09
(0.03)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗
0.00
(0.02)
[0.58]
=0.20
(0.42)
[0.56]
=0.04
(0.02)∗∗
[0.06]∗

0.01
(0.02)
[1.00]
=0.05
(0.03)∗
[0.63]
=0.02
(0.02)
[1.00]
0.03
(0.34)
[1.00]
=0.03
(0.02)
[0.82]

0.16

2012

0.18
(0.39)

0.13

2012

0.23
(0.64)

0.17

1999

0.22
(0.36)

0.54

200

1.19
(1.17)

0.48

2004

0.17
(0.31)

0.06
(0.02)∗∗∗
[0.01]∗∗∗
=0.09
(0.03)∗∗∗
[0.01]∗∗
0.00
(0.02)
[1.00]
=0.43
(0.42)
[0.51]
=0.00
(0.02)
[1.00]

0.04
(0.02)∗
[0.25]
=0.06
(0.03)∗
[0.25]
=0.01
(0.02)
[1.00]
=0.14
(0.44)
[1.00]
0.01
(0.02)
[1.00]

24.89
(12.37)∗∗
[0.16]

3.28
(12.51)
[1.00]

0.10

2108

88.76
(228.12)

25.62
(13.15)∗
[0.18]

4.83
(13.19)
[0.31]

3.98
(12.07)
[1.00]

2693

0.00∗∗∗

2108

0.32
(0.47)

2108

0.21
(0.46)

0.00∗∗∗

2108

0.17
(0.38)

0.04
(0.03)
[1.00]
=0.02
(0.03)
[1.00]
0.01
(0.02)
[1.00]

2693

0.17

0.02
(0.03)
[1.00]
=0.01
(0.03)
[1.00]
0.00
(0.02)
[1.00]

2108

108.54
(182.02)

Number of diarrhea incidences per child u15 in last 3 months

0.24
(0.59)

Proportion of children u15 vaccinated in last 3 months

0.22
(0.35)

Number of ANC visits made in last 3 months (among pregnant women)

1.26
(1.19)

Proportion of children taken for healthcare check-up in last 3 months

0.21
(0.34)

0.02
(0.02)

2585

0.03
(0.02)
[1.00]
0.00
(0.04)
[1.00]
0.00
(0.02)
[1.00]
0.00
(0.50)
[1.00]
0.04
(0.02)∗∗
[0.50]

2585

2569

2550

242

2557

Savings Outcomes
Pre-specified secondary
Amount saved regularly (per week, KES)

Pre-specified exploratory
Indicator: Amount saved regularly is positive

93.96
(230.26)

0.36
(0.48)

Number of new ROSCAs joined in last 3 months

0.17
(0.44)

Indicator: Respondent saves for productive investments

0.17
(0.38)

0.13
(0.03)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗
0.04
(0.03)∗
[0.10]
0.11
(0.02)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

=0.02

(0.03)
[1.00]
0.01
(0.02)
[1.00]
=0.01
(0.02)
[1.00]

0.16
(0.03)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗
0.03
(0.03)
[0.51]
0.12
(0.02)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

2693

2693

Labor Outcomes
Pre-specified secondary
Total hours of work in last 3 months

Pre-specified exploratory
Total days of work in last 3 months

Average monthly earnings in last 3 months

105.87
(173.63)

21.22
(30.09)
1094.50
(2865.35)

=6.79

=23.66

0.06∗

=0.59

=3.91

0.04∗∗

(9.48)
[0.90]

(1.64)
[0.56]
3.11
(147.23)
[0.65]

(8.95)∗∗∗
[0.03]∗∗

(1.60)∗∗
[0.18]
=1.23
(163.19)
[1.00]

2108

21.73
(30.45)

0.97

2108

1167.22
(3155.76)

0.60

1420

0.00
(1.00)

=7.30
(10.19)
[0.19]

=23.35

=3.01
(10.00)
[1.00]

=0.84

=3.92

=0.86

(1.76)
[0.90]
=106.79
(167.76)
[0.82]

(9.68)∗∗
[0.05]∗

(1.66)∗∗
[0.22]
=110.57
(175.38)
[1.00]

(1.71)
[1.00]
=110.87
(182.42)
[1.00]

2693

2693

2693

Other Behavioral Outcomes
Pre-specified secondary
Index of investment in children’s education (z-score)

0.00
(1.00)

=0.02

(0.06)
[0.90]

0.01
(0.07)
[1.00]

0.11
(0.07)∗
[0.18]

0.13
(0.08)∗
[0.08]∗

0.13
(0.07)∗
[0.33]

1825

Notes: OLS estimates of treatment effects. For each variable, we report the mean of the comparison group, the coefficients of interest, and standard errors in parentheses. Square brackets contain additional p-values corrected for multiple
hypothesis testing using the false discovery rate. All columns include village-level fixed effects, control for a vector of individual characteristics, and cluster standard errors at the level of intervention cohort. For the comparison to the AC+INF
group, the specification also controls for the baseline value of the outcome, for those that were collected at baseline. For the comparison to the pure control group, the specification also includes fixed effects for i) the week and ii) the day of the
week of the endline survey, for measures collected in the endline session (all variables except the objective chlorine measures). For the comparison to the pure control, the sample is restricted in the active treatment groups to those who attended the
baseline and first intervention. The specification also includes additional controls selected by LASSO to account for differential attrition. * denotes significance at 10 pct., ** at 5 pct., and *** at 1 pct. level. Outcome measures are listed on the left,
and are described in detail in Section 4. Objective measures of chlorine come from data collected in participants’ homes, where stored household water was tested for the presence of Total and Free Chlorine Residual, which indicate whether chlorine
has been added to water (TCR), and whether sufficient chlorine is in the water to make it safe to drink (FCR). The number of diarrhea incidences reports how many independent episodes of diarrhea each child under-15 had on average in the last
three months. The index of investment in children’s education consists of measures of money spent on children’s education and average school days attended in the last 3 months, and is constructed only for those women with school-age children.

Table A.19: LASSO specification: psychological outcomes for alternative attrition definition
Comparison with active control (AC+INF)
(1)
(2)
Active
Visualization
Control
Treatment
Group
Effect
Mean (SD)

(3)

(4)

Planning
Treatment
Effect

0.04
(0.05)
[0.91]

Comparison with pure control (PC)
(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Column 2 vs.
Column 3
p-value

N

Pure
Control
Mean (SD)

V+INF
Treatment
Effect

P+INF
Treatment
Effect

AC+INF
Treatment
Effect

N

0.31

2103

0.00
(1.00)

0.05
(0.06)
[1.00]

0.28

2103

0.00
(1.00)

Planning skills
Pre-specified primary
Behavioral Activation Score (BADS) (z-score)

Pre-specified secondary
Tower of London: Total Moves (z-score)

0.00
(1.00)

=0.01

(0.05)
[0.83]

0.00
(1.00)

0.01
(0.05)
[0.85]

0.982
(0.005)

0.007
(0.006)
[0.83]

=0.04

(0.05)
[0.50]

=0.46

(0.05)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

0.11
(0.06)∗
[0.15]

=0.48

(0.05)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

0.06
(0.06)
[1.00]

=0.44

2686

2686

(0.05)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

Time preferences
Pre-specified primary
β Effort

Pre-specified secondary
δEffort

0.999
(0.001)

β MP L

1.05
(0.46)

δMP L

0.98
(0.02)

=0.001

(0.001)
[0.26]
=0.02
(0.02)
[0.41]
=0.00
(0.00)
[0.41]

0.005
(0.007)
[0.91]

=0.002

(0.001)∗∗
[0.06]∗
0.02
(0.03)
[0.53]
=0.00
(0.00)
[0.40]

0.33

2068

0.953
(0.020)

0.16

2068

0.995
(0.002)

0.007
(0.018)
[1.00]

=0.001

(0.002)
[0.46]
=0.01
(0.03)
[0.46]
0.00
(0.00)∗∗
[0.05]∗

0.012
(0.018)
[0.32]

0.009
(0.018)
[1.00]

2906

0.003
(0.002)
[0.21]
0.02
(0.02)
[0.40]
0.00
(0.00)∗∗
[0.02]∗∗

2906

(0.002)
[0.27]
0.03
(0.03)
[0.17]
0.00
(0.00)
[0.17]

0.01
(0.06)
[0.51]

2686

0.10
(0.06)∗
0.13
(0.06)∗∗
0.39
(0.05)∗∗∗
0.04
(0.06)

2686

=0.002

0.21

2103

1.02
(0.43)

0.86

2103

0.98
(0.02)

0.12
(0.05)∗∗
[0.06]∗

0.38

2103

0.00
(1.00)

0.21
(0.07)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

0.19
(0.06)∗∗∗
[0.01]∗∗∗

0.06
(0.06)

0.61

2103

0.20

2103

0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)

0.17
(0.05)∗∗∗
0.18
(0.05)∗∗∗
0.43
(0.06)∗∗∗
0.01
(0.06)

0.16
(0.06)∗∗∗
0.11
(0.06)∗
0.35
(0.05)∗∗∗
=0.02
(0.06)

2686

2686

Self-efficacy
Pre-specified secondary
General Self-Efficacy Score (GSE) (z-score)

0.00
(1.00)

0.16
(0.05)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

Alternative mechanisms
Belief: Proportion of diarrhea incidences avoided through chlorination (z-score)
Chlorine knowledge score (z-score)
ANC/PNC knowledge score (z-score)
Risk Aversion Measure (z-score)

0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)

0.08
(0.05)
0.06
(0.05)
0.04
(0.05)
=0.03
(0.06)

=0.01

(0.05)
=0.05
(0.05)
=0.07
(0.06)

∗

0.08

2103

0.49

1926

2686
2686
2473

Notes: OLS estimates of treatment effects. For each variable, we report the mean of the comparison group, the coefficients of interest, and standard errors in parentheses. Square brackets contain additional p-values corrected for multiple hypothesis
testing using the false discovery rate. All columns include village-level fixed effects, control for a vector of individual characteristics, and cluster standard errors at the level of the intervention cohort. For the comparison to the AC+INF group, the
specification also controls for the baseline value of the outcome, for those that were collected at baseline. For the comparison to the pure control group, the specification also includes fixed effects for i) the week and ii) the day of the week of the endline
survey, for measures collected in the endline session. For the comparison to the pure control, the sample is restricted in the active treatment groups to those who attended the baseline and first intervention. The specification also includes additional
controls selected by LASSO to account for differential attrition. * denotes significance at 10 pct., ** at 5 pct., and *** at 1 pct. level. Outcome measures are listed on the left, and are described in detail in Section 4. The BADS score measures a
participant’s ability and motivation to follow through on plans they make in their life. Tower of London is a lab game that measures a participant’s ability to plan ahead. Time preferences over effort are estimated structurally from a real effort task
involving data entry by SMSs. Time preferences over money are measured using Multiple Price Lists (MPL). The risk aversion measure is derived from responses to a coin flip for various monetary rewards. The General Self-Efficacy score measures
a participant’s belief in their own ability to achieve the outcomes they desire. The mechanisms variables check if the interventions differentially affected i) a participant’s belief in the efficacy of chlorine to prevent diarrhea, and ii) their knowledge
of how to correctly chlorinate water, to assess whether changes in beliefs or knowledge could have been the cause of changes in chlorination behavior.

Table A.20: Behavioral outcomes (without endline date fixed effects)
Comparison with active control (AC+INF)
(1)
Active
Control
Group
Mean (SD)

Comparison with pure control (PC)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Visualization
Treatment
Effect

Planning
Treatment
Effect

Column 2 vs.
Column 3
p-value

N

Pure
Control
Mean (SD)

V+INF
Treatment
Effect

P+INF
Treatment
Effect

AC+INF
Treatment
Effect

N

Health Outcomes
Pre-specified primary
Objective measure: water has been treated with chlorine (TCR)

Pre-specified exploratory
Objective measure: water has sufficient chlorine to be safe (FCR)

0.23
(0.42)

0.05
(0.02)∗∗

0.02
(0.02)

0.15

2012

0.22
(0.42)

0.06
(0.02)∗∗∗

0.04
(0.02)∗

0.03
(0.02)

2839

0.21
(0.40)

0.04
(0.02)∗∗
[0.07]∗
=0.09
(0.03)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗
0.00
(0.02)
[0.58]
=0.20
(0.42)
[0.56]
=0.04
(0.02)∗∗
[0.06]∗

0.01
(0.02)
[1.00]
=0.05
(0.03)∗
[0.63]
=0.02
(0.02)
[1.00]
0.03
(0.34)
[1.00]
=0.03
(0.02)
[0.82]

0.16

2012

0.18
(0.39)

2012

0.23
(0.64)

0.17

1999

0.22
(0.36)

0.54

200

1.19
(1.17)

0.48

2004

0.17
(0.31)

0.03
(0.02)
[0.81]
=0.07
(0.03)∗∗
[0.23]
=0.02
(0.02)
[0.82]
=0.06
(0.42)
[1.00]
0.01
(0.02)
[1.00]

0.03
(0.02)
[1.00]
0.00
(0.04)
[1.00]
0.00
(0.02)
[1.00]
0.23
(0.43)
[1.00]
0.03
(0.02)∗
[1.00]

2839

0.13

0.06
(0.02)∗∗∗
[0.01]∗∗
=0.09
(0.03)∗∗∗
[0.02]∗∗
0.01
(0.02)
[0.90]
=0.27
(0.40)
[0.90]
0.00
(0.02)
[1.00]

24.89
(12.37)∗∗
[0.16]

3.28
(12.51)
[1.00]

0.10

2108

88.76
(228.12)

14.15
(12.69)
[0.66]

4.77
(12.93)
[0.31]

0.11
(12.07)
[1.00]

2972

0.00∗∗∗

2108

0.32
(0.47)

2108

0.21
(0.46)

0.00∗∗∗

2108

0.17
(0.38)

0.03
(0.03)
[1.00]
=0.02
(0.03)
[1.00]
0.01
(0.02)
[1.00]

2972

0.17

0.01
(0.03)
[1.00]
=0.01
(0.03)
[1.00]
0.00
(0.02)
[1.00]

2108

108.78
(182.99)

1.18
(10.16)
[0.66]

21.73
(30.45)

0.25
(1.71)
[1.00]
=44.55
(166.31)
[1.00]

Number of diarrhea incidences per child u15 in last 3 months

0.24
(0.59)

Proportion of children u15 vaccinated in last 3 months

0.22
(0.35)

Number of ANC visits made in last 3 months (among pregnant women)

1.26
(1.19)

Proportion of children taken for healthcare check-up in last 3 months

0.21
(0.34)

2823

2800

272

2806

Savings Outcomes
Pre-specified secondary
Amount saved regularly (per week, KES)

Pre-specified exploratory
Indicator: Amount saved regularly is positive

93.96
(230.26)

0.36
(0.48)

Number of new ROSCAs joined in last 3 months

0.17
(0.44)

Indicator: Respondent saves for productive investments

0.17
(0.38)

0.13
(0.03)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗
0.04
(0.03)∗
[0.10]
0.11
(0.02)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

=0.02

(0.03)
[1.00]
0.01
(0.02)
[1.00]
=0.01
(0.02)
[1.00]

0.12
(0.03)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗
0.02
(0.03)
[0.90]
0.09
(0.02)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

2972

2972

Labor Outcomes
Pre-specified secondary
Total hours of work in last 3 months

Pre-specified exploratory
Total days of work in last 3 months

Average monthly earnings in last 3 months

106.11
(174.61)

21.22
(30.09)
1094.50
(2865.35)

=6.79

=23.83

0.06∗

=0.59

=3.91

0.04∗∗

(9.54)
[0.90]

(1.64)
[0.56]
3.11
(147.23)
[0.65]

(8.99)∗∗∗
[0.03]∗∗

(1.60)∗∗
[0.18]
=1.23
(163.19)
[1.00]

2108

0.97

2108

1167.22
(3155.76)

0.60

1420

0.00
(1.00)

=21.17

=3.36

2972

=3.40

=0.58

2972

(9.51)∗∗
[0.09]∗

(1.63)∗∗
[0.23]
=113.88
(171.26)
[1.00]

(9.70)
[1.00]

(1.65)
[1.00]
=146.26
(174.92)
[1.00]

2972

Other Behavioral Outcomes
Pre-specified secondary
Index of investment in children’s education (z-score)

0.00
(1.00)

=0.02

(0.06)
[0.90]

0.01
(0.07)
[1.00]

0.08
(0.07)
[0.66]

0.12
(0.07)∗
[0.10]∗

0.12
(0.07)∗
[0.38]

1967

Notes: OLS estimates of treatment effects. For each variable, we report the mean of the comparison group, the coefficients of interest, and standard errors in parentheses. Square brackets contain additional p-values corrected for multiple
hypothesis testing using the false discovery rate. All columns include village-level fixed effects, control for a vector of individual characteristics, and cluster standard errors at the level of intervention cohort. For the comparison to the AC+INF
group, the specification also controls for the baseline value of the outcome, for those that were collected at baseline. In contrast to Table 2, for the comparison to the pure control group, the specification does not include fixed effects for
i) the week and ii) the day of the week of the endline survey. * denotes significance at 10 pct., ** at 5 pct., and *** at 1 pct. level. Outcome measures are listed on the left, and are described in detail in Section 4. Objective measures of
chlorine come from data collected in participants’ homes, where stored household water was tested for the presence of Total and Free Chlorine Residual, which indicate whether chlorine has been added to water (TCR), and whether sufficient
chlorine is in the water to make it safe to drink (FCR). The number of diarrhea incidences reports how many independent episodes of diarrhea each child under-15 had on average in the last three months. The index of investment in children’s
education consists of measures of money spent on children’s education and average school days attended in the last 3 months, and is constructed only for those women with school-age children.

Table A.21: Psychological outcomes (without endline date fixed effects)
Comparison with active control (AC+INF)
(1)
(2)
Active
Visualization
Control
Treatment
Group
Effect
Mean (SD)

(3)

(4)

Planning
Treatment
Effect

0.04
(0.05)
[0.91]

Comparison with pure control (PC)
(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Column 2 vs.
Column 3
p-value

N

Pure
Control
Mean (SD)

V+INF
Treatment
Effect

P+INF
Treatment
Effect

AC+INF
Treatment
Effect

N

0.31

2103

0.00
(1.00)

0.02
(0.06)
[1.00]

0.28

2103

0.00
(1.00)

Planning Skills
Pre-specified primary
Behavioral Activation Score (BADS) (z-score)

Pre-specified secondary
Tower of London: Total Moves (z-score)

0.00
(1.00)

=0.01

(0.05)
[0.83]

0.00
(1.00)

0.01
(0.05)
[0.85]

0.982
(0.005)

0.007
(0.006)
[0.83]

=0.04

(0.05)
[0.50]

=0.37

(0.05)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

0.11
(0.06)∗
[0.13]

=0.42

(0.05)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

0.04
(0.06)
[1.00]

=0.36

2955

2955

(0.05)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

Time Preferences
Pre-specified primary
β Effort

72

Pre-specified secondary
δEffort

0.999
(0.001)

β MP L

1.05
(0.46)

δMP L

0.98
(0.02)

=0.001

(0.001)
[0.26]
=0.02
(0.02)
[0.41]
=0.00
(0.00)
[0.41]

0.005
(0.007)
[0.91]

=0.002

(0.001)∗∗
[0.06]∗
0.02
(0.03)
[0.53]
=0.00
(0.00)
[0.40]

0.33

2068

0.953
(0.020)

0.16

2068

0.995
(0.002)

0.007
(0.018)
[1.00]

=0.001

(0.002)
[0.60]
0.00
(0.03)
[0.60]
0.00
(0.00)
[0.20]

0.012
(0.018)
[0.32]

0.009
(0.018)
[1.00]

2906

0.003
(0.002)
[0.28]
0.02
(0.02)
[0.45]
0.00
(0.00)∗
[0.21]

2906

(0.002)
[0.27]
0.03
(0.03)
[0.27]
0.00
(0.00)
[0.27]

0.01
(0.06)
[0.57]

2955

0.11
(0.06)∗∗
0.08
(0.06)
0.34
(0.05)∗∗∗
0.04
(0.06)

2955

=0.002

0.21

2103

1.02
(0.43)

0.86

2103

0.98
(0.02)

0.38

2103

0.00
(1.00)

0.17
(0.06)∗∗∗
[0.02]∗∗

0.17
(0.06)∗∗∗
[0.01]∗∗∗

0.61

2103

0.20

2103

0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)

0.13
(0.05)∗∗
0.11
(0.05)∗∗
0.35
(0.06)∗∗∗
0.02
(0.06)

0.15
(0.05)∗∗∗
0.07
(0.06)
0.28
(0.05)∗∗∗
=0.00
(0.06)

2955

2955

Self-Efficacy
Pre-specified secondary
General Self-Efficacy Score (GSE) (z-score)

0.00
(1.00)

0.16
(0.05)∗∗∗
[0.00]∗∗∗

0.12
(0.05)∗∗
[0.06]∗

Alternative Mechanisms
Belief: Proportion of diarrhea incidences avoided through chlorination (z-score)
Chlorine knowledge score (z-score)
ANC/PNC knowledge score (z-score)
Risk Aversion Measure (z-score)

0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)

0.08
(0.05)
0.06
(0.05)
0.04
(0.05)
=0.03
(0.06)

0.06
(0.06)
=0.01
(0.05)
=0.05
(0.05)
=0.07
(0.06)

∗

0.08

2103

0.49

1926

2955
2955
2735

Notes: OLS estimates of treatment effects. For each variable, we report the mean of the comparison group, the coefficients of interest, and standard errors in parentheses. Square brackets contain additional p-values corrected for multiple hypothesis testing using
the false discovery rate. All columns include village-level fixed effects, control for a vector of individual characteristics, and cluster standard errors at the level of the intervention cohort. For the comparison to the AC+INF group, the specification also controls for
the baseline value of the outcome, for those that were collected at baseline. In contrast to Table 4, for the comparison to the pure control group, the specification does not include fixed effects for i) the week and ii) the day of the week of the endline survey. * denotes
significance at 10 pct., ** at 5 pct., and *** at 1 pct. level. Outcome measures are listed on the left, and are described in detail in Section 4. The BADS score measures a participant’s ability and motivation to follow through on plans they make in their life. Tower of
London is a lab game that measures a participant’s ability to plan ahead. Time preferences over effort are estimated structurally from a real effort task involving data entry by SMSs. Time preferences over money are measured using Multiple Price Lists (MPL). The
risk aversion measure is derived from responses to a coin flip for various monetary rewards. The General Self-Efficacy score measures a participant’s belief in their own ability to achieve the outcomes they desire. The mechanisms variables check if the interventions
differentially affected i) a participant’s belief in the efficacy of chlorine to prevent diarrhea, and ii) their knowledge of how to correctly chlorinate water, to assess whether changes in beliefs or knowledge could have been the cause of changes in chlorination behavior.

Table A.22: Other health outcomes (not pre-specified)
Comparison with active control (AC+INF)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
Active
Visualization Planning Column 2 vs.
Control
Treatment Treatment
Column 3
Group
Effect
Effect
p-value
Mean (SD)

Comparison with pure control (PC)
(5)

(6)

(7)

N

Pure
Control
Mean (SD)

V+INF
Treatment
Effect

(8)

(9)

P+INF
AC+INF
Treatment Treatment
Effect
Effect

(10)
N

Self-reported water treatment
How do you treat your drinking water? (multiple possible)
Boiling

Add chlorine

Strain through cloth

73

Filter

Let stand and settle

Do not treat

How often do you treat your water? [1 - never, 4 - always]

0.32
(0.47)

0.05
(0.02)∗∗

0.67
(0.47)

0.06
(0.02)∗∗

0.07
(0.25)

=0.00

(0.01)

=0.00

0.02
(0.02)

0.12

2337

0.27
(0.44)

0.05
(0.03)∗∗

0.01
(0.03)

0.12
(0.02)∗∗∗

0.05
(0.03)∗∗

=0.02

0.00∗∗∗

2337

0.50
(0.50)

=0.00

0.94

2337

0.05
(0.23)

(0.03)

(0.01)

0.03
(0.01)∗

0.04∗∗

0.00∗∗∗

(0.02)

0.00
(0.02)

0.03
(0.17)

0.00
(0.01)

0.00
(0.01)

0.67

2103

0.02
(0.15)

3.23
(0.80)

0.02
(0.04)

0.07
(0.04)

0.20

2103

3.32
(0.79)

0.09
(0.29)
0.18
(0.38)

(0.01)

=0.06

∗∗∗

2337

2337

0.11
(0.32)
0.17
(0.37)

=0.00

2984

(0.03)
0.06
(0.02)∗∗

2984

0.01
(0.01)

2984

=0.00

=0.00

=0.05

=0.02

=0.04

2984

=0.08

=0.03

=0.04

2984

(0.01)

(0.02)∗∗∗

(0.02)∗∗∗
0.01
(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.02)

(0.02)
0.01
(0.01)

=0.07

=0.02

=0.06

=0.03

(0.04)

(0.04)

(0.02)∗∗

(0.02)
0.01
(0.01)

=0.11

2955

2955

(0.04)∗∗

Non-prespecified health outcomes
Number of diarrhea incidences per child u5 in last 3 months

0.44
(0.92)

=0.15

(0.05)∗∗∗

=0.11

(0.05)∗∗

0.31

1682

0.37
(0.84)

(0.05)

(0.05)

0.08
(0.05)

2357

Notes: OLS estimates of treatment effects. For each variable, we report the mean of the comparison group, the coefficients of interest, and standard errors in parentheses. All columns include village-level fixed effects, control
for a vector of individual characteristics, and cluster standard errors at the level of the intervention cohort. For the comparison to the AC+INF group, the specification also controls for the baseline value of the outcome,
for those that were collected at baseline.

