                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY BETWEEN AND WITHIN CANADA AND
                         THE UNITED STATES

                                       Marie Connolly
                                        Miles Corak
                                       Catherine Haeck

                                     Working Paper 25735
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25735


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2019




We are grateful to Winnie Chen, Yuri Ostrovsky, and Grant Schellenberg of Statistics Canada for
support in constructing the Canadian data. This was possible with financial support from the
Fonds de recherche du Québec - Société et culture (grant 2016-PU-195586 to Connolly and
Haeck) and from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada (Insight grant
230936-191999-2001 to Corak). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Marie Connolly, Miles Corak, and Catherine Haeck. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Intergenerational Mobility between and within Canada and the United States
Marie Connolly, Miles Corak, and Catherine Haeck
NBER Working Paper No. 25735
April 2019
JEL No. D63, J61, J62

                                         ABSTRACT

Intergenerational income mobility is lower in the United States than in Canada, but varies
significantly within each country. Our sub-national analysis finds that the national border only
partially distinguishes the close to one thousand regions we analyze within these two countries.
The Canada-US border divides Central and Eastern Canada from the Great Lakes regions and the
Northeast of the United States. At the same time some Canadian regions have more in common
with the low mobility southern parts of the United States than with the rest of Canada, and the
fact that these areas represent a much larger fraction of the American population also explains
why mobility is lower in the United States.

Marie Connolly                                          Catherine Haeck
Université du Québec à Montréal                         Université du Québec à Montréal
C.P. 8888, Succ. Centre-ville                           C.P. 8888, Succ. Centre-ville
Montréal QC H3C 3P8, Canada                             Montréal QC H3C 3P8, Canada
connolly.marie@uqam.ca                                  haeck.catherine@uqam.ca

Miles Corak
The Graduate Center, City University of New York
Department of Economics
and Stone Center on Socio-Economic Inequality
365 Fifth Avenue
New York, NY 10016
Twitter: @MilesCorak




A ICPSR repository is available at https://doi.org/10.3886/E108643V1
The degree to which inequality is passed on across generations has been a longstanding issue
studied by labor economists and other social scientists, at least since the late 1800s when
Francis Galton famously conceptualized the process as “regression to the mean.” But the
issue has also risen to the top of the public policy agenda in many countries, particularly in
the United States. In part, this reflects the fact that the influence of family background on
child outcomes relates to one of the country’s defining metaphors, the “American Dream.”
But in part it also reflects growing labor market inequality, and the increasing awareness that
economic opportunity—the capacity of children to move up the economic ladder—may be
more limited for those from relatively less advantaged families when inequalities of outcomes
are greater.
     The empirical literature addressing intergenerational mobility naturally looks to time
series variation to highlight potential causal forces, and appreciate the influence of public
policy. Our analysis begins with a brief review of economic theory to suggest that comparative
analysis between countries may also have particular value. One of the implications to be
drawn from a series of papers by Raj Chetty, Nathan Hendren and their co-authors, however,
is that the tone of comparative research has changed. In particular, a lesson from Chetty et
al. (2014) is that a within-country analysis of the United States is more relevant than many
between-country comparisons because the variation—or lack of it—within national borders
more appropriately highlights the driving forces and feasible policy options. Social choices
in many other countries may be motivated by underlying values that Americans may not
share, and therefore have little relevance to the conduct of public policy. Having documented
considerable variation within the United States leads the authors to naturally explore the
important causal role geographic mobility may play in promoting intergenerational mobility
(Chetty and Hendren 2018a; 2018b; Chetty, Hendren, and Katz 2016).
     We begin with the premise that cross-country comparisons can complement within-
country analyses. A Canada-US comparison is particularly judicious, and in the two following
sections of the paper we draw lessons from theory and highlight public opinion data to
appreciate the underlying determinants of intergenerational mobility, and how they are
perceived by the citizens of these two countries. Public opinion polls suggest that Canadians
and American share basic attitudes toward inequality and opportunity, and toward the
underlying drivers of upward mobility. If there is such a thing as the “Canadian Dream,”
it would look very much like what Americans say is the “American Dream.” Differences in
Canadian-American outcomes need not reflect different values, and this raises the possibility
of learning more about the causes of economic opportunity, and appreciating the role played
by institutions and policies.
     Our objective is to offer a between and within country analysis of Canada and the United
States by examining a menu of intergenerational mobility indicators estimated for each of
about 1,000 small areas. The Canadian data we construct are described in the third section
of the paper, and like the administrative data source used by Chetty et al. (2014), are based
on intergenerationally linked income tax files for a group of young men and women born in
the early 1980s, and whose adult incomes are captured when they are in their early 30s. We
place these Canadians in the American income distribution, and describe the landscape of
economic opportunity over Census Divisions and Commuting Zones that completely tile these


                                              2
two countries. We should stress that our analytical sample is intended not to be the “best”
possible data for the analysis of intergenerational mobility in Canada, but rather the “best”
possible data for a comparison with the United States. The Canadian data we construct and
use probably allow a more accurate comparison with the United States than any country-wide
comparison that has been made in the literature to date: tax-based administrative data, used
to define similar measures of income, and coming close to covering the total population of
similarly defined birth cohorts.
     The analysis and findings are described in the three remaining sections of the paper.
We confirm the existing impressions from the cross-country literature that Canada is char-
acterized by more intergenerational mobility than the United States, whether in terms of
intergenerational income mobility, intergenerational rank mobility, or in terms of particularly
relevant elements of the intergenerational transition matrix, like rags to riches movement and
intergenerational cycles of low income. The border partially demarcates the most populous
region of Canada—the Québec City-Windsor corridor—from the Northeastern seaboard
and the Great Lakes region of the United States. In part, this reflects a greater degree
of labor market inequality in these parts of the United States. But the other reason the
national statistics suggest Canada is more mobile has to do with the fact that there is a high
concentration of low mobility in the southern United States. While certain regions of northern
Canada share this limited mobility and are more accurately grouped with these regions of
the United States than with other parts of Canada, they make up a much smaller share of
the Canadian population, and do not influence the national statistics to the same degree.
Our findings suggest that inequalities between whites and blacks likely play an important
role in understanding why the United States has lower rates of intergenerational mobility
than other countries, in spite of public opinion polls showing that many Americans feel race
is not an important driver of upward mobility.


1    Theoretical background
Alan Krueger (2012), in his role as Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, cited the
positive correlation between income inequality and the intergenerational earnings elasticity
across the rich countries—a relationship he christened as the “Great Gatsby Curve”—to
motivate the possibility that rising income inequality in the United States will in the coming
decades move the country in the direction of less social mobility. There is a case to be
made that among the possible cross-country comparisons in the literature, the Canada-US
comparison may be particularly apt. There are “small differences” in the way Canadians and
Americans value and understand intergenerational mobility, and this may help to bring into
relief important differences in the nature of labor markets and public policies.
      Theory shows that differences in intergenerational mobility between countries may reflect
differences in any number of structural parameters, some of which may be more open to policy
influence in some national contexts than in others. Solon (2004; 2015) adapts the workhorse
model due to Becker and Tomes (1986; 1979) and Loury (1981) to illustrate the challenges
of making comparisons across time and space. A simplified version of the model in Solon


                                              3
(2004)—one that puts aside an explicit utility function reflecting the influence of parental
altruism on child investments, and also the influence of the progressivity of government
investment—is captured in the following equations:

                                              yt = ρht                                                     (1)
                                              ht = θyt−1 + et                                              (2)
                                              et = λet−1 + t                                              (3)

where t indexes generations within a family dynasty, y refers to the logarithm of permanent
income, h to human capital, which determines income (having a return ρ), and in turn
may be determined by parental income if there are credit constraints in human capital
investment, but otherwise determined by e, an unobserved endowment not influenced by
family investment decisions, and mechanically transmitted across generations according to a
first order auto-regression governed by parameter λ, the “inheritability of endowments,” with
 being a random variable representing “luck.”1 Solon (2004) shows that in a steady state the
population regression of earnings across generations has an elasticity β = (ρθ + λ)/(1 + ρθλ).
     With perfect capital markets, that is θ = 0, the structure of labor markets and the
institutions that determine human capital investment do not come into play, and differences in
earnings mobility over time or across space reflect—in some loosely defined way—differences
in populations and environments that imply differences in the nature and transmission of
endowments. But if capital markets are not perfect, then differences in the returns to human
capital, and the causal role of parental income determining the amount of human capital,
must also be part of the story. Inequality may be higher in some places, as reflected in higher
values of ρ, but individual behaviour or public investments easing θ may be countervailing
forces. Becker et al. (2018), and specifically Solon (2004), add other dimensions relevant
to cross-country comparisons, permitting parental altruism (that is, tastes and values),
the progressivity of government spending, and substitutability between private and public
investments, to also influence the intergenerational elasticity.
     Countries may occupy different positions on the Great Gatsby Curve for a whole host
of reasons associated with the inheritability of endowments, access to education and other
sources of human capital, differences in labor markets, and for the simple reason that they
make different choices reflecting different social objectives, or different perspectives on the
   1
     Clearly, this is a very simplified framework, but it can be easily extended. A child’s adult income may be
influenced not just by his or her human capital and endowment, but possibly directly by parental income,
which might proxy for nepotism or the role of social networks, with the children of higher income parents
earning more than equally skilled children of lower income parents. See Mulligan (1997), and the application
and interpretation of this formulation by Corak and Piraino (2016), who add parental income to Equation 1.
This simplified model also probably encourages us to think of e, and its evolution between generations, as a
genetic endowment. But the literature on epigenetics cautions against making a sharp distinction between
“nature and nurture,” and it might be more constructive to view e as embodying a host of inherent and
environmental factors. Becker and Tomes (1986) think in these terms. Heckman and Mosso (2014) recognize
this by generalizing Equation 2 to reflect the recursive process that more accurately models child development,
the multi-faceted nature of skills, and the role and complementarities of human capital investments within
and across the successive stages through which development occurs.


                                                      4
role of private versus public investments in children. This underscores the fact that not all
cross-country comparisons are relevant, with some comparisons more likely to reveal the
impact of policy and institutions than they are to reflect differences in social priorities.


2       Values toward inequality and economic opportunity
Simply put, values and institutions differ, and this has long played a role in understanding
differences in the nature and size of the welfare state, particularly between continental Europe
and North America (Alesina and Glaeser 2004). In a similar way, the priority societies place
on equality of opportunity enhancing policies will reflect underlying values. Arguably, these
are more similar across the Canadian–American border than elsewhere.
     Public opinion polls find that Americans and Canadians define the “American Dream”
in virtually the same way. The Pew Charitable Trusts conducted a number of public opinion
polls asking Americans what meaning they attach to the phrase “The American Dream.”
The responses have been stable through time, and a poll conducted in late January and
early February 2009 was adapted and conducted in Canada in August and September of the
same year (Corak 2010). Figure 1 summarizes one of the major findings by indicating the
percentage of respondents in each country answering eight or higher on a ten point scale for
each of the possible definitions of the “American Dream” presented to them.2
     The point estimates are very similar, particularly so with respect to the options most
closely related to intergenerational mobility. Sixty percent of American respondents ranked
being able to succeed regardless of family background eight or higher on a ten point scale,
while 59 percent of Canadians did so.3 The percentage indicating that the statement “Your
children being better off financially than you” represents the American Dream was 64 percent
in the United States, and 57 percent in Canada. While these two options relate most directly
to intergenerational mobility, they do not offer clear guidance on the appropriate way to
measure it statistically. The reference to children being financially better off most clearly
refers to absolute mobility using an intra-family reference point, but “being able to succeed
regardless of family background” leaves the reference point undefined and may be interpreted
in a relative or an absolute sense. The differences between these responses, and those to all
but one of the other options listed in the figure, are not statistically significant. The only
    2
     The poll was conducted under the sponsorship of the PEW Charitable Trusts by Greenberg Quinlan
Rosner Research and Public Opinion Strategies using a sample of 2,119 American adults 18 years and older,
and by EKOS Research Associates using sample of 1,035 Canadians falling in the same age group. The
specific question referring to the American Dream asked to Canadians was directly adapted from the US
poll and read: “Americans often talk about attaining the American Dream to describe what it means to
have a good life in their country. This means different things to different people. Here are some ways some
Americans have described what the American Dream means to them. On a scale of one to ten, please tell me
how accurately each statement describes what you would consider the Canadian Dream to be. One would
mean the statement does not describe what it means at all. A ten would mean the statement describes it
perfectly.”
   3
     The exact wording of the option presented to respondents was: “Being able to succeed regardless of the
economic circumstances in which you were born.”



                                                    5
                                                              Being middle class
                                          Americans
                                          Canadians
                                                              Becoming rich

                                                              Owning your
                                                              own business

                                                              Getting married, having kids

                                                              Enough income to
                                                              afford a few luxuries

                                                              Getting a college degree


                                                              Owning a house

                                                              Succeed regardless
                                                              of background

                                                              Being financially secure

                                                              Children being better
                                                              off financially than you

                                                              Free to say or do what you want

                                                              Being free to
                                                              accomplish anything with hard work


       0      20        40        60        80          100
                      Percent reporting
             eight or higher on a ten point scale

Figure 1: Percentage of respondents in comparable public opinion polls indicating eight or
higher on a ten point scale to alternative descriptions of the American Dream




                                                    6
exception is that forty percent of Americans suggested “Owning your own business” is a
strong marker of the meaning of the American Dream, but at 29 percent significantly fewer
Canadians reported feeling the same way.
     Americans and Canadians also have a similar view of the factors determining upward
economic mobility. Figure 2, drawn from information in the same source, lists a host of
determinants of upward mobility, ranging from factors that are not subject to individual
choice or responsibility—like race, gender, and luck—to others entirely within an individual’s
locus of control—like hard work, and having ambition—as well as a number of others that
may reflect both extremes as well as public policy choices.
     Representative samples in both countries tend to see factors associated with individual
choice and responsibility as the prime drivers of economic mobility. Ninety-two percent
of Americans and 88 percent of Canadians reported that “hard work” was either essential
or very important in determining upward mobility, and 89 percent of respondents in both
countries also felt this way about “having ambition”. On the other hand, small minorities in
both countries cited race, gender, or luck as being essential or very important, “luck” being
the most cited with 21 percent of Americans and 22 percent of Canadians thinking of it in
these terms. The responses across all 16 factors presented to respondents are very similar
across the two countries, often essentially the same with the only notable exception being
that Americans were somewhat more likely to view the state of the economy as important.4
This said, Americans tend to view family background more importantly than Canadians.
Twenty-eight percent of American respondents versus 24 percent of Canadians said that
“coming from a wealthy family” was essential or very important, and 37 percent versus 30
percent viewed having “educated parents” in the same way. On the other hand, Canadians
were more likely to cite “knowing the right people” as an essential or very important driver
of mobility.5
      But if Americans and Canadians have a similar meaning of the good life, and similar
views on how to attain it, they have significantly different views on the role of collective action
through public policy. McCall (2017) uses 2000 data from The International Social Survey
Programme to point out that while 35 percent of Americans “strongly agree” or “agree” with
the statement “Government’s responsibility is to reduce gap between high and low incomes,”
a significantly larger proportion (47 percent) of Canadians have this view. Even if this issue
is not supported by a plurality of Canadians, the difference is significant. However, these two
countries are much more similar than respondents in European countries, where the majority,
and often the strong majority, in Great Britain, Sweden, Norway, West Germany, and France
feel redistribution is an important government responsibility.
   4
     This likely reflects the fact that the survey was, as mentioned, conducted in January and February 2009,
during the height of the Great Recession. The recession was notably more severe in the United States. In
addition, the Canadian survey was conducted about six months later.
   5
     The 2000 round of the The International Social Survey Programme also found similar responses to similar
questions. Forty-seven percent of Americans versus 49 percent of Canadians felt that knowing the right
people is essential or very important for “getting ahead”. (The percentages associated with this question in
Figure 2 are, at 44 and 49 percent, essentially the same.) In addition, 20 percent of Americans but only 13
percent of Canadians felt that “coming from a wealthy family” was essential or very important for getting
ahead. See McCall (2017).


                                                     7
                                         Americans
                                                           Race
                                         Canadians
                                                           Gender

                                                           Luck

                                                           Coming from a wealthy family

                                                           Educated parents

                                                           Growing up in a good neighborhood

                                                           Access to loans

                                                           Knowing the right people

                                                           Growing up in a two−parent family

                                                           State of the economy

                                                           Growing up in a stable family

                                                           Having a good education

                                                           Quality K−12 education

                                                           Staying healthy

                                                           Having ambition

                                                           Hard work


       0       20       40        60       80        100
                     Percent reporting
                 Essential or Very Important

Figure 2: Percentage of respondents in comparable public opinion polls stating that a factor
is Essential or Very Important to upward mobility




                                                8
     Findings from Corak (2010) also suggest that Americans and Canadians share a preference
for equality of opportunities over equality of outcomes: 71 percent of Americans and 68
percent of Canadians felt it was more important “to ensure everyone has a fair chance of
improving their economic standing” than “to reduce inequality.” This said, Canadians are
more likely to offer a more “activist” role for their governments.
     A notable difference between the two countries concerns the role of government
     as a means to influence economic mobility. When asked if the government does
     more to help or more to hurt people trying to move up the economic ladder,
     respondents in both countries lacked strong proclivities. However, 46 percent
     of Canadians feel that government does more to help than to hurt, compared
     to 36 percent of Americans. On the other hand, 46 percent of Americans feel
     government does more to hurt versus 39 percent of Canadians. The difference
     in the responses to this question was among the largest of all questions asked
     (Corak 2010, 17).
This is as much a statement about differences in beliefs about the efficacy and efficiency of
public policy as it is about ideological differences on the role of the state, and has a clear echo
in the public opinion research conducted by Alesina, Stantcheva, and Teso (2018). They focus
on the relationship between perceptions of intergenerational mobility and preferences for
redistribution in the United States and four European countries. Canada is not part of their
analysis, and their purpose is not the same as ours, focusing on intergenerational mobility
to understand the strength of preferences for equality of outcomes. But they underscore
the point that beliefs about the role of government intervention are at the core of political
polarization, and lead to different views on what to do about intergenerational mobility even
if the lack of it is perceived as a problem.
     For example, in the PEW-EKOS polls a slight majority of Americans (51 percent) feels
that cutting taxes would be a “very effective” government action to improve mobility, but only
38 percent of Canadians feel the same way (Corak 2010, Figure 7). These differences imply
different public policy capacities. Hoynes and Stabile (2017) document the very dramatic
differences in income support for lower income families in the two countries, the safety net
being drawn much more tightly in Canada. Even if underlying values are the same in these
two countries, perceptions about the role of public policy—and ultimately the range and
design of policy—may be very different.
     This relates directly to the emphasis Solon (2004) puts on the “progressivity” of public
investment in human capital. His model also suggests that cross-country differences in the
design of public policies—in addition to differences in the inheritability of endowments, the
returns to human capital investment, and the capacity of family income to influence a child’s
human capital—play a role in determining differences in intergenerational mobility. All of
these factors may come into play in understanding Canada-US differences. But since these
two countries define and value mobility in the same way, comparing them may help place a
sharper focus on differing beliefs about the role of public policy. In other words, a Canada-US
comparison might open up a wider menu of choices in American public debate than if the
comparison was just over time within the country, or for that matter to European public
policy, which can be more easily dismissed as not relevant to American values.

                                                9
3       Data and measurement
The economics literature on intergenerational income mobility has grown significantly since
the early 1990s when the maturing of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics offered Solon
(1992) the opportunity to estimate intergenerational income elasticities with nationally
representative data spanning two generations.6 The surveys of this research by Björklund
and Jäntti (2011), Black and Devereux (2011), Blanden (2013), Corak (2013; 2006), Mulligan
(1997), Solon (2002; 1999), and Stuhler (2018) reveal the important role that the construction
and availability of new data plays in offering opportunities to both revisit longstanding
issues, and imagine new possibilities. In Canada this took the form of the development of
inter-generationally linked income tax data by Corak and Heisz (1999), which were used to
estimate an intergenerational elasticity of about 0.2—a finding similar to Fortin and Lefebvre
(1998) who use Census data—and at least half the magnitude of the best available estimate
for the US (Solon 1992; Mazumder 2005a; 2005b; Zimmerman 1992).7 The most important
recent advance in the American literature has been the development and use of similar
tax-based data from the Internal Revenue Service by Chetty et al. (2014) and Mitnik et al.
(2015), confirming intergenerational income elasticities of about 0.4 and likely approaching
0.6. Mazumder (2018) incorporates these findings in his literature review to suggest that
the consensus estimate of the father-son intergenerational elasticity of incomes should be
considered to be about 0.6. Analyses with tax-based data also suggest the use of a wider
variety of intergenerational statistics and, as illustrated by Chetty et al. (2014), sub-national
analysis as an important new research possibility.
     We update and re-construct the Canadian data to permit a direct comparison with
the regional analysis of the United States offered by Chetty et al. (2014). This involves
examining labor market outcomes in 2011 and 2012, but for a younger cohort born in 1980
and in 1982. Our development of these data is meant to line up as closely as possible to
the American equivalent, and as such we are not in a position to examine intergenerational
income mobility at the most appropriate stage in the life cycle, when the children are in
their late 30s to mid 40s.8 As such, we follow Chetty et al. (2014) in focusing on different
measures of rank mobility, which tend to be stable by the time individuals reach their early
30s (Corak 2018 Table 5; Nybom and Stuhler 2017).
    Canadians file income taxes as individuals, but the tax form—referred to as the T1 Form—
requires identifying information about a spouse or common-law partner to be provided. We
    6
      Zimmerman (1992) offered a contemporaneous analysis that did not use the Panel Study of Income
Dynamics.
    7
      The Canadian data, called the Intergenerational Income Database, have also been used by Chen, Ostrovsky,
and Piraino (2017), Corak (2001), Corak, Gustafsson, and Osterberg (2004), Corak and Heisz (1998), Corak
and Piraino (2016; 2011), Grawe (2004; 2006), Oreopoulos (2003), Oreopoulos, Page, and Stevens (2008) to
study a host of issues, and in some cases offer causal analysis.
    8
      Chen, Ostrovsky, and Piraino (2017) offer an analysis of cohorts born in the mid 1960s who are followed
up to 2008 in a manner that takes full account of the life-cycle biases discussed by Grawe (2006), Jenkins
(1987), and Haider and Solon (2006). They estimate the father-son elasticity to be 0.32, and offer a Canada-US
comparison from this perspective. Corak (2018) uses the data on this older cohort in the same manner we do,
offering regional estimates for the 266 Census Divisions defined in the 1986 Canadian Census, with the more
appropriate point in the life-cycle allowing estimates of the regression to the mean model in incomes.


                                                     10
are able to construct a “family income” variable for both parents and children (in adulthood)
and their spouses in the manner of Chetty et al. (2014): the total (before tax) income of
both partners in the household using the Canada Revenue Agency definition of total income
(all market sources of income plus all government transfers).9 Parent total income is averaged
over the tax years 1996 to 2000, a potential of up to five years for each parent. If a parent’s T1
record is not found for a particular year, income is assigned a value of zero. This framework
is comprehensive in using not only a wide definition of income, but also including both sons
and daughters, as well as children raised by single parents.
     The intergenerational link of tax returns between parents and children requires that the
child has a Social Insurance Number while living at home. Some parents obtain a Social
Insurance Number for their children early in their lives, but others do not and for the birth
cohorts we study it is usually obtained when the child enters the labor market, whether
part-time as a teenager or later. The link between parent and child Social Insurance Numbers
is made by using the algorithm described by Corak and Heisz (1999). The appendix offers a
detailed explanation of the structure of the data, and the creation of our analytical sample.
Chetty et al. (2014) use children born between 1980 and 1982, whose parents are identified
and have a positive mean income between 1996 and 2000. A small difference is that our
analysis uses only those children born in 1980 and 1982, the 1981 birth cohort not being part
of underlying data created from income tax files by Statistics Canada.
     The adult income of these children is defined in a similar way, on the basis of the average
total income during 2011 and 2012, including any spousal income if a spouse is present.
The American data considers only partners who are married, putting aside common law
relationships. Our use of the Canadian data treats common law partnerships as married
since for the most part they are recognized in the Canadian income tax system as such, and
form a very important fraction of many long-term stable relationships in some provinces,
particularly in Québec. The proportion of the relationships that are either identified as
married or common law in these tax files is about 50 percent, just below the 55 percent
recorded as married in the United States.
     Children not filing a T1 Form in 2011 or 2012, or in both years, are assigned an income
of zero. We add the income from the child’s spouse, if a spouse is present, to own income in
calculating the child’s “family” income. All dollar amounts are adjusted to 2012 Canadian
dollars using the national Consumer Price Index, and then to US dollars using the Purchasing
Power Parity rate for 2012 produced by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (1.28 Canadian dollars per US dollar).
   9
    More specifically, this consists of: earnings from an employer-employee relationship as indicated on the T4
form, and including commissions, interest and investment income, other employment income, other income,
pension and super-annuity income, rental income, self-employment net income (from business, commissions,
farming, fishing or professional activities), as well as capital gains and losses, and dividends (taxable and
appropriately grossed up to reflect changes in tax treatment). It also includes: Old Age Security pension,
Canada/Quebec Pension Plan benefits, and Employment Insurance benefits. In addition, for the years from
1986 onward total income is defined to include tax credits associated with the Goods and Services Tax
and Harmonized Sales Tax; from 1992, Net Federal supplements, Social Assistance payments and Workers’
Compensation payments; from 1996, Guaranteed Income Supplements; and from 1998, limited partnership
income and Registered Retirement Savings Plan income.


                                                     11
     A child’s geographic location is based upon the postal code provided in the T1 form in
the year the child is linked to his or her parents. This is consistent with Chetty et al. (2014),
who use the 1996 location for 96 percent of their sample. The postal code is converted to
Census geography codes using Statistics Canada’s Postal Code Conversion Files. The analysis
is based on the Census Division, which roughly corresponds to a county or municipality,
the sub-provincial level of government used to deliver provincial and municipal services.
Not all provinces have such a level of government, and in these cases Statistics Canada in
consultation with provincial counterparts defines an equivalent geographic area so that the
entire country is covered. In the 1996 Census there are 288 Census Divisions. Conceptually,
this geographic unit is somewhat narrower than the Commuting Zones used in the American
data, but practically they are similar as some Census Divisions cover a significant geographic
area, though in some cases much wider than would be suggested by commuting patterns.
This implies that our sub-national analysis involves, together with the 741 Commuting Zones
in the US data, over 1,000 regions.
     In the manner of Chetty et al. (2014) we also use Census data to derive a host of
economic and demographic variables profiling the Census Divisions. This is mostly based
on the one-in-five micro-data associated with the 1996 Canadian Census, the data from the
so-called “Long Form” that roughly 20 percent of Canadians are required to complete. In
this way we are able to explore the community level correlates of intergenerational mobility
statistics we derive from the tax data for each region.
      Theory offers only a partial guide on the choice of statistics to measure intergenerational
mobility, and to some degree research is increasingly informed not just by the limitations
and opportunities of available data, but also by public policy discussion. Becker and Tomes
(1986; 1979) focus empirical attention on the regression to the mean model of incomes:
yi,t = α + βyi,t−1 + εi , where once again yi,t represents the natural logarithm of permanent
income of a member of family i in generation t, and α and β are the parameters usually
estimated by least squares that respectively measure absolute and relative income mobility.
As stressed, only under very specific circumstances is β a structural parameter, and it should
more accurately be understood to be a broad summary indicator of intergenerational income
mobility reflecting both the correlation of standardized incomes and differences in the variance
of incomes between generations. This said, even as a descriptive statistic it does not capture
all dimensions of the process, rank mobility not being explicitly measured, and the linearity
assumption implying that the rate of mobility is the same across the entire parental income
distribution. As such, we are agnostic as to the appropriate measure of mobility. Like Chetty
et al. (2014) we downplay the intergenerational elasticity in large measure because of the
potential for life-cycle biases.10
      We focus on summary indicators of rank mobility derived from a rank-rank regression:
Ri,j,t = aj + bj Ri,j,t−1 + i,j , where Ri,j,t refers to the percentile rank in the national income
distribution of an individual in family i, belonging to generation t, from region j when the
analysis is sub-national. To be clear, we are following Chetty et al. (2014) in defining a child’s
geography on the basis of where he or she lived as a teenager, but our measure of permanent
  10
    This said, we do characterize our communities by the average parental income, an important correlate of
the expected adult income of children.


                                                    12
income is determined without regard to where the child may be living as an adult, a little
more than a decade later. Geographic mobility is embodied in this analysis, and children
and parents—regardless of where they live—are placed in the national income distributions
to determine their rank, not in the local income distribution. The parameters of this model
are estimated using least squares, with aj offering a measure of absolute mobility—the
expected rank of a child raised by bottom percentile parents—and bj a measure of relative
rank mobility—the increase in a child’s rank for every percentile increase in the parents’ rank.
     Our focus is also on certain cells of the quintile transition matrix, in particular the chances
that a child born to bottom quintile parents will rise to the top of the quintile—so-called
rags to riches mobility—and the chances that he or she will grow up to in turn be a bottom
quintile adult—the intergenerational cycle of low income. These are referred to, respectively,
as P1,5 = Pr{Yt ∈ top|Yt−1 ∈ bottom} and P1,1 = Pr{Yt ∈ bottom|Yt−1 ∈ bottom}, where
Yt and Yt−1 refer respectively to child and parent permanent income. We calculate these
statistics for the country as a whole and for each sub-national unit.
     Canadian incomes are placed both in the Canadian income distribution, and also in
the American income distribution. The sub-national analysis is based entirely on the latter
ranking. In this case the assigned ranks refer to the percentile rank in the United States, and
the transition matrices derived from this ranking are not strictly transition matrices as the
rows are not constrained to add to one. The online appendix to Chetty et al. (2014) lists the
national marginal income distributions by percentile.11
     Table 1 shows average parent and child incomes for selected percentiles of the income
distributions, based upon the national cut-offs. The average income in the bottom percentile
of the child’s income distribution in the analytical file Chetty et al. (2014) use is -$43,800, and
all percentiles up to the sixth have an average income of zero. This may appear odd as the
objective is to estimate permanent income, and it is hard to rationalize how anyone can have
a negative or even zero permanent income. But Chetty et al. (2014) motivate the decision
to keep these very low incomes because of high incarceration rates among some groups of
the US population in this cohort. Excluding these groups would likely induce a more severe
sample-selection bias at the low end of the income distribution.12 This is appropriate since
the two-year window relatively early in the child’s life-span places an even greater limitation
on estimating permanent income. As mentioned, the Canadian data is also constructed to
include observations with low incomes, though this is not common in the existing literature
which generally imposes a cut-off of $500 or more on incomes averaged over five years.
     Table 1 also shows that while Canadian parents tend to have lower average income
within almost all percentiles, other than the very bottom percentiles, this is markedly so
higher up in the income distribution. To be in the top 20 percent, and certainly to be in the
top five percent and the top one or two percent, implies having a good deal more income in
  11
     Specifically, we use Table 2 retrieved at https://opportunityinsights.org/paper/land-of-opportunity/,
which offers the average parent and child incomes for each percentile of the respective income distributions,
rounded to the nearest $100. We define the percentile cutoffs to be the midpoint between two means.
  12
     Correspondence with Raj Chetty. The analytical files are based both on the 1040 forms Americans are
required to complete when filing their income taxes, and on the W-2 forms submitted by employers. The
later allow the authors to capture individuals who did not file their tax returns.


                                                     13
Table 1: Selected percentiles of the parent and child income distributions in Canada and the
United States: US (2012) dollars


                                                Parents         Children
                           Percentile      Canada     United Canada United
                                                       States          States

                                1             1,593     1,700             -10,456 -43,800
                                5             8,379     9,200                   0       0
                                10           12,944    15,000                 179   2,300
                                20           22,194    24,900              13,575 11,000
                                50           52,122    59,500              44,663 34,600
                                80           87,972   107,900              81,703 74,400
                                90          111,475   144,500             102,852 99,900
                                95          137,335   194,300             122,165 125,300
                                99          242,279   420,100             169,247 193,300
                               100          586,026 1,408,800             277,608 408,400

                           Source: Authors’ calculations, Chetty et al (2014) online tables.



the United States than in Canada. Children in the United States are raised in a context of
greater top-end income inequality. At the same time, the adult incomes of Canadian children
are higher in the middle of the income distribution than in the United States. This said,
child top incomes are also higher in the United States.13 When Canadian parents are placed
in the American income distribution, 29.7 percent fall into the bottom quintile, and only 5.2
percent in the top. The patterns are not as extreme for Canadian children, but similar: 20.7
percent of Canadian children in adulthood fall into the bottom fifth of the American income
distribution, and 12.5 percent into the top fifth.14


4      Between country comparisons
We confirm the general notion in the literature viewing Canada as more intergenerationally
mobile than the United States, but in motivating the remainder of our analysis, note that
this finding may be complemented and nuanced in an important way with subnational
comparisons.
  13
     Research based on survey data for the 1990s finds that when Canadian children are placed in the US
income distribution they are much less likely to be in the bottom decile of the US income distribution than
their American counterparts, reflecting differences in the polarization of labor markets, the structure of
families, and the more generous Canadian system of income support. To be clear, however, this result does
not account for in-kind support—in particular SNAP (food stamps)—which tend to be greater in the United
States. This limitation also applies to analyses based on income tax data. See Corak, Curtis, and Phipps
(2011).
  14
     For parents, 28.3, 24.9 and 11.9 percent place in the second, the third, and the next to top quintile; for
children these percentages are 18.8, 22.8 and 25.1.


                                                            14
Table 2: Least squares estimates of relative intergenerational income and rank moblity, Canada
and United States


       Income definitions                                                                                      United
       Child                                                             Parent                                States   Canada


       Intergenerational income elasticities
 1     Logarithm of family income                                        Logarithm      of   family   income    0.344    0.310
 2     Excluding incomes below $500                                      Logarithm      of   family   income             0.226
 3     Recoding incomes below $500 to $500                               Logarithm      of   family   income             0.313
 4     Recoding zero incomes to $1                                       Logarithm      of   family   income    0.618    0.474
 5     Recoding incomes below $1,000 to $1,000                           Logarithm      of   family   income    0.413    0.294

       Relative rank mobility
 6     Percentile in US                              Percentile in US                                           0.341    0.229
 7     Percentile in US (excluding missing)          Percentile in US                                                    0.226
 8     Percentile in own country                     Percentile in own country                                  0.341    0.212
 9     Percentile in own country (excluding missing) Percentile in own country                                           0.228
 10    Percentile in own country                     Percentile in own country 1999 to 2003                     0.339    0.216
 11    Percentile in own country                     Percentile of top parent own country                       0.312    0.219

 Note: All estimates are statistically significant, wth the maximum standard error being 0.006.




     Least squares estimates of relative income and rank mobility, the estimates of the
parameters β and b, are presented in Table 2 for a number of different sample selection
rules in a way that follows some of the findings in Chetty et al. (2014 Table I), from which
the estimates for the United States are drawn. The first panel offers the intergenerational
elasticities, and the second the rank-rank slope estimate, where ranks are determined both by
the within-country percentile distribution, and by placing Canadians in the American income
distribution.
     The Canadian intergenerational income elasticity is lower. All the coefficients, and all
the differences between the countries, are statistically significant, the largest standard error
in the table being 0.006 (that for the Canadian estimate in row 4), with most being about
0.001 for Canada, and in the range of 0.0003 to 0.0004 for the United States. The Canadian
estimates of the elasticities are similar to those in the existing literature, but not directly
comparable to them: our income definition is unique, the samples include both men and
women, and are, at least for a comparison with the best current estimates in Chen, Ostrovsky,
and Piraino (2017), early in the life cycle.15 The estimates of relative rank mobility in Table
2 imply that a child raised by top percentile parents in the United states will rank about 31
to 34 percentiles higher in the income distribution than a bottom percentile child, but in
  15
     The exception is a comparison to Corak (2018), who uses the same administrative data source and income
definitions, but with an older cohort of Canadians born in the mid 1960s, whose outcomes are measured over
a five year period ending in 2008. Interestingly, he reports a Canada-wide elasticity that, at 0.20, is actually
a bit lower than the lowest estimate offered in the first panel of Table 2. Both of these sets of estimates are
much lower than those offered by Chen, Ostrovsky, and Piraino (2017), but these authors also suggest that
their results should be understood to be about half as great as comparable US estimates.


                                                                          15
                        70




                        60
Mean child percentile




                        50




                        40                                                            Canadians in the US Distribution
                                                                                      Canadians in the Canadian Distribution
                                                                                      Americans in the US Distribution




                        30

                               0             20             40                   60                80                    100

                                                                 Parent percentile

                             Figure 3: Intergenerational rank mobility in Canada and the United States


Canada this difference would, at 21 to 23 percentiles, be a full decile lower.16
     Figure 3 contrasts rank mobility between the two countries in a way that permits a
comparison of both absolute and relative mobility. The slope is flatter in Canada, and
the intercept is higher, the combination implying that Canadian children will rank higher
than their American counterparts until about the median of parent income is reached. The
expected rank of a Canadian child raised by bottom quintile parents is somewhat above the
40th percentile, but for an American significantly below. To reach a similar point on the US
income ladder an American child would have to have parents who ranked as high as the 30th
percentile. The US “middle class” is within easier reach for low income Canadian
children, than it is for low income Americans.
      This said, the information in Figure 3 also implies that American children raised by top
quintile parents are more likely to rank higher than their Canadian counterparts. The rank-
rank relationship tends to show more non-linearity in Canada, but top percentile Canadians
still cannot expect to see their children attain the same rank as top percentile Americans.
               16
    Corak (2018 Table 5) reports a rank-rank slope for Canada of 0.242 when child outcomes are measured at
35 to 48 years of age, and 0.240 when measured for the same cohort at 31 and 32 years of age. This is in the
range of our estimates, suggesting that percentile ranks are established by the time children reach the early
30s, as Chetty et al. (2014) suggest with US data, and as Nybom and Stuhler (2017) show with Swedish data.


                                                                  16
There also seems to be more pronounced non-linearities at the bottom of the Canadian
income distribution, certainly over the course of the bottom decile of the parent distribution.
To some degree the linear rank-rank model is a less accurate summary indicator of rank
mobility in Canada than Chetty et al. (2014) find it is for the United States.
     Table 3 presents another perspective on these movements by offering estimates of the
quintile transition matrices for the two countries, including two estimates for Canada: Panel
2 based on the Canadian quintile cut-offs, and Panel 3 based upon the ranks that would be
ascribed to Canadian parents and children if they were placed in their respective American
income distributions. Panels 1 and 2 show that there is a good deal of intergenerational
mobility for a large segment of the population in these two countries, for children raised in
families from the 20th to the 80th percentiles. Family income in these middle quintiles seems
rather loosely related to child outcomes, the quintile transition probabilities hovering a bit
above and a bit below 0.20. In this sense, intergenerational mobility may actually contribute
to middle class anxiety, parents not being able to greatly influence their child’s station in life.
There certainly are distinct gradients between the 20th and 80th percentiles, and somewhat
more so in the United States, but these are notably sharper for children from bottom quintile
and top quintile parents.
     The children of top quintile parents in the United States have an almost 37 percent
chance of staying in the top quintile as adults, and face about one-in-ten chance of falling to
the bottom fifth of the income distribution. Panel 2 shows that in Canada, this tilt is also
present but not as extreme: just less than a 30 percent chance of remaining in the top, and
more than a 15 percent chance of falling to the bottom.17 A similar pattern is displayed at
the other extreme of the income distribution. In both the United States and Canada, bottom
quintile children face about a one-in-three chance of an intergenerational cycle of bottom
income, but a rags to riches movement is more likely for Canadians than Americans, the
odds being less than one-in-ten in the US but higher in Canada. The 7.5 percent chance of
moving from a bottom quintile to a top quintile family in the United States is the lowest
probability listed in Panels 1 and 2.
     The mobility of low income Canadian children is even greater when they and their
parents are ranked according to the US income distribution. Panel 3 of the table shows they
are somewhat less likely to stay in the bottom as their American counterparts (29.1 percent
versus 33.7 percent), and much more likely to rise to the top half of the income distribution,
though not necessarily more likely to rise to the top fifth.
      All three dimensions of this cross-country comparison, but in particular this last result
related to the prospects of low income children, put the so-called “American Dream” in sharp
relief, and offer stronger evidence to support the growing perception in the literature that
this Dream—if it is defined in terms of income mobility and the opportunity to, in terms of
  17
    Nybom and Stuhler (2017) and O’Neill, Sweetman, and Van de gaer (2007) note that measurement
error in both parent and child incomes influences transition matrices in a non-classical way, leading to an
overstatement of mobility in middle parts of the distribution, and an understatement at the extremes. While
our correction for measurement error in child incomes is imperfect—an averaging of only two years of child
incomes—we don’t expect this to influence quintile transition matrices, but for this reason put aside a detailed
look at the extremes of the percentile transition matrices.


                                                      17
Table 3: Quintile transition matrices: Americans in the US income distribution, Canadians
in the Canadian income distribution, and Canadians in the US income distribution


    Child’s quintile                                                                Parent’s quintile
                                                                        Bottom   Second Third Fourth    Top


    1. United States
    Bottom                                                               33.7     24.2   17.8   13.4    10.9
    Second                                                               28.0     24.2   19.8   16.0    11.9
    Third                                                                18.4     21.7   22.1   20.9    17.0
    Fourth                                                               12.3     17.6   22.0   24.4    23.6
    Top                                                                   7.5     12.3   18.3   25.4    36.5

    2. Canada in the Canadian income distribution
    Bottom                                                               32.0     20.3   17.0   15.3    15.5
    Second                                                               24.0     23.2   20.7   18.0    14.8
    Third                                                                18.2     21.3   21.6   20.6    18.8
    Fourth                                                               14.6     19.3   21.8   22.8    21.4
    Top                                                                  11.2     15.9   18.9   23.3    29.5

    3. Canada in the US income distribution
    Bottom                                                               29.1     18.1   15.6   15.4    17.0
    Second                                                               22.5     20.1   16.7   14.1    12.1
    Third                                                                21.7     24.7   23.5   22.0    19.6
    Fourth                                                               19.0     26.1   29.5   29.3    26.8
    Top                                                                   7.7     10.9   14.8   19.3    24.6

    Source: Authors’ calculations, and Chetty et al. (2014, Table II)



Figure 1, “succeed regardless of family background”—is more of a reality in Canada than the
United States. But the sub-national research documented by Chetty et al. (2014) presents
a challenge: the degree of intergenerational mobility varies significantly within the United
States, with some regions showing much more mobility than that recorded even for the most
mobile countries. Between country comparisons have more relevance when they are also
accompanied by within country comparisons.


5       Between and within country comparisons
In fact, these markers of intergenerational mobility have somewhat more variation across the
288 Canadian Census Divisions than across the 709 American Commuting Zones for which
we are able to calculate rank mobility estimates. The unweighted standard deviation of the


                                                                18
rank-rank intercept is 6.82 in Canada, and at 6.89 about the same in the United States. But
the standard deviation of the rank-rank slope is notably higher in Canada: 0.113 versus
0.0648. This suggests a certain overlap in these statistics across regions. The two countries,
in other words, may not be perfectly distinguished by the border between them.
     Figure 4 maps Canada and the United States according to the value of P1,1 , defined by
the quintile cut-offs of the American income distribution. The roughly 1,000 regions of the
two countries are categorized into five g roups, w ith t he m ost m obile c ut-off p laced a t 0.2,
and the upper cut-off at 0.35. There is a clear border effect between some parts of the two
countries. An important exception involves the most mobile areas, extending from eastern
parts of Alberta and the southern parts of Saskatchewan to neighbouring North Dakota
through the adjoining regions between Manitoba and Minnesota. But the national border is
clearly distinguished further east, and particularly between the lower Great Lakes regions
all the way through to the eastern seaboard. Most of the regions in the eastern part of the
United States are characterized by a transition probability of 0.3 or higher. This part of
Canada has only a few pockets with a greater than 0.35 chance of intergenerational poverty
that are shared with regions scattered throughout United States. For the most part the
highest probabilities of intergenerational cycles of low income are found in northern parts of
Canada. Indigenous populations are significant in these areas, and many are sparsely
populated.
     Rags to riches mobility, P1,5, is not as sharply distinguished between the two countries
with one important exception. Figure 5 maps this probability. Southern Ontario—the most
populous part of Canada lying north of Lake Ontario and Lake Erie—displays a similar
bottom to top quintile mobility as adjacent regions in Michigan, Ohio, and New York State,
most regions being categorized in the 0.05 to 0.10 range. This said, some areas of Québec
adjacent to New York State, Vermont, and New Hampshire display a lower probability than
their counterparts in Ontario and New England. Regions with rather high chances of escaping
low income and rising to the very top quintile cover the American midwest, where in most
Commuting Zones the probability is more than 20 percent, similar probabilities being
experienced in the adjacent regions of western Canada. Similarities also extend, roughly
speaking, across the border into Canada from the northwest of the United States. The
distinct difference between the countries is the significant pockets of very low bottom to top
quintile mobility in parts of the southern states. This is a concentrated area of low upward
mobility covering a significant proportion of the population that does not have a parallel in
Canada, or at least to the extent it does covers a rather small proportion of the Canadian
population.
     These comparisons are hard to generalize for at least two reasons. First, they are only
two possible measures of intergenerational mobility. As policy relevant as they may be, they
do not embody all dimensions of mobility. Second, while the maps are striking illustrations
leaving strong impressions, they are based upon arbitrary—though intuitively appealing—
probability cut-offs. For these reasons we focus on an alternative descriptive approach that
allows us to simultaneously use a total of five available indicators. We cluster the regions with
K -means, an unsupervised machine learning algorithm. To be clear, this is not an exercise in
prediction, but rather one of clustering units into a predetermined number of groups
according to a metric of all available mobility indicators. We chose the number of

                                               19
Figure 4: The intergenerational cycle of low income: Bottom to bottom quintile transtion
probabilities in Canada and the United States show distinct patterns on either side of the
national border




                                           20
Figure 5: Rags to riches mobility: Bottom to top quintile transtion probabilities are not
sharply distinguished on either side of the national border




                                           21
groupings according to our purpose. This is an exercise in description, intended to serve a
communication purpose and set directions for more detailed analysis. It permits us to be
agnostic about the choice of indicator in order to highlight which regions of Canada and the
United States are more similar to each other than to other parts of the country. In this way
we assess more rigorously whether, and to what extent, the national border falls out as the
aftermath of the categorization.
     Briefly, K -means partitions observations into groups which minimize the within-cluster
variation, defined as the sum of all the pairwise squared Euclidean distances. The optimization
problem involves:
                                                                              
                                           K                  p
                                         X    1 X X                             
                             minimize                            (xij − xi0 j )2                       (4)
                                          k=1 |Ck | i,i0 ∈Ck j=1
                              C1 ,...,CK                                        


where K is the number of pre-defined clusters, Ck denotes a cluster, i and j represent
particular observations within a cluster, and xj is one of the p features of the data. We
use five such features: relative rank mobility as measured by the least squares estimate of
the rank-rank slope (bj ), absolute mobility as measured by the least squares estimate of the
intercept of the rank-rank regression (aj ), the mean of parent incomes in the region, and the
two quintile transition probabilities highlighted in Figures 4 and 5, P1,1 and P1,5 . It is in this
sense that we claim to be agnostic as to the appropriate statistic measuring intergenerational
mobility. The algorithm solving equation 4 is described in James et al. (2013) and Hastie,
Tibshirani, and Friedman (2009).18
     Figure 6 maps the American Commuting Zones and the Canadian Census Divisions
when they are forced to belong to only two clusters. In other words, with this map we seek
to determine if the K -means algorithm would classify these regions into two groups according
to the international border. It does so only partially, and in a way hinted at by the previous
maps: large parts of Canada are grouped with the more mobile regions of the United States,
but other parts with the less mobile American regions. The vast majority of Canadian Census
Divisions covering the most populated parts of the country have a degree of intergenerational
mobility more in common with each other than with neighbouring regions of the northeastern
United States. But these areas would also be grouped with regions in the mid-western parts
of both countries. There are also regions in the north of the country that have more in
common with a large swath of the American South and eastern seaboard than they do with
the rest of Canada.
    The first panel of Table 4 offers the total number of regions and populations of these
two clusters, with the population estimates coming from the 2001 Canadian and 2000 US
  18
    We use the Stata package Cluster and the command cluster kmeans with 500 random restarts, and present
the results that maximize the Calinski-Harabasz Pseudo-F, which is the ratio of between-cluster variance
to within-cluster variance. This is a “top-down” approach to clustering requiring the number of clusters to
be pre-determined. We employed up to 2,000 restarts and found no significant change in the results. We
examined up to 10 pre-determined clusters in deciding upon the results in the text. An alternative approach
would be to use agglomerative (bottom-up) clustering, which does not require the number of clusters to be
pre-specified.


                                                      22
Figure 6: The Canada-United States border would not be chosen by a machine learning
algorithm minimizing within-cluster variance of five indicators of intergenerational mobility




                                             23
Table 4: Summary statistics of intergenerational mobility measures, for clusters of Canadian
Census Divsions and American Community Zones as determined by K-means


            Cluster             Number             Population               Rank mobility         Transition Average
           identifier          of regions         (thousands)             absolute relative       probability Parent
                                               children     total            a         b           P15   P11 Income


       1. Two clusters
             1                     402            2,137 65,750               40.1        0.239    10.7   27.0    83,508
             2                     556            8,411 245,948              32.3        0.345     7.4   34.1    87,246

       2. Four clusters
              1                    153              350   9,021              46.3        0.237    16.0   22.2    72,841
              2                    342            1,421 44,988               38.3        0.253     8.1   28.0    64,745
              3                    149            5,822 178,081              34.1        0.321     8.6   32.8   100,457
              4                    314            2,956 79,608               29.6        0.376     5.9   36.0    68,953

       Note: Total poplulation refers to populations estimates from the 2001 and 2000 Censuses.




Censuses, and the number of children from the tax-based analytical files. The table also
offers population weighted values of the five mobility indicators. The most populous cluster
includes almost 246 million people and four-fifths of our sample, but as the accompanying
Table 5 shows it does not cover the most populous regions of Canada, which are included in
the cluster that is more mobile according to the absolute and relative rank indicators, and the
two transition probabilities. About two-thirds of our sample, and 60 percent of Canadians
according to the 2001 Census, lived in the areas covered by Cluster 1. This cluster is also a
cluster of regions with lower average parent incomes.
     This is not our preferred number of clusters, and does not accurately capture the variance
in the data. But that, in part, is the point. When sub-national indicators of mobility are
available for analysis they do not naturally support the conclusion that a simple between
country analysis is an appropriate way to view intergenerational mobility. We conduct the
analysis repeatedly with up to ten clusters being pre-specified, and judge that a four-cluster
mapping is the best way to communicate the regional variation in mobility.
     This is mapped in Figure 7, and shows that the clustering continues to occur on either
side of the international border, for the most part a line being drawn along the Great Lakes
and Saint Lawrence River regions, one that continues to distinguish the New England States
from the Atlantic Provinces. The clusters associated with the most and the least mobility span
the border, one running through the mid west of the United States and into Saskatchewan
and most of Alberta, another grouping the Southern United States with Northern parts of
Canada. The second panel of Table 4 summarizes the mobility measures in this four-cluster
map. Cluster 3 contains the largest fraction of the population, and Table 5 documents
that it is almost exclusively based in the United States, covering significant portions of the
northeast, mid-west, and western coastal areas. Only five Canadian Census Divisions are


                                                                  24
Table 5: Distribution of the number of regions and the sample sizes across clusters for Canada
and the United States: Two cluster and four cluster analyses


                                                 Canada                         United States
                     Cluster             Number      Number                  Number      Number
                                          Census     Children               Commuting    Children
                                         Divisions (thousands)                Zones    (thousands)

                1. Two clusters
                      1                     171               489                 231     1,648
                      2                      78               284                 478     8,128

                2. Four clusters
                       1                     40               103                 113      246
                       2                    175               552                 167      869
                       3                     5                 88                 144     5,733
                       4                     29                28                 285     2,928

                Note: Number of children refers to the size of the analytical sample.



grouped into this cluster. Cluster 3 is distinguished from Clusters 1 and 2, which together
geographically cover most of Canada and 85 percent of our sample. Mobility is generally
lower in the American dominant Cluster 3, while average parental income is higher. A top
percentile parent in Cluster 3 has children who can expect to rank about 32 percentiles higher
than a bottom percentile parent, almost a decile more than in Cluster 2. The probability of
an intergenerational cycle of low income is also significantly higher in Cluster 3, on average
about one-third.
     The three clusters spanning the border are higher and lower mobility areas. Cluster
1 running through Alberta and Saskatchewan into the mid-west American states is the
highest mobility area of these two countries, with absolute rank mobility of more than 45
percentiles, with probabilities of rags to riches movement and intergenerational low income
in the neighborhood of 20 percent. This cluster includes significant parts of the provinces of
Alberta and Saskatchewan, and also of Newfoundland and Labrador, a province traditionally
considered a low income–low mobility region. These regions experienced robust labor markets
during the period we are measuring child outcomes as a result of a boom in oil, potash,
and other commodity prices. Rising wage rates and labor supply led to significant increases
in median incomes during the first decade of the 2000s.19 This highlights the fact that
our measure of permanent income for children may be less than perfect in a way that has
differential national impacts. Measurement error in child incomes is often not considered to
imply an attenuation bias in the estimation of the intergenerational income elasticity, leading
only to a loss of efficiency. But this is not the case with rank-based statistics, which require
both parent and child incomes to be corrected for measurement (Nybom and Stuhler 2017).
  19
    See Corak (2016), Figure 15 and more detailed analyses by Fortin and Lemieux (2016), and Marchand
(2012; 2015).


                                                              25
Figure 7: A four cluster mapping shows that some regions lie largely on either side of the
Canada-United States border but that others are not confined to one country




                                           26
We average child incomes over only a two-year period during the height of this boom, and
as such do not take the period of lower prices after 2014 into account. In this sense these
time-specific events likely lead us to overstate the permanent incomes of children in these
Canadian regions.
     This would also apply to regions of the United States experiencing a commodity-boom
at the same time. It is interesting to note that Corak (2018) averages child incomes over a
five year period ending in 2008, and while Newfoundland and Labrador does not appear as a
particularly high mobility region, at least for a cohort of Canadians who as adults were 38 to
45 years of age, Saskatchewan and Alberta continue to represent the most mobile regions of
the country. This suggests something other than a transitory shock is at play in determining
our results. Even to the extent that our findings are related to commodity price movements,
this would reflect a clear lesson from theory: that relatively more equal and inclusive labor
markets lead to more generational mobility. The commodity boom should not be understood
as the sole driver of mobility in this cluster, which also includes communities that have
other advantages. As theory and Chetty et al. (2014) stress, these relate to family structure,
community resources associated with social capital, and an ethic of geographic mobility.
     Average parent income is not noticeably different across the three clusters spanning the
border. The most mobile cluster, labelled as Cluster 1, is significantly less populated than the
low mobility cluster, labelled as Cluster 4 in Figure 7 and Table 4. Cluster 4 is most notably
distinguished from the others by a very low rags to riches movement, and has the highest
chance of intergenerational low income. The chances that a child born to bottom quintile
parents will also be a bottom quintile adult averages 36 percent. Escaping low income is a
challenge not only in the southern United States, but also in some northern parts of Canada.
     We examined an alternate specification that undertook the clustering not on the stan-
dardized values of the five features, but on the standardized residuals of least squares estimates
in which each feature is regressed against a set of variables that the literature suggests are
correlated with mobility. These are described in the next section, and include: the Gini
coefficient; the unionization rate; variables related to family structure; the racial and ethnic
composition of the population; the educational qualifications of the adult population; the
labor force participation rate of teenagers; and employment shares by industry. Using the
residuals from these models removes part of the observed variation in mobility across regions.
This analysis continues to find that Canada’s population share located in the cluster with
highest mobility is larger than for the United States, 24 percent versus 21 percent. In addition,
30 percent of Americans live in low-mobility areas, compared to 20 percent of Canadians.
The implication is that our major findings continue to hold even when accounting for a host
of observable characteristics.
     Another check on our findings focuses the analysis on the border regions. We re-examined
the original clustering analysis by using only regions close to the border, defined as the
straight-line distance from the centroid of each Census Division and Commuting Zone to the
international border. We examined regions defined by distances ranging from 100 kilometers
to 600 kilometers. Sixty one percent of Canadians live in the 107 Census Divisions within
100 kilometers to the border, but only 4.7 percent of Americans live in the adjacent 39
Commuting Zones. These proportions rise to 78 percent and 11 percent when we use a 200

                                               27
Table 6: Summary statistics of intergenerational mobility measures, for clusters of Canadian
Census Divsions and American Community Zones within 600 km of the border as determined
by K-means


            Cluster             Number             Population               Rank mobility         Transition Average
           identifier          of regions         (thousands)             absolute relative       probability Parent
                                               children     total            a         b           P15   P11 Income


        1. Two clusters
              1                    217               623 20,020              42.7         0.224   10.5   24.6    70,183
              2                    286             4,663 140,088             33.4         0.342    8.0   34.4    94,447

       2. Four clusters
              1                    68                146        4,031        47.5         0.234   16.9   21.3    67,499
              2                    161               430       16,233        39.7         0.227    6.2   26.5    61,316
              3                    129             2,386       76,191        36.3         0.308    9.8   32.1   100,962
              4                    145             2,323       63,653        30.4         0.381    6.5   37.0    89,172

       Note: Total poplulation refers to population totals from the 2001 and 2000 Censuses.




kilometer limit, and to 96.6 percent and 46.5 percent when we use a 600 kilometer limit. A
two-cluster map using only the regions falling within a 600 kilometer straight-line distance
looks essentially like Figure 6, with the Great Lakes and Northeastern regions of the United
States continuing to be clearly distinguished from the central and eastern parts of Canada.20
Table 6 offers the same summary information as Table 4 for these regions, yielding similar
results.
     The grouping of these regions into four clusters is also presented in the second panel of
the Table, with Figure 8 offering the equivalent four cluster map. These results echo those
described in Table 4, allowing us to summarize by suggesting that Canada and the United
States share regions of both high and low mobility, but are distinguished by the fact that on
average—where the great bulk of the population lives—most Americans live in regions of
less mobility, with parental income ranks being more strongly related to child ranks, and the
chances of escaping low income being lower. What also drives the cross-national differences
in mobility indicators is the fact that the low mobility regions the two countries have in
common carry different weights in the overall national populations. The low mobility regions
of the United States weigh more heavily in determining country-wide mobility than they do
in Canada. For example, the weighted average of the absolute rank mobility statistic is 35.8
in the United States, and would rise to 39.6 if the regions in Cluster 4 were excluded from the
calculation. A similar calculation in Canada sees the statistic moving up less dramatically,
from 40.6 to only 41.4. The rags to riches probability increases from 10 percent to 12.4
percent in the United States, but in Canada only from 8.54 to 8.59 percent.21
  20
     The most notable difference is that a few more regions in central New Brunswick and Nova Scotia are
classified as parts of the second cluster.
  21
     The changes in the bottom to bottom quintile transition probability are more similar, going from 30.7


                                                                   28
Figure 8: A four cluster mapping using only regions within 600 kilometers from the border




                                           29
6     Correlates of intergenerational mobility
Our analysis makes no pretense of offering causal explanations, neither of the intergenerational
mobility process, nor the role of the national border. This said, there are clear and well
documented differences between and within these two countries which our review of theory
suggests all play a role in determining child outcomes, including differences in labor markets,
demographics, and public policies associated with income support and investments in children.
The most notable of these is the level of post-transfer income inequality that has been stressed
in the literature on cross-country comparisons, including among others Solon (2004) and
Corak (2013). Figure 9 offers a version of the Great Gatsby Curve using our estimates of
the slope of the parent-child rank-rank regression for each region, our data not providing the
basis for deriving the co-variate generally used in this literature, the intergenerational income
elasticity. As such, this is likely an attenuated version of the curve, not being influenced by
differences in the variance of incomes between generations. The positive relationship between
inequality, as measured by the Gini coefficient for the parent incomes, and relative rank
mobility is clear.22 Chetty et al. (2014) point out that the Great Gatsby Curve is present
within the United States, and Figure 9 suggests it also exists within Canada, as well as across
the joint landscape of the two countries.
     It is also clear from the picture that the strong majority of Canadian Census Divisions
have a level of inequality that is comparatively lower than many of the American Commuting
Zones. The median value of the Canadian Gini is 36.4, and three-quarters of the observations
have a coefficient of less than 39.2. The US median is 39.8, with three-quarters of the
observations falling below 45.7. It also appears from the picture that the relationship between
these two variables is stronger in the Canadian data. These impressions are clear in the first
row of the first panel of Table 7, which presents correlation coefficients between relative rank
mobility and inequality. The correlations with a number of other community characteristics
are also offered. The second panel presents the correlations with absolute rank mobility.23
      The correlation coefficient between relative rank mobility and the Gini is 0.381, but
0.425 for the Canadian data. The other factors most strongly correlated with relative rank
mobility have to do with demographics: 0.498 with the fraction of single mothers in the
community, and 0.473 with the fraction who are black. But these two variables also show
different patterns between the countries, both correlations being higher than 0.6 in the United
States, and much smaller in Canada. In fact, while the correlation with the black fraction of
the population is statistically significant in the Canadian-only data, it is estimated to have a
negative sign. This contrasts with the fraction of Indigenous peoples in the population, which
percent to 27.3 percent in the United States, and from 26.6 to 24.8 percent in Canada. There would be a
substantial jump in average community income in the United States amounting to more than $5,000, but just
a $700 increase in Canada.
   22
      A small number of communities with a Gini coefficient of 65 or greater are dropped from the picture for
the sake of exposition. They are not used in deriving the least squares line also drawn in the picture, which
is based upon an unweighted regression.
   23
      The country-specific estimates in this table are based upon a within-country standardization of the data
to have mean zero and standard deviation of one, while the entries for both countries are based on all the
regions from both countries.


                                                     30
                         0.8

                               Canada
                               United States



                         0.6
       Rank−Rank slope




                         0.4




                         0.2




                                    30             40             50           60

                                           Gini coefficient (parent incomes)
Figure 9: The Great Gatsby Curve for Canada and the United States: Intergenerational rank
mobility and inequality




                                                    31
Table 7: Correlation coefficients between mobility indicators and community characteristics:
Canada, United States, and both countries together

               Community characterisitc                             Canada                 United States       Both countries
                                                                estimate   s.e.           estimate    s.e.    estimate    s.e.


               1. Relative rank mobility
               Gini coefficient                                      0.425     0.054          0.345   0.035      0.381   0.029
               Fraction single mothers                               0.142     0.059          0.641   0.029      0.498   0.028
               Fraction divorced                                    -0.200     0.058          0.158   0.037      0.175   0.031
               Fraction married                                     -0.190     0.058         -0.370   0.035     -0.122   0.032
               Fraction black                                       -0.140     0.059          0.631   0.029      0.473   0.028
               Fraction visible minority                            -0.102     0.059         -0.260   0.036     -0.078   0.032
               Fraction indigenous                                   0.520     0.051          0.022   0.038      0.215   0.031
               Fraction white                                       -0.475     0.052         -0.225   0.037     -0.357   0.030
               Fraction foreign born                                -0.202     0.058         -0.247   0.036     -0.260   0.031
               Fraction high school dropout                          0.417     0.054          0.378   0.035      0.009   0.032
               Fraction university degree                           -0.263     0.057         -0.263   0.036     -0.012   0.032
               Teenage labour force participaton                    -0.061     0.059         -0.516   0.032     -0.296   0.030
               Unionization rate                                     0.091     0.061         -0.138   0.037     -0.293   0.031
               Manufacturing employment share                       -0.194     0.058          0.393   0.035      0.165   0.031
               Resource employment share                             0.207     0.058         -0.354   0.035     -0.157   0.031

               2. Absolute rank mobility
               Gini coefficient                                     -0.563     0.049         -0.557   0.031     -0.583   0.026
               Fraction single mothers                              -0.421     0.054         -0.780   0.024     -0.727   0.022
               Fraction divorced                                    -0.090     0.059         -0.438   0.034     -0.426   0.029
               Fraction married                                      0.311     0.056          0.557   0.031      0.285   0.030
               Fraction black                                       -0.081     0.059         -0.627   0.029     -0.576   0.026
               Fraction visible minority                            -0.118     0.059          0.084   0.037     -0.035   0.032
               Fraction indigenous                                  -0.567     0.049         -0.157   0.037     -0.241   0.031
               Fraction white                                        0.588     0.048          0.427   0.034      0.511   0.027
               Fraction foreign born                                -0.122     0.059          0.036   0.038      0.031   0.032
               Fraction high school dropout                         -0.087     0.059         -0.431   0.034      0.032   0.032
               Fraction university degree                           -0.060     0.059          0.126   0.037     -0.106   0.032
               Teenage labour force participaton                     0.032     0.059          0.642   0.029      0.285   0.030
               Unionization rate                                    -0.087     0.061          0.079   0.037      0.285   0.031
               Manufacturing employment share                        0.012     0.059         -0.307   0.036     -0.227   0.031
               Resource employment share                             0.291     0.057          0.584   0.030      0.511   0.027

               Source: Authors’ calculations based on least squares estimates of standardized data.




has a much larger coefficient in Canada, the positive correlation with relative rank estimate
indicating lower mobility. These patterns hold when the focus is on the relationship with
absolute rank mobility in Panel 2 of the table, with the addition of the fraction of divorced
parents also being significant in the United States, but not in Canada. Both absolute and
relative rank mobility are lower in Canadian communities with a higher Indigenous population
share, and lower in American communities with a higher black share.
     These patterns continue to hold in multi-variate regressions with important nuances.
The Indigenous population share is a particularly strong correlate of less mobility in Canada,
and though not as large in the United States is nonetheless significant both in magnitude and
statistically when the focus is on absolute rank mobility. The black share of the community
population is associated with lower absolute mobility in the multi-variate American results,


                                                                         32
while the fractions of divorced and of single parents become more important. These results
are available upon request, and are used to derive a Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition of the
mean differences in relative and absolute mobility between the two countries. This suggests
that these factors “explain” 5.9 percent of the relative mobility difference, and 89.1 percent of
the absolute difference. While these decompositions and correlations only hint at suggestions
for future causal analysis, in combination with our cluster analysis they offer a clearer picture
of the descriptive differences between the countries. We suggest three broad themes calling
for more analysis.
     The first difference which merits further study concerns the fact that race plays out
differently in the two countries, being black matters for intergenerational mobility in the
United States. To the extent that the communities we highlight as part of Cluster 4, the low
mobility cluster dominated by the southern American states, have a higher black population,
then this must be part of the explanation for the cross-country differences. This suggestion
fits well with both Hertz (2005) and Bhattacharya and Mazumder (2011) who find that
intergenerational mobility—particularly absolute mobility—among the black population is a
good deal lower than the general population. It also meshes with Chetty et al. (2018), who
offer a detailed geographic analysis of mobility by race, documenting the significantly lower
rates of mobility among black men, and with Berger (2018) who associates American regions
having low chances of upward mobility with a higher prevalence of slavery at the time of
the Civil War, documenting a negative correlation between upward mobility measured by
P1,5 and prior slavery. It may be that the Canadian communities in this cluster also have
significant challenges associated with minority status, but this is more likely reflected in the
Indigenous status of their populations, and in this way has more in common with the low
mobility Commuting Zones in the mid-west United States also falling into Cluster 4, which
Chetty et al. (2014) identify as native reservations.
     The second difference that requires further study concerns the nature and role of
inequality, both labor market inequality, and after tax-transfer inequality reflecting the role
of income support. Inequality is a strong correlate of intergenerational mobility, and the
other distinguishing feature of the Canada-US landscape is that virtually all communities
belonging to Cluster 3 fall on the American side of the border. The Gini coefficient in these
areas is notably higher than Cluster 2, the cluster grouping the dominant proportion of the
Canadian population. The mean Gini coefficient in Cluster 3 is 42.6 compared to 37.5 in
Cluster 2, and the cut-offs for the third quartiles are 47.7 and 40.1 respectively. Top end
inequality is much higher in these regions of the United States than in Canada, but as both
Chetty et al. (2014) and Corak (2018) point out in separate analyses of the two countries, it
is bottom end inequality and the share of the middle income population that matters for
regional variation of intergenerational mobility. This may be a reason why Cluster 3 does not
cross onto the Canadian side of the border. Derenoncourt (2018) examines the hypothesis
that inequality in the lower end of the distribution may also be related to race, suggesting
that cities and neighborhoods changed in ways that discriminated against blacks who moved
northward during the Great Migration. Her results suggest that access to public goods and
schooling became more restrictive, “white flight” depriving these migrants and their children
of public investments that in turn had long-term negative consequences that continued across
generations. If this is the case then the country differences in mobility process reflecting the

                                               33
dominant position of Cluster 3 in the United States may be inter-related with the differences
reflected in Cluster 4, and in this way also associated with the distinct racial patterns on the
United States side of the border.
      The third issue meriting study concerns how these two themes, both related to the
inequalities embedded in labor markets, interact with family structure and the support and
investments families are able to make in their children. Marriage, divorce, and single mother-
hood seem to play out differently in the two countries, the intergenerational consequences
being more detrimental in the United States. We have no basis for disentangling demographic
influences on intergenerational mobility from labor market and public policy influences, but
it is clear that these three broad factors interact in different ways across the border, and that
the underlying causal directions—whether from labor market outcomes to family structure or
the opposite—will in part inform the role and design of public policy.


7    Conclusion
Intergenerational income mobility is lower in the United States than in Canada, even when
Canadians are placed in the American income distribution. This is the case almost without
regard to the statistic used to gauge intergenerational dynamics: income mobility, rank
mobility, or directional mobility measured by transition matrices. For example, our analysis
of rank mobility shows that Canadian children raised by parents at the bottom fifth of the
income distribution can on average aspire to rise more than 30 percentiles, approaching the
median income in their generation. This is almost 10 percentiles higher than the expected
rank of their American counterparts. These differences in rank mobility reflect a combination
of differences in absolute mobility, the expected rise in the income distribution of child
raised by bottom ranking parents, and differences in relative mobility, the transmission of an
additional percentile rank among parents to their children.
     We document public opinion research which we interpret as suggesting that a comparison
between these two countries may be particularly apt. Canadians and Americans share values
associated with their personal aspirations, and the aspirations they hold for their children.
The “American Dream” has a very similar meaning on both sides of this international border,
and citizens seem to have a common perspective on the importance of individual initiative
and responsibility, and on the value associated with equality of outcomes versus equality
of opportunity as social goals. As such, a pairing of these two countries may offer insights
on the drivers of intergenerational mobility. Comparisons of the United States with many
other countries might be interpreted as being policy irrelevant because the results may reflect
differences in underlying values and social choices. A Canada-US comparison cannot be as
easily dismissed.
     The most important difference between Canadians and Americans has to do with their
perspectives on the role of the government in supporting individuals and families in striving
to realize their aspirations, Canadians being significantly more inclined to see government
as a help rather than a hindrance. Progressive public policies are one factor promoting
intergenerational mobility, but there are many others. These have to do with the strength

                                               34
and capacities of families to invest in the human capital of their children and to support them
in all of the transitions they must make from infancy to adulthood, and with the structure
of labor markets that reflect the economic returns to skills and education. Public policy,
families, and labor markets all interact to determine differences in intergenerational mobility
across space.
     Our analysis of administrative data associated with the income tax records of the labor
market outcomes of a cohort of Canadian men and women born in the early 1980s, a data
set we construct to resemble that used by Chetty et al. (2014) for the United States, allows
us to document the level and variation of intergenerational mobility across about 1,000 small
areas that completely cover these two countries. This between and within country description
shows considerable variation in outcomes within both countries, and we use unsupervised
machine learning to cluster regions that are most similar across a battery of five related
measures of mobility.
     The findings support two broad descriptive conclusions that call for more detailed study.
The first conclusion is that it is too simplistic to suggest that the international border is the
most accurate way to understand the variation across these regions. Many areas in Canada
share very high levels of intergenerational mobility with many areas in the United States. At
the same time, some of the least mobile Canadian regions have more in common with the
least mobile parts of the United States than they do with other parts of Canada. The second
conclusion is that the Canada-US landscape can be best summarized as consisting of four
broad regions, three of which the countries share, and one that is almost entirely American.
     These findings in turn raise at least two issues that may help in understanding the
underlying drivers of intergenerational mobility. One important reason that there is less
intergenerational mobility in the United States has to do with the very low levels of mobility
in the American South. While some parts of northern Canada share these challenges, they
represent a much smaller fraction of the Canadian population. The US challenge may have
to do with the longstanding issue of fully integrating the black population into the economic
mainstream of cities and regions that have a long history of exclusion. As such, our findings
echo existing research suggesting there is a much lower degree of mobility among the black
population in the United States. The Canadian challenges may be just as important, but
different in nature, more likely being associated with the Indigenous populations in some
geographically more isolated areas of the country. There is no parallel in Canada for the
magnitude of the experiences in the American South, which as Alesina and Glaeser (2004)
stress is a central factor in understanding US-European differences in the nature and size of
the welfare state. We suggest these same issues may be playing out in understanding the
relatively low level of intergenerational mobility in the United States, and by implication the
greater capacity for the Canadian welfare state to reduce poverty rates and lower inequality
in the lower half of the income distribution.
     Another reason there is more intergenerational mobility in Canada concerns a region of
affluence but of low mobility that is distinct to the United States. Many regions along the
Great Lakes and Northeastern seaboard of the United States are characterized by a relatively
lower degree of mobility. They are not part of the Canadian landscape, with the great
bulk of the Canadian population living in adjacent yet relatively more mobile communities.

                                               35
These Canadian communities are on average less affluent, but also characterized by less
income inequality. This finding suggests that the search for causal explanations place less
emphasis on inequalities in family life and private and public investments in education, and
look more carefully at the structure of labor markets, the returns to human capital, and at
income support to the least advantaged, an insight offered at one level by the Great Gatsby
Curve. For example, Rothstein (2017) carefully mines the Commuting Zone data on relative
rank mobility produced by Chetty et al. (2014) to show that parental influences on the
educational attainment of their children may be second order in determining the degree of
intergenerational mobility. His results emphasize the relatively strong role that variations in
the returns to human capital across regions plays in determining the degree to which income
is transmitted across the generations. Our findings also lean in this direction, suggesting an
important role for labor market institutions, and the inequalities embedded in them, as a
potential factor in understanding Canada-US differences.




                                              36
Appendix

The Nature of the Canadian Intergenerational Data
The Intergenerational Income Database (IID) consists of Canadian administrative tax records
in which parent-child pairs are identified and followed over time, allowing for the study of the
intergenerational transmission of income. The initial link between children and their parents is done
when children are aged 16 to 19 and living at home with one of their parents. The algorithm used
to create the data, which is housed at Statistics Canada, is described in Corak and Heisz (1999).
The data are based upon the tax records—the T1 forms Canadians are required to submit to the
tax authorities—for the cohorts of children who were 16 to 19 years. The original version of these
data uses children who fell into this age group in 1982 and 1986, as analysed by Chen, Ostrovsky,
and Piraino (2017) and Corak (2018). One contribution of our research is to facilitate the updating
of the data to include parent and child records for more recent birth cohorts, those born between
1972 and 1985, and who are linked to their parents in 1991, 1996, or 2001. The following table
summarizes the population counts, and compares them to the Census totals.

               Cohort     Birth years       IID count    IID weighted    Census     Ratio
               1982      1963   to   1966   1,183,614     1,517,127     1,723,720   0.880
               1984      1965   to   1968   1,124,849     1,517,126     1,563,105   0.971
               1986      1967   to   1970   1,155,248     1,517,127     1,520,745   0.998
               1991      1972   to   1975   1,102,855     1,484,566     1,495,750   0.993
               1996      1977   to   1980   1,166,879     1,558,393     1,570,605   0.992
               2001      1982   to   1985   1,350,222     1,634,646     1,642,535   0.995


      Statistics Canada uses a variety of mechanisms to link parent and child T1 forms. In part,
this relies on the Family Allowance, a demogrant to families with children, and in part through an
algorithm created and described by Corak and Heisz (1999) relying on the tax-filing behavior of
children while living at home. The basis of the linkage is the T1 Family File, an administrative
database of the universe of T1 records provided by the Canada Revenue Agency that Statistics
Canada has developed to identify family members, some of whom are imputed. The process involves
using the reported spousal Social Insurance Number on the T1 form—which covers both married
and common-law partners—to identify couples, as well as the names and addresses of tax-filing
children.
      The coverage rate, as measured by the number of children in the tax files divided by the
relevant population from the Census, ranges from 59 percent to 82 percent, and as the above table
shows, from 88 percent to 99.8 percent when weighted. A parent-child match requires the child to
file a tax return in at least one year while living at home. The algorithm first attempts to find a
match when the children are 16 to 19 years of age, and if it is not found then proceeds to successive
attempts in up to each of the five following years. While the universe of all tax filers is available, not
all children born in the relevant years for the cohort are part of the final data. Weights are provided
to correct for possible undercoverage, as described by Cook and Demnati (2000) and Statistics
Canada (undated). For the original cohorts, the weights take into account gender, the first two
characters of the postal code, and the parents’ total market income split into 11 income classes. For
the update, an additional step is added to deal with adult tax filers who could be linked to their

                                                    37
parents in the three years preceding the cohort year (and who end up not being linked in the IID).
     The co-variates available in the data are limited to information reported for tax purposes in
the T1 form, and include current marital status, language in which the tax filer reported his or her
information to the Canada Revenue Agency, the six-character alphanumeric postal code (in the
year the child was linked to the parent), and a unique and confidential identifier for the partner.
The T1 files also include all the income information available on the tax return: various income
sources such as earnings, self-employment net income, interest and investment income, dividends,
other employment income, rental income, and different government benefits. Detailed geographical
information based on Census geographic coding are added to the individual records by Statistics
Canada for the Census year closest to the year the parents and children are linked. For example,
the postal codes from tax years 1997 through to 2001 can be linked to files containing information
based on the 1996 Census geography, to the 2001 Census geography for the years 2002 to 2006.
     Individuals who immigrated to Canada after the age of 19 are not in scope, even if their later
tax records are part of the T1 Family File. Also, while our analysis makes reference to “children
and their parents,” no biological link can be established, and “parent” should be understood in this
sense.


Analytical Sample and Variable Definitions
Our analysis is based on an analytical file we create in order to make the data as comparable as
possible to the core data sample used by Chetty et al. (2014), defined as all children born in the
1980-1982 birth cohorts, for whom parents can be identified and whose mean parent income between
1996 and 2000 is no less than 500 US dollars. We select all children born in 1980 (coming from the
1996 cohort) and 1982 (coming from the 2001 cohort). Due to the age at which the children are
matched to their parents (16 to 19 at the first year the match is attempted), and the tax years that
are used to conduct the initial match (1996 and 2001), the Canadian data do not contain individuals
born in 1981.24 Our sample consists of 556,949 unweighted observations for analyses at the national
level, 294,462 children born in 1980 and 262,487 in 1982.

       Selection rule                                       1996 cohort     2001 cohort          Total
       Full sample                                             1,166,879       1,350,222     2,517,101
       Birth year 1980 and 1982                                  297,662         322,210       619,872
       Birth year matches longitudinal birth year                297,647         322,049       619,696
       Matched at age 19 or less (2001 cohort only)              297,647         266,904       564,551
       Postal code present                                       296,508         266,253       562,761
       Parental income over US$500                               294,462         262,487       556,949


      Parent income is defined as the five-year average of the total household income before taxes but
after transfers, using the Canada Revenue Agency definition of total income. From 1982 onward, this
includes: Canada/Quebec Pension Plan benefits, capital gains/losses calculated, dividends (taxable
  24
    We drop a handful of observations for which the longitudinal year of birth is not equal to the year of
birth from the Family File, which is taken from the T1 of the year linked, and which is the basis of our chosen
age group. We also exclude children that were linked to their parents at age 20 or more, though sensitivity
analyses (not reported here) shows that this exclusion does not change the results in a significant way.


                                                      38
grossed up), earnings from T4 slips including commissions, interest and investment income, Old Age
Security pension, other employment income, other income, pension and superannuity income, rental
income, self-employment net income (from business, commission, farming, fishing or professional),
and employment insurance benefits. We use each parent’s total income for the tax years 1996 to
2000, a potential of up to five years for each parent. If we cannot find a parent’s tax record in a
particular year, we assign a value of zero. We then take the mean of the sum of the father’s and
mother’s total income, that is, we add up all the income and divide by five.
      Note that if the child is recorded as having two parents in the year linked, but if the parents
separate or divorce at a later date we continue combining the individual incomes of the mother and
father as defined in the year linked. Also, since the children born in 1982 are from the 2001 cohort,
two “parents” can be identified in the year linked (2001 or later) but traced back in time even if
they had not yet formed a household. Suppose a 2001-cohort child’s mother and stepfather start
filing taxes using the same address in 2000, then in 2001 they would both be considered the child’s
parents. This implies that in computing the mean parental income from 1996 to 2000, the mother
and stepfather were actually not in the same household from 1996 to 1999.

Descriptive statistics for parents                              Mean     Standard deviation     Median
Family income (1996-2000 average)                               63,440          96,169           52,090
Family income (excluding less than US $500)                     64,277          96,497           52,770
Percentile rank in United States family income distribution      37th
Top parent earner income                                        48,618          87,261           39,310
Fraction single parents                                         0.185           0.388
Fraction female among single parents                            0.700           0.458
Fraction married parents                                        0.768           0.422
Fraction common-law partners                                    0.047           0.212
Father’s age at child birth                                      30.07           6.16                29
Mother’s age at child birth                                      27.49           5.58                27
Father’s age in 1996                                            45.07            6.23                44
Mother’s age in 1996                                            42.49            5.64                42
Gini coefficient, parental family income                         42.07


     The descriptive statistics in the above table show that 76.8 percent of children grew up in
households with married parents, 4.7 percent with common-law partners as parents, and the balance,
18.5 percent, with single parents. Our main parental income variable is based on a restriction of
having an average income from 1996 to 2000 of US $500 or higher, which puts aside less than
1 percent of the sample. This is the average of total income including benefits, over five years,
for one or two parents. Given the relatively more generous social safety net in Canada, ultra-low
income situations are likely to be coding errors and not representative of a low-income situation,
and excluding them is the reason for the cut-off.
     Following Chetty et al. (2014), we define child income as the mean of the child’s total income
for the tax years 2011 and 2012, including the child’s married or common-law spouse total income
figures for the same years if a spouse is reported for those years. If we cannot find a child in both
the 2011 and the 2012 T1 files, meaning his or her income information is completely missing for the
years that we are interested in, we assign a income value of zero for that year. This is done in order
to be consistent with the way Chetty et al. (2014) develop their analytical data. Just under 10


                                                 39
percent of children in the sample have an average income value of US $500 or less (including those
who were missing). We also defined a series of analytical samples based on assigning US $500 and
US $1,000 to individuals reporting less than those amounts.

                                                                                  Standard
  Descriptive statistics for children                                    Mean     deviation      Median
  Family income (2011-2012 average, coding missing as US $0)            51,819          49,294   44,950
  Percentile rank in United States family income distribution             48th
  Fraction with family income under US $500 or missing                   0.098           0.297
  Family income (2011-2012 average, excluding < US $500)                57,441          48,678   50,090
  Individual income (2011-2012 average)                                 32,547          31,453   29,220
  Individual earnings (2011-2012 average)                               27,963          28,051   24,610
  Fraction female                                                        0.490           0.500
  Fraction married in 2011                                               0.308           0.462
  Fraction married in 2012                                               0.334           0.472
  Fraction having a common-law partner in 2011                           0.160           0.367
  Fraction having a common-law partner in 2012                           0.163           0.369
  Child’s age in 2011                                                     30.0             1.0       31
  Gini coefficient, child family income                                  44.08


      Dollar figures in the original data files are expressed in Canadian current dollars, and we adjust
for inflation by converting to 2012 Canadian constant dollars using the Consumer Price Index, based
on the information reported by Statistics Canada in CANSIM Table 326-0021. We then convert to
2012 US dollars using the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development’s Purchasing
Power Parity for private consumption between the US and Canadian dollar for 2012, a value of
$1.284164 Canadian for each US dollar.25 Canadian children and their parents are assigned ranks in
the US income distribution based on this PPP-converted total income. The online data appendix to
Chetty et al. (2014) offers the national marginal income distributions by percentile as Table 2. We
use the midpoints between the mean parent and child incomes for each gentile of the respective
income distributions rounded to the nearest 100 as our percentile cutoffs.26
      All the relevant Canadian computations use the weights provided by Statistics Canada. The
weights are taken as provided for children born in 1980, but are rescaled for those born in 1982
to equal the sum of the 1980 weights in order to give each cohort the same weight. Our findings
are not sensitive to this rescaling. The geographic coding is based on the postal code in the year
linked, and the boundary definitions in the 1996 Census. Children born in 1980 and 1982 are in
different IID cohorts and different years linked, meaning that their residence in their teen years
would be closer to the 2001 Census than the 1996. Even so we use the 1996 geography for all of
the observations in our analytical sample to avoid issues associated with boundary changes. The
provincial and territorial boundaries do not change, apart from the creation of Nunavut in 1999.
The Census Division is also a stable geographic unit during the time frame of our analysis. Census
Divisions span the entire country, and reflect local and provincial administrative units, such as
counties, regional districts, regional municipalities and other types of provincially legislated areas.
There are 288 Census divisions in the 1996 and 2001 Census geographies.

  25
       Retrieved online at http://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?datasetcode=SNA_TABLE4
  26
       Retrieved online at https://opportunityinsights.org/paper/land-of-opportunity/

                                                    40
                  Population by region    Census Divisions    Commuting Zones
                  Number of regions                     288                  741
                  Average population                107,712              379,787
                  Median population                  39,367              103,842
                  Minimum                             1,375                1,193
                  Maximum                         2,592,460           16,393,360
                  Bottom percentile                   5,064                2,407
                  5th                                10,490                6,745
                  10th                               13,673               11,487
                  25th                               22,166               38,384
                  75th                               84,551              289,849
                  90th                              170,038              803,201
                  95th                              421,969            1,533,306
                  Top percentile                  1,851,746            4,642,561
                  Total population               31,021,250          281,421,900


     The above table shows the Census estimates of the population by Census Division and
Commuting Zone, the geographic unit used by Chetty et al. (2014). The average Commuting Zone
is more than three times the size of the average Census Division, the total population of the United
States being nine times that of Canada. There are roughly 2.5 times more Commuting Zones than
Census Divisions.




                                                41
References

Alesina, Alberto, and Edward L. Glaeser. 2004. Fighting Poverty in the US and Europe: A
  World of Difference. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Alesina, Alberto, Stefanie Stantcheva, and Edoardo Teso. 2018. “Intergenerational Mobility
  and Preferences for Redistribution.” American Economic Review 108 (2): 521–54.
Becker, Gary S., and Nigel Tomes. 1979. “An Equilibrium Theory of the Distribution of
  Income and Intergenerational Mobility.” Journal of Political Economy 87 (6): 1153–89.
———. 1986. “Human Capital and the Rise and Fall of Families.” Journal of Labor
 Economics 4 (3, Part 2): S1–S39.
Becker, Gary S., Scott Duke Kominers, Kevin M. Murphy, and Jörg L. Spenkuch. 2018. “A
  Theory of Intergenerational Mobility.” Journal of Political Economy 126 (S1): S7–S25.
Berger, Thor. 2018. “Places of Persistence: Slavery and the Geography of Intergenerational
  Mobility in the United States.” Demography 55 (4): 1547–65.
Bhattacharya, Debopam, and Bhashkar Mazumder. 2011. “A Nonparametric Analysis
  of Black–white Differences in Intergenerational Income Mobility in the United States.”
  Quantitative Economics 2 (3): 335–79.
Björklund, Anders, and Markus Jäntti. 2011. “Intergenerational Income Mobility and the
  Role of Family Background.” In The Oxford Handbook of Economic Inequality, edited by
  Wiemer Salverda, Brian Nolan, and Tim Smeeding. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Black, Sandra E., and Paul J. Devereux. 2011. “Recent Developments in Intergenerational
  Mobility.” In Handbook of Labor Economics, edited by David Card and Orley Ashenfelter,
  4, Part B:1487–1541. Elsevier.
Blanden, Jo. 2013. “Cross-Country Differences in Intergenerational Earnings Mobility: A
  Comparison of Approaches from Economics and Sociology.” Journal of Economic Surveys
  27 (1): 38–73.
Chen, Wen-Hao, Yuri Ostrovsky, and Patrizio Piraino. 2017. “Lifecycle Variation, Errors-in-
  Variables Bias and Nonlinearities in Intergenerational Income Transmission: New Evidence
  from Canada.” Labour Economics 44 (1): 1–12.
Chetty, Raj, and Nathaniel Hendren. 2018a. “The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenera-
  tional Mobility I: Childhood Exposure Effects.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 133 (3):
  1107–62.
———. 2018b. “The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational Mobility II: County-
 Level Estimates.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 133 (3): 1163–1228.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2016. “The Effects of Exposure
  to Better Neighborhoods on Children: New Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity



                                            42
  Experiment.” American Economic Review 106 (4): 855–902.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Maggie R. Jones, and Sonya R. Porter. 2018. “Race
  and Economic Opportunity in the United States: An Intergenerational Perspective.”
  www.equality-of-opportunity.org/assets/documents/race_paper.pdf.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez. 2014. “Where Is the
  Land of Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States.”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (4): 1553–1623.
Cook, K., and A. Demnati. 2000. “Weighting the Intergenerational Income Data File.”
  Unpublished, 10 pages. Statistics Canada, Social Surveys Methods Division.
Corak, Miles. 2001. “Death and Divorce: The Long-Term Consequences of Parental Loss on
  Adolescents.” Journal of Labor Economics 19 (3): 682–715.
———. 2006. “Do Poor Children Become Poor Adults? Lessons from a Cross Country
 Comparison of Generational Earnings Mobility.” In Research on Economic Inequality,
 edited by In John Creedy and Guyonne Kalb. Vol. 13. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
———. 2010. “Chasing the Same Dream, Climbing Different Ladders: Economic Mobility in
 the United States and Canada.” Washington DC: Pew Charitable Trusts.
———. 2013. “Income Inequality, Equality of Opportunity, and Intergenerational Mobility.”
 Journal of Economic Perspectives 27 (3): 79–102.
———. 2016. “‘Inequality Is the Root of Social Evil,’ or Maybe Not? Two Stories About In-
 equality and Public Policy.” Canadian Public Policy 42 (4): 367–414. doi:10.3138/cpp.2016-
 056.
———. 2018. “The Canadian Geography of Intergenerational Income Mobility.” Economic
 Journal forthcoming.
Corak, Miles, and Andrew Heisz. 1998. “How to Get Ahead in Life: Some Correlates of
  Intergenerational Income Mobility in Canada.” In Labour Markets, Social Institutions, and
  the Future of Canada’s Children, edited by Miles Corak. Catalogue No. 89-553. Ottawa:
  Statistics Canada.
———. 1999. “The Intergenerational Earnings and Income Mobility of Canadian Men:
 Evidence from Longitudinal Income Tax Data.” The Journal of Human Resources 34 (3):
 504–33.
Corak, Miles, and Patrizio Piraino. 2011. “The Intergenerational Transmission of Employers.”
  Journal of Labor Economics 29 (1): 37–68.
———. 2016. “The Inheritance of Employers and Nonlinearities in Intergenerational Earnings
 Mobility.” In Inequality and Growth: Patterns and Policy, edited by Kaushik Basu and
 Joseph Stiglitz. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Corak, Miles, Lori J. Curtis, and Shelley Phipps. 2011. “Economic Mobility, Family
  Background, and the Well-Being of Children in the United States and Canada.” In
  Persistence, Privilege, and Parenting: The Comparative Study of Intergenerational Mobility,

                                             43
  edited by Tim M. Smeeding, Robert Erikson, and Markus Jäntti. New York: Russell Sage
  Foundation.
Corak, Miles, Bjorn Gustafsson, and Torun Osterberg. 2004. “Intergenerational Influences on
  the Receipt of Unemployment Insurance in Canada and Sweden.” In Generational Income
  Mobility in North America and Europe, edited by Miles Corak. Cambridge: Cambridge
  University Press.
Derenoncourt, Ellora. 2018. “Did Great Migration Destinations Become Mobility Traps?”
  Unpublished. Harvard University.
Fortin, Nicole, and Sophie Lefebvre. 1998. “Intergenerational Income Mobility in Canada.”
  In Labour Markets, Social Institutions, and the Future of Canada’s Children, edited by
  Miles Corak. Catalogue No. 89-553. Ottawa: Statistics Canada.
Fortin, Nicole, and Thomas Lemieux. 2016. “Wage Inequality in Canadian Provinces.” In
  Income Inequality: The Canadian Story, edited by D.A. Green, W.C. Riddell, and F.
  St-Hiliare. Montreal: Institute for Research on Public Policy.
Grawe, Nathan D. 2004. “Reconsidering the Use of Nonlinearities in Intergenerational
  Earnings Mobility as a Test for Credit Constraints.” The Journal of Human Resources 39
  (3): 813–27.
———. 2006. “Lifecycle Bias in Estimates of Intergenerational Earnings Persistence.” Labour
 Economics 13 (5): 551–70.
Haider, Steven, and Gary Solon. 2006. “Life-Cycle Variation in the Association Between
  Current and Lifetime Earnings.” The American Economic Review 96 (4): 1308–20.
Hastie, Trevor, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman. 2009. The Elements of Statistical
  Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction. Second Edition. New York: Springer.
Heckman, James J., and Stefano Mosso. 2014. “The Economics of Human Development and
  Social Mobility.” Cambridge, Mass.: NBER Working Paper Series No. 19925.
Hertz, Tom. 2005. “Rags, Riches, and Race: The Intergenerational Economic Mobility of
  Balck and White Families in the United States.” In Unequal Chances: Family Background
  and Economic Success, edited by Samuel Bowles, Herbert Gintis, and Melissa Osborne
  Groves. New York; Princeton N.J.: Russell Sage Foundation; Princeton University Press.
Hoynes, Hilary, and Mark Stabile. 2017. “How Do the U.S and Canadian Social Safety Nets
  Compare for Women and Children?” Cambridge, Mass.: NBER Working Paper Series No.
  23380. http://www.nber.org/papers/w23380.
James, Gareth, Daniela Witten, Trevor Hastie, and Robert Tibshirani. 2013. An Introduction
  to Statistical Learning with Applications in R. Sixth Edition. New York: Springer.
Jenkins, Stephen. 1987. “Snapshots Versus Movies.” European Economic Review 31 (5):
  1149–58.
Krueger, Alan B. 2012. “The Rise and Consequences of Inequality in the United States.”
  https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/files/krueger_cap_speech_final_

                                            44
  remarks.pdf.
Loury, Glenn C. 1981. “Intergenerational Transfers and the Distribution of Earnings.”
  Econometrica 49 (4): 843–67.
Marchand, J. 2012. “Local Labor Market Impacts of Energy Boom-Bust-Boom in Western
  Canada.” Journal of Urban Economics 71 (1): 165–74.
———. 2015. “The Distributional Impacts of the Energy Boom in Western Canada.”
 Canadian Journal of Economics 48 (2): 714–35.
Mazumder, Bhashkar. 2005a. “Fortunate Sons: New Estimates of Intergenerational Mobility
  in the United States Using Social Security Earnings Data.” The Review of Economics and
  Statistics 87 (2): 235–55.
———. 2005b. “The Apple Falls Even Closer to the Tree Than We Thought: New and
 Revised Estimates of the Intergenerational Inheritance of Earnings.” In Unequal Chances:
 Family Background and Economic Success, edited by Samuel Bowles, Herbert Gintis, and
 Melissa Osborne Groves. New York; Princeton N.J.: Russell Sage Foundation; Princeton
 University Press.
———. 2018. “Intergenerational Mobility in the United States: What Have We Learned
 from the PSID.” Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 680 (1):
 213–34.
McCall, Leslie. 2017. “The Politics of Inequality, Opportunity, and Redistribution.” Presen-
  tation. Kingston Canada: Queen’s University International Institute on Social Policy.
Mitnik, Pablo, Victoria Bryant, Michael Weber, and David B. Grusky. 2015. “New Estimates
  of Intergenerational Mobility Using Administrative Data.” Unpublished. Washington DC:
  Internal Revenue Service.
Mulligan, Casey B. 1997. Parental Priorities and Economic Inequality. Chicago: University
  of Chicago Press.
Nybom, Martin, and Jan Stuhler. 2017. “Biases in Standard Measures of Intergenerational
  Income Dependence.” Journal of Human Resources 52 (3). Institute for Evaluation of
  Labor Market; Education Policy: 800–825.
Oreopoulos, Philip. 2003. “The Long-Run Consequences of Living in a Poor Neighborhood.”
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (4): 1533–75.
Oreopoulos, Philip, Marianne Page, and Ann Huff Stevens. 2008. “The Intergenerational
  Effects of Worker Displacement.” Journal of Labor Economics 26 (3): 455–83.
O’Neill, Donal, Olive Sweetman, and Dirk Van de gaer. 2007. “The Effects of Measurement
  Error and Omitted Variables When Using Transition Matrices to Measure Intergenerational
  Mobility.” The Journal of Economic Inequality 5 (2): 159–78.
Rothstein, Jesse. 2017. “Inequality of Educational Opportunity? Schools as Mediators of the
  Intergenerational Transmission of Income.” Unpublished. University of California Berkeley.


                                            45
  https://eml.berkeley.edu/~jrothst/workingpapers/rothstein_mobility_april2017.pdf.
Solon, Gary. 1992. “Intergenerational Income Mobility in the United States.” The American
  Economic Review 82 (3): 393–408.
———. 1999. “Intergenerational Mobility in the Labor Market.” In Handbook of Labor
 Economics, edited by Orley C. Ashenfelter and David Card. Vol. 3A. Amsterdam: Elsevier
 Science.
———. 2002. “Cross-Country Differences in Intergenerational Earnings Mobility.” The
 Journal of Economic Perspectives 16 (3): 59–66.
———. 2004. “A Model of Intergenerational Mobility Variation over Time and Place.”
 In Generational Income Mobility in North America and Europe, edited by Miles Corak.
 Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. 2015. “What Do We Know so Far About Multigenerational Mobility?” Cambridge,
 Mass.: NBER Working Paper Series No. 21053.
Statistics Canada. undated. “Intergenerational Income Data.” Family and Labour Studies
   Division; unpublished mimeo.
Stuhler, Jan. 2018. “A Review of Intergenerational Mobility and Its Drivers.” Technical
  Report Joint Research Centre. Publications Office of the European Union.
Zimmerman, David J. 1992. “Regression Toward Mediocrity in Economic Stature.” The
  American Economic Review 82 (3): 409–29. http://www.jstor.org/stable/2117313.




                                           46
