NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HEDGING CLIMATE CHANGE NEWS
Robert F. Engle III
Stefano Giglio
Bryan T. Kelly
Heebum Lee
Johannes Stroebel
Working Paper 25734
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25734

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2019

We thank Harrison Hong, Andrew Karolyi, Ross Valkanov, participants at the Climate Finance
Workshop at Columbia University, the Climate Finance Conference at Imperial College, the
Volatility Institute Conference at NYU Stern, as well as a number of anonymous referees for
helpful comments. Generous grant support was provided by the Norwegian Finance Initiative and
the Global Risk Institute. We thank Konhee Chang for outstanding research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25734.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Robert F. Engle III, Stefano Giglio, Bryan T. Kelly, Heebum Lee, and Johannes
Stroebel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Hedging Climate Change News
Robert F. Engle III, Stefano Giglio, Bryan T. Kelly, Heebum Lee, and Johannes Stroebel
NBER Working Paper No. 25734
April 2019
JEL No. G12
ABSTRACT
We propose and implement a procedure to dynamically hedge climate change risk. To create our
hedge target, we extract innovations from climate news series that we construct through textual
analysis of high-dimensional data on newspaper coverage of climate change. We then use a
mimicking portfolio approach based on a large panel of equity returns to build climate change
hedge portfolios. We discipline the exercise by using third-party ESG scores of firms to model
their climate risk exposures. We show that this approach yields parsimonious and industrybalanced portfolios that perform well in hedging innovations in climate news both in-sample and
out-of-sample. The resulting hedge portfolios outperform alternative hedging strategies based
primarily on industry tilts. We discuss multiple directions for future research on financial
approaches to managing climate risk.
Robert F. Engle III
Department of Finance, Stern School of Business
New York University, Salomon Center
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-160
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
rengle@stern.nyu.edu

Heebum Lee
44 West 4th Street
KMC 9-98 (Finance Department)
44 West 4th Street, KMC 9-98
New York, New 10012
United States
hlee2@stern.nyu.edu

Stefano Giglio
Yale School of Management
165 Whitney Avenue
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
stefano.giglio@yale.edu

Johannes Stroebel
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
johannes.stroebel@nyu.edu

Bryan T. Kelly
Yale School of Management
165 Whitney Ave.
New Haven, CT 06511
and NBER
bryan.kelly@yale.edu

1

Introduction

The climate is changing, but there is substantial uncertainty around the exact climate trajectory and as well as the economic consequences of climate change. As a result, investors
around the world have a huge demand for hedging themselves against the realizations
of climate risk. Due to the long-run and non-diversifiable nature of climate risk, standard
futures or insurance contracts in which one party promises to pay the other in the event of
a climate disaster are hard to implement. Indeed, no counterparty could credibly guarantee to pay claims during a climate disaster event that might materialize in many decades,
in part because a bad outcome would mandate all contracts to be paid at the same time.
Individual investors are therefore largely constrained to self-insure against climate risk.
In this paper, we propose an approach for constructing climate risk hedge portfolios
using publicly traded assets. We follow a dynamic hedging approach similar to Black
and Scholes (1973) and Merton (1973). In this approach, rather than buying a security
that directly pays off in the event of a future climate disaster, we construct portfolios
whose short-term returns hedge news about climate change over the holding period. By
hedging, period by period, the innovations in news about long-run climate change, an
investor can ultimately hedge her long-run exposure to climate risk. In the short run,
such a portfolio differs from the Markowitz mean-variance efficient portfolio, and will
thus exhibit a lower Sharpe ratio; but in the long run, the dynamic hedging approach will
compensate investors for losses that arise from the realization of climate risk.
The primary objective of this paper is to provide a rigorous methodology for constructing portfolios that use relatively easy-to-trade assets (equities) to hedge against risks that
are otherwise difficult to insure. We show that our approach, which uses tools from standard asset pricing theory, does indeed allow us to construct portfolios that can successfully hedge climate news out-of-sample. Having said that, we do not view our resulting
hedge portfolios as the definitive best hedges against climate change risk, but instead as
a starting point for further exploration. Along these lines, we will disuss many valuable
directions for future research on using financial markets to hedge climate risk.
The first challenge to implementing a dynamic hedging strategy for climate risk is to

1

construct a time series that captures news about long-run climate risk, and which can
therefore help us to construct an appropriate hedge target. We start from the observation
that when there are events that plausibly contain such information about changes in climate risk, this will likely lead to newspaper coverage of these events; indeed, newspapers
may even be the direct source that investors use to update their subjective probabilities
of climate risks. Our approach in this paper therefore is to extract a climate news series
from textual analysis of news sources. A wide range of events covered in newspapers can
carry potentially relevant information. Indeed, the list of topics that are often covered by
newspapers in relation to discussions about climate risk includes extreme weather events
(e.g., floods, hurricanes, droughts, wild fires, extreme temperatures), physical changes to
the planet (e.g., sea level changes, glacial melting, ocean temperatures), regulatory discussions, technical progress in alternative fuel delivery, and the price of fossil fuels.
We construct two complementary indices that measure the extent to which climate
change is discussed in the news media. The first is calculated as the correlation between
the text content of The Wall Street Journal (WSJ) each month and a fixed climate change
vocabulary, which we construct from a list of authoritative texts published by various
governmental and research organizations. The WSJ is among the most salient media outlets for market participants, and thus our index captures the intensity of climate change
discourse that is accessible to the investment community at very low cost.
Our WSJ Climate Change News Index associates increased climate change reporting
with news about elevated climate risk, based on the idea that climate change primarily
rises to the media’s attention when there is cause for concern. An alternative approach
is to directly differentiate between positive and negative news in our index construction.
To this end, we construct a second news-based climate index that is designed to focus
specifically on bad news about climate change. This index applies sentiment analysis to
climate-related articles to measure the intensity of negative climate news in a given month.
In this paper, we do not try to distinguish between different types of climate-change
news. In particular, we do not distinguish between news about physical damages from
climate change and news about regulatory risks that are related to climate change. These
two risk measures might move independent from each other. For example, the Paris
2

accord, which led to a pledge to reduce carbon emissions, might have represented an increase in regulatory risk and a decrease in physical risk. Separately measurng news series
about physical and regulatory climate risk represents an interesting avenue for future research. Also, our focus in this paper is on global climate change news – our indices do
not capture news about local climate events that would not be covered in the WSJ or in a
large cross-section of newspapers.
The second step in implementing our dynamic hedging strategy is to construct portfolios that allow us to hedge innovations in these two news series. In particular, we seek
to systematically explore which stocks rise in value and which stocks fall in value when
(negative) news about climate change materializes. Then, by constructing portfolios that
overweight stocks that perform well on the arrival of such negative news, an investor
will have a portfolio that is well-positioned to profit the next time when such news about
climate change materializes. Continued updating of this portfolio based on new information about the relationship between climate news and stock returns will ultimately lead
to a portfolio which is long the winners from climate change and short the losers.
Our econometric approach to forming such hedge portfolios follows standard methods in the asset pricing literature. If climate risk represents a risk factor for asset markets
(i.e, if it is a factor that drives the comovement of different assets), it is possible to construct a well-diversified portfolio the return of which isolates the exposure to that risk factor. Investors can then hedge their climate risk exposure by trading this portfolio without
changing their exposures to the other risk factors in their portfolios. Various approaches
to construct such hedge portfolios have been proposed in the literature. The two main
ones are cross-sectional regressions like Fama-MacBeth (in which the hedging portfolio
is obtained through period-by-period cross-sectional regressions of asset returns onto exposures to the risk factors), and direct projections of the risk factors onto a set of asset
returns (the so-called mimicking portfolio approach).1 Among the many prominent papers in this literature are Fama and MacBeth (1973), Chen et al. (1986), Huberman et al.
(1987), Breeden et al. (1989), Lamont (2001), Balduzzi and Robotti (2008), Lönn and Schot1

The literature on cross-sectional regressions like Fama-MacBeth typically focuses on estimating the risk
premia of the factor, but these are simply the average excess returns of the corresponding hedge portfolios.

3

man (2017), and Roll and Srivastava (2018). Giglio and Xiu (2018) study the asymptotic
properties of the different estimators in large cross-sections, and investigate their robustness to model specification errors. In this paper, we will apply the mimicking portfolio
approach, as advocated by Lamont (2001).
The challenge with implementing these approaches is that we only observe a limited
number of months of climate news realizations, but have a large set of assets that we
could use to form hedge portfolios. This leads to concerns about data mining, where we
might end up constructing hedge portfolios that perform very well in-sample but that
are not stable going forward. To address this concern, we use characteristics that proxy
for a firm’s exposure to climate risk to parsimoniously parameterize the weights of the
hedge portfolios. For example, one such characteristic might be the carbon footprint of
each firm. In particular, it might be that when there is news about increasing climate risk,
individuals will buy low carbon footprint stocks and sell high carbon footprint stocks. If
this were the case, one could construct a portfolio that increases in value when there is
(negative) news about climate risk using thousands of long and short positions based on
just one parameter, the firms’ carbon footprints.
We implement this characteristics-based approach by using firm-level environmental
performance scores constructed by the ESG (“Environmental, Social, and Governance")
data providers MSCI and Sustainalytics to proxy for firms’ climate risk exposure.2 In
particular, we use these scores as characteristics on which to sort individual stocks to
form portfolios. We then construct the final hedge portfolios by projecting innovations
in our climate news indices onto these ESG-characteristic-sorted portfolios, together with
standard Fama-French factor-sorted portfolios (market, size, and value).
When we compare our hedge portfolios to alternative hedge portfolios that add simple industry bets (such as positions in the energy ETF XLE) to the standard Fama-French
factors, we find that our ESG-characteristic-based mimicking portfolios procedure pro2

Again, there is a question of what type of climate change risk exposure these measures are capturing.
Specifically, they may more closely capture regulatory risks than physical risks, and other characteristics
could be added to the analysis to capture different types of climate change exposures. For example, one
could perhaps proxy for firms’ physical climate risk by the distance of their headquarters or production
facilities from the sea. Exploring different firm-level measures of climate risk exposure (both physical and
regulatory) constitutes an interesting avenue for future research.

4

duces hedge portfolios that perform better than the alternatives in hedging innovations
in climate risk. In particular, our portfolios deliver higher in-sample and out-of-sample
correlation with those innovations. For example, the return of the hedge portfolio based
on the Sustainalytics E-Scores achieves out-of-sample correlations with the WSJ index innovations as high as 30%. Our hedge portfolios also do not resemble industry bets; rather,
they identify, both within and across industries, those firms with largest exposures to climate change risk, yielding a climate hedge portfolio that is relatively industry-balanced.
Our work contributes to a burgeoning literature that studies how climate change affects asset markets, and how asset markets in turn may affect the dynamics of climate
change. Andersson et al. (2016) propose a passive investment strategy tilted to lowcarbon stock as a hedge against climate risk, while Choi et al. (2018) explore how investors
update their information about climate risk. Hong et al. (2018) investigate whether international stock markets efficiently price drought risk, and Kumar et al. (2018) explore
whether fund managers misestimate the risk of climate disasters. Baldauf et al. (2018),
Bakkensen and Barrage (2018), Bernstein et al. (2018), Giglio et al. (2018), and Murfin and
Spiegel (2018) explore the pricing of climate risk in real estate markets, while Giglio et al.
(2015, 2018) use real estate pricing data to back out very long-run discount rates that are
appropriate for valuing projects aimed at mitigating climate change. Daniel et al. (2015)
apply standard asset pricing theory to calibrate the social cost of carbon.
Section 2 outlines the statistical methodology underlying our climate hedge portfolios.
Section 3 reports our empirical analysis. The final section concludes, and discusses a
number of exciting directions for future research on hedging climate risks.

2

Construction of the Hedge Portfolios: Theory

This section discusses our methodology to construct portfolios that hedge news about
climate change. We denote by rt an n × 1 vector of excess returns over the risk-free rate
of n assets at time t. We assume that these returns follow a linear factor model, in which
asset returns are driven by innovations in climate news, which we denote by CCt , as well

5

as by p other (tradable or non-tradable) risk factors vt :
rt = (βCC γCC + βCC (CCt − E[CCt ])) + ( β γ + β vt ) + ut
|{z}
|{z}
|{z} |{z} |{z} |
|{z} |{z} |{z} |{z}
{z
}
n×1

n×1

1×1

n×1

n×p

1×1

p×1

n×p

p×1

(1)

n×1

The vectors βCC and β are risk exposures of the n assets to the climate news factor and
the other p factors, respectively. Similarly, γCC and γ are the corresponding risk premia
for the climate news factor and the other risk factors. Finally, ut is an idiosyncratic error
term. In this basic setup, the risk exposures are constant; we relax this assumption below.
Our objective is to construct a hedge portfolio for CCt . This is defined as a portfolio
that has unit exposure (beta) to climate risk shocks CCt , but no exposure to any of the
other p factors vt . This ensures that investors can change their exposure to climate risk
by trading in this portfolio, without modifying their exposure to the other risk factors.
The asset pricing literature has followed two main approaches to construct hedge portfolios: the Fama-MacBeth cross-sectional regression approach and the mimicking portfolio
approach. Giglio and Xiu (2018) derive theoretical properties of the two estimators in
large-dimensional settings.
In this paper, we follow the mimicking portfolio approach; for completenes, we provide a review of the Fama-MacBeth procedure in our setting in Appendix A.1. In the
mimicking portfolio approach, the climate risk factor CCt is directly projected onto a set
of excess returns of a set of portfolios, r̃t :
CCt = ξ + w0 r̃t + et .

(2)

The hedge portfolio for CCt is constructed using the weights ŵ estimated from this regression; its excess return is hCC
= ŵ0 r̃t . The vector et captures the measurement error
t
in CCt , so that this approach explicitly accounts for potential measurement error in the
climate risk factor CCt . A sufficient condition for this procedure to recover the desired
hedge portfolio for climate news is that the returns of the portfolios used in the projection,
r̃, span the same space as the true factors, (CCt , vt ).3
3

Formally, write the model in compact form by calling f the vector of all factors: ft ≡ (CCt , vt ) with
covariance matrix Σf , and βf the matrix of betas: βf = (β̂CC , β̂). Call η the (p + 1) × 1 vector with 1

6

2.1

Implementation and construction of the hedge portfolios

To build hedge portfolios using the mimicking portfolio approach, we choose a set of
projection portfolios which are well diversified, so that idiosyncratic error is approximately eliminated, and which at the same time capture different dimensions of risk, so
that their returns r̃t span the factor space. The portfolios used in the projection need to
satisfy one further requirement. In particular, the setup described in equation 1 includes
the assumption that the risk exposures of the assets used in the estimation are constant
over time. We therefore need to construct the portfolios r̃ in such a way that their exposures to the underlying risk factors are constant. A standard approach to achieve this is
to form portfolios by sorting assets on characteristics. Indeed, to the extent that risk exposures of individual assets depend directly on these characteristics, sorting the assets by
characteristics will ensure that the resulting portfolios have constant risk exposures. We
follow this approach and choose a matrix of firm-level characteristics Zt , appropriately
cross-sectionally normalized, to construct the portfolio returns as:
0
r̃t = Zt−1
rt

where rt are excess returns of individual stocks, and portfolio weights are equal to the
normalized characteristics.4 Substituting this expression into equation 2, we write:
0
CCt = ξ + w0 Zt−1
rt + et

(3)

Equation 3 can be interpreted in two ways. It can either be thought of as a projection
0
of the hedge target CCt onto characteristic-sorted portfolios Zt−1
rt that are assumed to

have constant risk exposure and that span the entire factor space. Alternatively, it can be
thought of as a constrained projection of CCt on all individual asset returns rt , but with
as the first element and 0 everywhere else, so that CCt = η 0 ft . The population vector of weights w is
V ar(r̃t )−1 Cov(r̃t , CCt ). If returns r̃t span the same space as the true factors, it means there exists an invert0
ible matrix H such that r̃t = Hft . We can then write: w = (HΣf H 0 )−1 HΣf η = H −1 η. The return of this
CC
0
0
0 −1
0
portfolio is: ht = w r̃t = w Hft = η H Hft = η ft = CCt .
4
Note that we are working exclusively with excess returns, so there are no theoretical constraints on
portfolio weights.

7

0
time-varying weights w0 Zt−1
; the weights are modeled as a linear function of character-

istics, so that any individual firm’s weight depends on its risk exposure to the different
factors. Equation 3 therefore performs a one-step dimension reduction that estimates the
hedge portfolio while modeling the time variation in risk exposures.

3

Hedging Climate Change News

In this section, we implement the mimicking portfolio approach to hedging climate risk.
As we have highlighted in the introduction, the relevant performance measure for the
resulting hedge portfolios is how well they hedge innovations to climate news out-ofsample. However, given the relatively short time period for which we observe measures
of both climate news and firm-level climate risk exposures, there are a limited number
of out-of-sample test periods on which to evaluate the climate hedge portfolios.5 As will
become apparent below, there are many degrees of freedom in how to construct these
hedge portfolios, including decisions on how to construct measures of firm-level climate
risk exposures, and what other portfolios to include in regression 2. As a result, there
is the danger of optimizing over these degrees of freedom to construct portfolios that
provide optimal out-of-sample hedges to climate news over the short period we observe,
but that may not be effective at hedging this news going forward.
To avoid such data mining concerns, we will clearly describe the various choices we
encountered in the construction of the climate hedge portfolios. However, instead of
optimizing over these degrees of freedom to find a portfolio that optimally hedges climate
news over our short test sample, we make choices that appear reasonable to us, and that
will hopefully lead to stable approaches to hedging climate news that is yet to occur. This
discussion will highlight a number of important directions in which to further develop
these climate hedge portfolios, and longer time series of measures of climate news and
5

In addition, even if we could easily extend our time series further into the past, it is unclear whether the
additional sample periods would help us with constructing climate hedge portfolios today. In particular,
it is plausible that climate risk has only started to be priced in stocks in recent years as investors’ attention
to this risk has increased. Indeed, some indirect evidence for such a suggestion comes from the fact that
demand for ESG measures has increased substantially over the past few years. As a result, it is unclear
whether firms with different climate risk exposures have had different excess returns in response to climate
news that materialized in, say, the 1990s.

8

climate risk exposures will allow for more systematic ways of testing the true out-ofsample performance of different climate hedge portfolios.

3.1

Measuring Climate Change News

The first step in our analysis is to construct an index that measures innovations in news
about climate risk. There are a variety of choices to be made in constructing this hedge
target. How should we identify the news sources that reflect the information investors
use in their climate risk-based investment decisions? Once we identify the appropriate
news, how do we measure its relative intensity over time? How do we quantify the extent
of good news versus bad news? And should one differentiate among sub-types of climate
news (such as news about physical climate risks versus news about regulatory risks)?
Below, we follow two alternative approaches to building a climate news index. We
believe they have the virtues of breadth and simplicity, and offer scope for comparing
tradeoffs in some of our construction choices. At the same time, our indices have obvious
imperfections and leave much room for other researchers to propose adjustments. Indeed,
different investors might want to make different choices to ours in order to optimally
align their hedge targets with the overall climate exposure of the rest of their portfolios.
For example, investors with a strong coastal real estate portfolio might want to focus
more on news about physical climate risk (since such real estate is strongly exposed to
rising sea levels), while investors with a strong exposure to the coal industry might want
to focus more on news about regulatory interventions in response to climate risk.6
3.1.1

Wall Street Journal Climate Change News Index

The first index that we construct is based on climate news coverage in The Wall Street
Journal (WSJ). Two considerations support our use of the WSJ. One is a desire to measure
news that is relevant to and salient for investors concerned about climate risks, and the
WSJ is among the most important media sources consumed by financial market partici6

In addition, some researchers and investors may want to expand the list of publications they consider beyond our newspaper-based approach. Additional publications of interest could include coverage
in scientific journals or social media posts.

9

pants. The second advantage is that we have access to the full text of WSJ articles since
the early 1980s, which offers complete flexibility in choosing how to build the climate
news index from raw news content.
To quantify the intensity of climate news coverage in the WSJ, we compare the news
content to a corpus of authoritative texts on the subject of climate change. In particular,
we collect 19 climate change white papers from sources such as the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and the
U.S. Global Change Research Program. We complement these white papers with 55 climate change glossaries from sources such as the United Nations, NASA, the IPCC, the
EPA, and others. The full list of these authoritative texts is presented in Appendix A.2.
We aggregate the 74 text documents into a “Climate Change Vocabulary (CCV),” which
amounts to the list of unique terms (stemmed unigrams and bigrams) and the associated
frequency with which each term appears in the aggregated corpus. Figure 1 provides an
illustration of the CCV in the form of a word cloud, with term sizes proportional to their
frequency.
We form an analogous list of term counts for the WSJ. Each (daily) edition of WSJ is
treated as a “document,” and term counts are tallied separately for each document. Next,
we convert WSJ term counts into “term frequency–inverse document frequency,” or tfidf, scores. Common terms that appear in most documents earn low scores because they
are less informative about any individual document’s content (they have low idf ), as do
terms that are rare in a given article (they have low tf ). The tf-idf transformation defines
the most representative terms in a given document to be those that appear infrequently
overall, but frequently in that specific document (see Gentzkow et al., 2018).
The main choice going into our index construction is to treat the CCV as our definition
of phraseology associated with climate change discourse. That is, our CCV takes a stand
on the specific terms, and their relative usage intensity, to identify news about the topic of
climate change. Like with the WSJ, we convert Climate Change Vocabulary term counts
into tf-idf. We treat the aggregated CCV as a single document when calculating term
frequencies, and apply the inverse document frequency calculation from the WSJ corpus.7
7

The choice to use the same idf for WSJ and CCV counts ensures that the document-frequency weights

10

Figure 1: Climate Change Vocabulary

Note: Word cloud summary of climate change vocabulary from a corpus of 74 authoritative climate
change texts. Term sizes are proportional to their frequency in the corpus.

Finally, we construct our daily climate change index as the “cosine similarity” between
the tf-idf scores for the CCV and each daily WSJ edition. Days in which the WSJ uses the
same terms in the same proportion as the CCV earn an index value of one, while days
in which WSJ use no words from the CCV earn an index value of zero. Approximately
speaking, our raw WSJ Climate Change News Index describes the fraction of the WSJ dedicated to the topic of climate change each day, as defined by the texts that underlie the
CCV. We scale this index by a factor of 10,000 to allow interpretation of the magnitudes
of innovations in the index, which will represent our eventual hedge targets.
Figure 2 shows a time series of the WSJ Climate Change News Index since 1984. It shows
that the intensity of climate news coverage has steadily increased since about the year
2000. In addition, the climate risk index spikes during salient climate events such as the
of CCV terms match the weights of WSJ terms. If we were to instead calculate idf based on the corpus of
authoritative climate texts, we would end up down-weighting the most informative climate change terms
and unduly distort the measurement of climate change discourse in the WSJ.

11

Figure 2: WSJ Climate Change News Index
225

2009 Copenhagen
UN Climate Change
Conference

Trump
Withdraws from
Paris Agreement

200
175
G8 Climate Agreement

150
WSJ

Adoption of
UNFCCC

125

2012 Doha
UN Climate Change
Conference

Bush withdraws from
Kyoto Protocol

100
75

4th IPCC Report

Kyoto Protocol
Adopted

IPCC Formed

3rd National Climate
Assessment &
EPA Climage Change
Initiative
Paris
Agreement

Kyoto Protocol
Effective

UNFCCC meets
Treaty
Requirement

NOAA produces
educational film about
global warming
"The Climate Factor"

50
25

1985

1989

1993

1997

2001
DATE

2005

2009

2013

2017

Note: Figure shows the WSJ Climate Change News Index climate change news index from 1984–2017, annotated with climate-relevant news announcements.

adoption of global climate treaties (e.g., the UNFCCC or the Kyoto protocol), or important
global conferences to battle climate change (e.g., the 2009 UN Climate Change Conference
in Copenhagen).
3.1.2

Crimson Hexagon’s Negative Sentiment Climate Change News Index

Implicit in our construction of the WSJ Climate Change News Index is the assumption that
there is more climate change discussion when climate risk is elevated. In other words, the
WSJ index embeds the view that, when it comes to climate change, no news is good news.
While we view this as a plausible assumption, there is a risk of inaccurately capturing
discussions of positive climate news (e.g., news about new mitigation technologies) as
increases in climate risk. A separate potential shortcoming of the WSJ index is that, being
based on a single source, it may be too narrow in its quantification of climate discourse
among investors.

12

To address these possible concerns, we study a second news-based climate risk index
that is designed to focus specifically on negative climate news, and that is drawn from
a much more expansive collection of news articles. For this purpose, we use the services of the data analytics vendor Crimson Hexagon (CH). Starting in May 2008, Crimson
Hexagon has collected a massive corpus of over one trillion news articles and social media posts. The underlying news sources cover over 1,000 outlets, including the WSJ, The
New York Times, The Washington Post, Reuters, BBC, CNN, and Yahoo News. Coverage
in terms of total articles available expands over time. Cross-sectionally, the distribution
of article counts is fairly evenly distributed across news outlets, with the top 100 outlets
accounting for approximately 14% of the total article count. For a given user-provided
search term, CH applies a variety of proprietary natural language processing analytics,
such as sentiment analysis and topic modeling, to construct time series of the sentiment
of coverage of that term across the sources it collects.
We provide CH with the search phrase “climate change,” and restrict our analysis to
discussions in the news media (excluding social media). Based on these choices for terms
and content sources, CH provided us with an array of indices that summarize the total
number of articles that include climate change news, as well as the fraction of those summarized to contain positive and negative climate change news. It also provided indices
for further sentiment sub-categories (e.g., fear, joy, anger, etc.), as well as a topic decomposition of climate-related articles. Thus, there are many potential degrees of freedom in
using Crimson Hexagon data to construct a climate news series. For example, we could
tune our choice of search terms, or optimize across each of the finer indices that CH supplies for any given set of search terms. As described above, given the brevity of our data
sample, we need to guard against data mining, and we do so in this case by restricting
ourselves to the most obvious search term (“climate change”) and focusing on the most
obvious category that resolves our desire for “signed” news, namely those that CH categorizes as basic “negative sentiment.” We calculate our CH Negative Climate Change News
Index as the share of all news articles that are both about “climate change” and that have
been assigned to the “negative sentiment” category; we multiply this measure by 10,000
in order to interpret the magnitudes of innovations in the index.
13

Figure 3: CH Negative Climate Change News Index

250
2009 Copenhagen
UN Climate Change
Conference

200

80

"Climategate"
Reporting
on WSJ

70

3rd National Climate
Assessment &
EPA Climage Change
Initiative

175
150

60

WSJ

Paris
Agreement
2012 Doha
UN Climate Change
Conference

125

50

2016 Marrakech
UN Climage Change
Conference
Trump
Withdraws from
Paris Agreement

100
75

40
30
20

50
2008

90

CH

225

WSJ Climate Change News Index
CH Negative Climate Change News Index

10
2009

2010

2011

2012

2013 2014
DATE

2015

2016

2017

2018

Note: Figures shows the CH Negative Climate Change News Index from 2008–2017, overlaid against the WSJ
Climate Change News Index, and annotated with climate-relevant news announcements.

Figure 3 plots the time series of the CH Negative Climate Change News Index, in addition
to that of the WSJ Climate Change News Index for comparison. Both indices regularly spike
around salient climate events, such as climate conferences. The initial level of the CH
index is somewhat higher than that of the WSJ index, though this is during a period
for which Crimson Hexagon has relatively little data; this is also a period that will not
be included in our final analysis (as we discuss below, our empirical analysis starts in
September 2009, the first month for which we observe complete coverage of firm-level
climate risk exposures). Interestingly, there are a number of instances when the WSJ index
spikes, but the CH index does not. One of these was in early 2010, a period during which
the WSJ reported extensively on the "Climategate" controversy.8
8

The Climategate controversy involved the publication of emails obtained through hacking a server at
the Climatic Research Unit at the University of East Anglia. Several climate change "skeptics" alleged that
these emails documented global warming to be a scientific conspiracy, with scientists manipulating data.

14

3.1.3

Constructing Hedge Targets

To measure innovations in climate news, we average the daily values for the WSJ Climate
Change News Index and CH Negative Climate Change News Index to the monthly level, and
then construct values of CCt as residuals from an AR(1) model. This gives us our two
monthly hedge targets: CCtW SJ , which captures innovations in the WSJ Climate Change
News Index, and CCtN egN ews , which captures innovations in the CH Negative Climate Change
News Index. Figure 4 shows the correlation across these measures across the 88 months
that will be included in our final analysis, September 2009 to December 2016. The correlation coefficient is 0.3, which suggests that, while both measures capture common elements
of climate risk, they are by no means identical. As we have discussed above, which of the
two series (or any one of the potential alternative series that we could have constructed)
represents the ideal hedge target depends on the precise application; as a result, we view
the construction of alternative hedge targets as an exciting area for further research.

20
-40

-20

0

CC

WSJ

40

60

Figure 4: Correlation Across CCt Measures

-20

-10

0
CC

10

20

NegNews

Note: Figure shows a scatter plot that highlights the correlation across our two climate hedge targets,
CC W SJ and CC N egN es . Each observation corresponds to one month between September 2009 to December 2016. The correlation coefficient is 0.30.

15

3.2

Potential Assets in Hedge Portfolio

After defining the hedge targets, the second step in implementing the mimicking portfolio hedge approach described in Section 2 is to determine the universe of assets used
to build the hedge portfolio. In this project, we focus on constructing hedge portfolios
using U.S. equities as the underlying assets. We obtain monthly individual U.S. stock
return data from CRSP. We include only common equity securities (share codes 10 and
11) for firms traded on the NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ. Following Amihud (2002) and
many others, we exclude penny stocks, defined as stocks with a price below $5 at the
time of portfolio formation. This is to avoid including stocks whose returns are dominated by market microstructure issues. We also drop microcap stocks, defined as stocks
with market capitalization in the bottom 20% of the sample traded in NYSE, following
the observation in Fama and French (2008) that the returns of hedge portfolios obtained
from long-short positions can be distorted by the inclusion of such microcaps (see also
the discussion in Hou et al., 2015).

3.3

Measuring Climate Risk Exposures

Having identified the set of possible assets to include in the hedge portfolio, the next empirical challenge is to systematically measure different firms’ exposures to climate risk,
i.e., to identify the characteristics in Zt that drive such exposures. Our approach in this
paper is to build on measures of firms’ environmental exposures produced by third-party
ESG data providers. Indeed, there has been a growing interest in ESG investing among
investors who are increasingly demanding assets that fulfill certain environmental ("E"),
social ("S"), and governance ("G") criteria.9 Given this trend, measuring the ESG characteristics of firms has become an important task for investors, and firm-level ESG scores
are available from numerous providers that collect raw data gathered from sources such
as firms’ disclosures, SEC filings, and reports by governments or NGOs. These raw data
9

According to The U.S. SIF Foundation, the dollar value of ESG assets owned by institutional investors
grew to $4.73 trillion in 2016, an increase of 11% a year since 2005.

16

are then translated into numerical ESG scores using proprietary algorithms.10
Our study uses information on firm-level ESG scores from two leading data providers,
MSCI and Sustainalytics.11 Both data providers construct various sub-scores that evaluate
firms on different aspects of their ESG performance. From these sub-scores, we choose the
broadest scores that plausibly proxy for firms’ exposure to climate risk.
MSCI.

We obtained from MSCI a data set of annual firm-level ESG scores between 1995

and 2016.12 MSCI evaluates firms along several sub-categories that capture either positive or negative environmental performance; the full list of sub-categories is presented in
Appendix A.3. Each sub-category is either scored as a "1" when the firm satisfies a certain condition, or a "0" if the firm does not satisfy the condition. For instance, a "1" in the
positive "Climate Change - Energy Efficiency" sub-category means that the company operates in a relatively energy-efficient way. The thresholds for satisfying each condition are
determined by MSCI, and are not disclosed with the data. Following Hong and Kostovetsky (2012), we calculate an overall environmental score for each firm by subtracting the
total scores in the negative environmental sub-categories from the total scores in positive
environmental sub-categories. We call the resulting variable the "MSCI E-Score," where a
higher score suggests a firm is more environmentally friendly. In principle, it would be
possible to also construct E-Scores from only a selection of all "E" sub-categories, perhaps
by focusing on those sub-categories that are particularly relevant for climate-change. The
out-of-sample performance of hedge portfolios constructed using different combinations
of "E" sub-categories could then be compared to select the one with the best performance.
However, given the relatively short time series to evaluate the performance of the resulting hedge portfolios, even such an "out-of-sample" approach of finding the "best" EScores is naturally subject to data mining concerns. We hence decided to restrict ourselves
10

As noted in the introduction, ESG scores may capture specific notions of climate change exposure; for
example, they may better capture exposure to regulatory risks than exposure to physical damages from
climate risks. The methodology in this paper could easily be applied using other firm characteristics that
may capture different types of climate risk exposures.
11
There is a growing number of providers of ESG data, including firms such as Arabesque and TruValue
Labs. An analysis of which of these E-Scores results in the optimal hedge portfolio is an interesting avenue
for further research, but in the absence of longer time-series is likely subject to concerns of data mining.
12
These scores were formerly known as KLD scores. In 2010, following MSCI’s acquisition of RiskMetrics, KLD scores were re-tooled into what are now known as MSCI KLD scores.

17

to only analyzing the relatively broad overall E-Score, following prior approaches in the
literature; we leave a more detailed exploration of the various sub-categories to future
research.
Sustainalytics.

Sustainalytics provided us with monthly firm-level ESG scores begin-

ning in September 2009. The broadest score in the data is the "Total ESG Score," which
is the average of the "Total Environment Score," the "Total Social Score," and the "Total
Governance Score." To determine each of the "E," "S," and "G" scores, Sustainalytics uses a
number of sub-categories and evaluates each firm’s score by comparing it to peers in the
same industry (Sustainalytics uses a non-standard industry classification). For instance,
the 57 sub-categories for the "Total Environment Score" include evaluations of a firm’s
efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, increase renewable energy use, and reduce
water use; the full list of sub-categories is presented in Appendix A.3. The scores in the
sub-categories are then aggregated by weighting them according to how exposed each
industry is to each ESG risk, though this aggregation procedure is not well documented.
Final scores are between 0 and 100. As before, a higher score suggests a firm is more environmentally friendly. We use the "Total Environment Score” in our empirical analysis.
Summary Statistics. Our analysis of climate hedge portfolios focuses on the period between September 2009 and December 2016. This is a period for which we observe both
measures of innovations of climate news, CCtW SJ and CCtN egN ews , and both the Sustainalytics and MSCI E-Scores. We can therefore conduct a direct comparison of the performance of the various hedge portfolios for the two climate news series over this time
horizon. For the MSCI E-Score, which is only reported annually, we assign the same score
to all the months in the relevant year. Panels (a) and (b) of Figure 5 plot the number of
firms in our pool of potential hedge assets for which we observe each E-Score over time.
For Sustainalytics, we usually observe E-Scores for between 700 and 800 firms. MSCI
E-Scores have broader coverage, and are provided for between 1,700 and 1,900 firms.
Panels (c) and (d) of Figure 5 show average values for each of the two E-Scores for
a constant set of firms that we observe throughout the sample. There are a number of

18

740

1600

Number Unique MSCI E-Score
1700
1800
1900

Number Unique Sustainalytics E-Score
760
780
800
820

840

2000

Figure 5: E-Scores – Summary Statistics Over Time

2010m7

2012m1

2013m7

2015m1

2016m7

2010m7

2013m7

2015m1

2016m7

(b) MSCI – Number of Firms Over Time

.2

46

Mean MSCI E-Score
.3
.4

.5

Mean Sustainalytics E-Score
48
50
52

.6

54

(a) Sustainalytics – Number of Firms Over Time

2012m1

2010m7

2012m1

2013m7

2015m1

2016m7

2010m7

Number of Firms: 564

2012m1

2013m7

2015m1

2016m7

Number of Firms: 915

(c) Sustainalytics – Mean Over Time

(d) MSCI – Mean Over Time

Note: Figure provides summary statistics for our two E-Scores. The top row shows the number of firms
in our sample for which we observe E-Scores. The bottom row shows the average E-Score over time
across those firms that we observe in every period in our sample. The left column shows these statistics
for the Sustainalytics E-Score, the right panel shows the statistics for the MSCI E-Score.

19

discontinuous breaks in the averages of each score. For the MSCI E-Score, which is determined annually, these breaks could either be due to changes in firms’ true ESG performance between years, or due to changes in the modeling procedure. For Sustainalytics, which computes monthly scores, the discontinuous breaks are more likely due to
changes in the modeling methodology over time, though we have been unable to obtain
documentation on such changes that would allow us to verify this conjecture.13 Such
modeling changes would be problematic for building time-series models that perform
well out-of-sample.
To minimize the complications from any modeling changes, we construct Zt by crosssectionally demeaning each E-Score in each month. However, this approach might still be
problematic if changes to the model do not just shift the mean of the E-Scores over time,
but also the cross-sectional dispersion. In that case, the meaning of absolute differences in
the demeaned E-Score would change over time. As a second way to construct measures of
Zt , we therefore rank the E-Scores of all firms at each point in time, and then demean and
re-scale the ranked measure such that it ranges from -0.5 to +0.5. This approach preserves
the ordinal content of the E-Scores but discards any information contained by the absolute differences between scores. There are a number of issues with such ranking-based
approaches as well. In particular, as highlighted by Panels (a) and (b) of Figure 5, the
number of firms for which E-Scores are available changes throughout the sample period.
It is plausible that the firms that are added later in the sample are systematically different
from those that are added earlier; for example, they might be less exposed to climate risk.
The cross-sectional ranking of the same firm might therefore change over time without the
true climate exposure of that firm changing. Since neither the demeaned absolute value
nor the demeaned and re-scaled ranked value of E-Scores are ex-ante superior methods to
construct climate exposures in Zt , we will present hedge portfolios using both approaches
to constructing exposure measures, and compare their relative performance.14
13

Most uses of ESG scores by the financial services sector build on the cross-section of ESG scores at a
given point in time, for example by forming portfolios that have a relatively higher performance on these
measures. Such use cases often do not require a stable meaning of the same numerical score over time.
14
There are other potential ways to construct climate exposure measures in Zt from the various raw
E-Scores. For example, one could cross-sectionally standardize each absolute measure to have a constant
standard deviation over time. Alternatively, one could rank firms’ E-Scores within industry rather than

20

An interesting question is what firm characteristics are captured by the two E-Scores.
A first hypothesis is that they primarily pick up industry-membership, whereby firms in
"clean" industries such as wind and solar energy are assigned high E-Scores, and firms
in "dirty" industries such as coal mining are assigned low E-Scores. To explore the extent
to which the scores are primarily capturing a firm’s industry, we begin by taking the
firm-level E-scores in December 2016 (the last period in our data) and regressing them
onto industry fixed effects. When regressing the absolute value of the Sustainalytics EScore on 2-digit SIC code fixed effects, the adjusted R-Squared of the regression is 0.103;
it is 0.184 when regressing on fixed effects for 4-digit SIC codes. The measures of RSquared were similar when using the ranked measure of the Sustainalytics E-Score. When
regressing the absolute value of the MSCI E-Score on 2-digit SIC codes (4-digit SIC codes),
the adjusted R-Squared of the regression is 0.099 (0.203). These numbers show that, while
there is some industry effect in determining E-Scores, most of the variation occurs within
relatively narrow industries rather than across these industries.
Indeed, the three 2-digit SIC industries with the lowest Sustainalytics E-Scores are
Personal Services (SIC code 72), Water Transportation (SIC code 44), and Motion Pictures
(SIC code 78), probably not the first industries that come to mind when thinking of "dirty"
industries. Similarly, the 2-digit SIC industries with the highest Sustainalytics E-Scores
are Building Materials & Gardening Supplies (SIC code 52), Textile Mill Products (SIC
code 22), and Furniture & Homefurnishings Stores (SIC code 57). When ranking by MSCI
E-Scores, we similarly find that low-scoring firms are not necessarily those one would
expect ex ante, such as those operating in the Oil and Gas sector.
A second question is the extent to which the MSCI and Sustainalytics E-Scores capture
the same object. Figure 6 shows the correlation across the raw Sustainalytics and MSCI EScores in December 2016. They have a positive correlation of about 0.65, suggesting that
they are both measuring aspects of the same object. However, there is enough independent variation across the two measures to suggest that their usefulness in constructing
climate hedge portfolios might vary. Indeed, we show below that the performance of the
across all firms. However, in the absence of longer time series, a systematic analysis of which of these approaches obtains the best out-of-sample fit during our sample period is subject to the data mining concerns
described earlier. As a result, we did not pursue these alternative approaches in this project.

21

hedge portfolios varies noticeably when these hedge portfolios are constructed using the
different E-Scores.

-1

0

MSCI E-Score
1

2

3

Figure 6: Correlation Across E-Scores – December 2016

20

40

60
Sustainaltyics E-Score

80

100

Note: Figure shows a binned scatter plot that highlights the correlation across the Sustainalytics and
MSCI E-Scores for all 796 firms in our sample that have both scores in December 2016. The correlation
coefficient is 0.65.

3.4

Forming Hedge Portfolios

In this section, we construct hedge portfolios for innovations in climate news, CCt , using
the mimicking portfolio approach described in Section 2.1. As discussed above, we use
two different approaches to transform the raw E-Scores into the characteristic vector Zt :
(i) Using firms’ cross-sectionally demeaned absolute value of the E-Score (“absolute
scores”, e.g., ZtSU S_A )
(ii) Ranking the firms cross-sectionally by their E-Score, and then standardizing these
rankings to range between -0.5 and +0.5 (“ranked scores”, e.g., ZtSU S_R ).
22

Recall that one of the conditions for the mimicking portfolio approach to isolate climate
change risk (and to avoid picking up other potentially correlated risks in the economy)
is that the projection portfolios span all the risk factors driving returns. In addition to
portfolios sorted on the climate characteristics, we therefore also include in regression 2
three additional factors that might be correlated with climate risk and that are known
to be important in explaining the cross-section of returns: size (using cross-sectionally
standardized market value to create Zt , so that half the firms, sorted by market value,
have positive weight, and half have negative weight; note that this portfolio will be long
large firms and short small firms), value (using cross-sectionally standardized values of
book-to-market to create Zt ), and the market (setting Zt to equal the share of total market
value).15 For example, when we use the absolute Sustainalytics E-Score to measure firms’
climate risk exposures, regression 3 becomes:
0

0

0

0

SU S_A
SIZE
HM L
M KT
CCt = ξ + wSU S Zt−1
rt + wSIZE Zt−1
rt + wHM L Zt−1
rt + wM KT Zt−1
rt + et ,

(4)

where wSU S , wSIZE , wHM L and wM KT are scalars that capture the weight of the corresponding portfolios in the mimicking (hedge) portfolio for CCt .
For comparability, we also analyze the performance of hedge portfolios constructed
using returns of the ETFs XLE and PBD instead of the returns of portfolios of stocks sorted
by their E-Scores. XLE is the ticker of the Energy Select Sector SPDR ETF, which represents
the energy sector of the S&P 500. PBD is the ticker of the Invesco Global Clean Energy ETF,
which is based on the WilderHill New Energy Global Innovation Index, and is composed
of companies that focus on greener and renewable sources of energy and technologies
facilitating cleaner energy. Constructing hedge portfolios based on those ETFs allows us
to (i) analyze the extent to which our E-Score-based hedge portfolios simply represent
a market tilt away from "brown energy" and towards "green energy," and (ii) explore
whether hedge portfolios based on XLE and PBD would have performed better than our
E-Score-based hedge portfolios.16
15

In order to maximize the number of stocks used to construct the hedge portfolios, we include stocks
even if some of the characteristics Zt are missing for that stock. To do so, we set all missing characteristics
equal to zero.
16
As before, there are many degrees of freedom for how to compute hedge portfolios based on ETFs, and

23

3.5

Results - In-Sample Fit

We begin by exploring the in-sample fit of various versions of regression 4 over the full
sample period. Table I shows regressions when hedging innovations to the WSJ Climate
Change News Index., CCtW SJ , described in Section 3.1. Columns 1 and 2 show that portfolios based on Sustainalytics E-Scores have a positive and significant relationship with
CCtW SJ ; in periods with more innovations in negative climate news, a portfolio that goes
long firms with higher (more "green") E-Scores has relatively larger excess returns. The
R-Squared measures of these regressions show that the portfolios based on the Sustainaltyics E-Scores can hedge 15-18% of the in-sample variation in CCt . Columns 3 and 4 show
that portfolios based on the MSCI E-Scores also have higher excess returns during periods with innovations in negative climate news; the R-Squared of the regressions are lower
than those in columns 1 and 2. Portfolios based on ranked versions of both E-Scores have
a slightly higher in-sample fit than portfolios based on absolute demeaned values. In addition to the ESG scores, size appears to correlate with climate change exposure: larger
firms appear more exposed than smaller firms to climate change news, in the sense that
they perform worse when there is more coverage of climate change in the WSJ. In column
5, we include the returns of XLE and PBD instead of the return of a characteristic-sorted
portfolio. The in-sample fit of this regression is lower than that of any of the regressions in
columns 1 - 4, even though we have fewer explanatory variables in those regressions. This
suggests that the characteristic-weighted portfolios might have some advantages over a
hedge approach that creates industry tilts using energy-related ETFs.17 It also shows that
most of the R-Squared in columns 1-4 is the result of the characteristics-weighted portfolios, and not of the other portfolios, which are also included in column 5.
Table II presents the same set of regressions as Table I, this time hedging innovations
in the CH Negative Climate Change News Index, CCtN egN ews . As before, the in-sample fits
we do not want to suggest that portfolios constructed using XLE and PBD constitute the “best” ETF-based
portfolios for hedging climate risk. Indeed, we view the analysis of which ETFs and other funds are most
helpful in hedging climate risk to be an exciting area for future research.
17
The inclusion of the other factors in regression 4 make the resulting hedge portfolios in column 5 of
Table II different from a simple industry-tilt away from the market. Indeed, the resulting hedge portfolio
will have a beta of 1 with CCt , and a beta of zero with the other factors. It is this factor neutrality that is a
desirable property of hedge portfolios, not industry neutrality.

24

Table I: Full-Sample Regression: WSJ Climate Change News Index
(1)
0

SU S_A
Zt−1
rt

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

1.416***
(0.436)

0

SU S_R
rt
Zt−1

67.789***
(17.834)

0

M SCI_A
rt
Zt−1

12.658*
(6.849)

0

M SCI_R
Zt−1
rt

53.743*
(27.401)

rtXLE

0.085
(0.810)

rtP BD

0.208
( 0.630 )
0

HM L
Zt−1
rt
0

SIZE
Zt−1
rt
0

M KT
Zt−1
rt

Constant
R-Squared
N

1.221
(7.019)

2.309
(6.873)

-5.862
(6.878)

-5.941
(6.858)

-6.772
(8.093)

-5.680**
(2.350)

-6.034**
(2.289)

-5.511*
(2.773)

-5.459**
(2.696)

-2.765
(2.474)

0.783
(0.642)
2.894
(2.681)

0.789
(0.628)
2.673
(2.613)

0.841
(0.692)
4.659*
(2.700)

0.789
(0.680)
4.891*
(2.669)

0.091
(1.285)
5.959**
(2.897)

0.153
88

0.187
88

0.083
88

0.088
88

0.047
88

Note: Table shows results from regression 4. The dependent variable captures innovations in the WSJBased Climate News Measure. The unit of observation is a month, and the sample runs between September
2009 and December 2016. Standard errors are presented in parentheses. Significance levels: ∗ (p<0.10), ∗∗
(p<0.05), ∗∗∗ (p<0.01).

of the hedge portfolios based on Sustainalytics E-Scores are higher than the fits of the
hedge portfolios based on MSCI E-Scores; similarly, the in-sample fits of the portfolios
constructed using ranked E-Scores are marginally higher than those of the portfolios constructed using the absolute (demeaned) E-Score. Finally, the in-sample fits of all four
portfolios based on E-Scores are somewhat higher than that of the portfolio based on XLE
and PBD.18
How would the hedge portfolios implied by these regressions look? To determine
each firm i’s weight in the hedge portfolio, we construct the following sum, where Zi,t
18

It is interesting to note that when hedging negative climate change news, it is the value/growth dimension that seems to be aligned with the risk exposure. In particular, the table shows that value firms
appear more exposed to climate news than growth firms.

25

Table II: Full-Sample Regression: CH Negative Climate Change News Index
(1)
0

SU S_A
Zt−1
rt

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.266*
(0.141)

0

SU S_R
rt
Zt−1

12.286**
(5.864)

0

M SCI_A
rt
Zt−1

1.089
(2.173)

0

M SCI_R
Zt−1
rt

6.641
(8.696)

rtXLE

-0.092
(0.252)

rtP BD

0.036
(0.196)
0

HM L
Zt−1
rt
0

SIZE
Zt−1
rt
0

M KT
Zt−1
rt

Constant
R-Squared
N

-4.536**
(2.272)

-4.390*
(2.260)

-5.934***
(2.182)

-5.919***
(2.177)

-5.520**
(2.519)

-0.137
(0.761)

-0.179
(0.753)

0.210
(0.880)

0.100
(0.856)

0.501
(0.770)

0.315
(0.208)
-0.115
(0.868)

0.314
(0.206)
-0.137
(0.859)

0.287
(0.219)
0.313
(0.857)

0.295
(0.216)
0.306
(0.847)

0.297
(0.400)
0.376
(0.902)

0.125
88

0.133
88

0.090
88

0.094
88

0.089
88

Note: Table shows results from regression 4. The dependent variable captures innovations in the NewspaperBased Negative Climate News Measure. The unit of observation is a month, and the sample runs between
September 2009 and December 2016. Standard errors are presented in parentheses. Significance levels: ∗
(p<0.10), ∗∗ (p<0.05), ∗∗∗ (p<0.01).
0

0

0

SU S_A
SIZE
HM L
values are taken as of December 2016: ŵSU S_A Zi,Dec16
+ ŵSIZE Zi,Dec16
+ ŵHM L Zi,Dec16
+
0

M KT
ŵM KT Zi,Dec16
, and where the various ŵ-terms represent the estimated coefficients from

regression 4. This means that a firm’s weight in the hedge portfolio is determined by its
E-Score as well as its book-to-market ratio and its size. The resulting portfolio is the portfolio that an investor would form in December 2016 to hedge climate news in January
2017. Table III presents the average portfolio positions by 2-digit SIC code classification
for the industries with the six largest negative average portfolio weights and the industries with the six largest positive average portfolio weights. We only present the portfolio
positions based on the absolute E-Scores, since they look very similar to the positions in
the hedge portfolio constructed using the ranked E-Scores. For the portfolio constructed
26

Table III: Largest Average Short and Long Positions (By 2-digit SIC Code).
(a) WSJ Climate Change News Index
Sustainalytics E-Score (absolute)

MSCI E-Score (absolute)

Top Negative Portfolio Weights
Coal Mining
Water Transportation
Insurance Agents, Brokers, & Service
Mining Non-Metallic Minerals, Except Fuels
Transportation Services
Security & Commodity Brokers

SIC2
12
44
64
14
47
62

Top Negative Portfolio Weights
Water Transportation
Petroleum & Coal Products
Motion Pictures
Communications
Security & Commodity Brokers
Oil & Gas Extraction

SIC2
44
29
78
48
62
13

Top Positive Portfolio Weights
Building Materials & Gardening Supplies
Tobacco Products
Food & Kindred Products
Paper & Allied Products
Textile Mill Products
Furniture & Homefurnishings Stores

SIC2
52
21
20
26
22
57

Top Positive Portfolio Weights
Pipelines, Except Natural Gas
Tobacco Products
Miscellaneous Manufacturing Industries
Lumber & Wood Products
Paper & Allied Products
Textile Mill Products

SIC2
46
21
39
24
26
22

(b) CH Negative Climate Change News Index
Sustainalytics E-Score (absolute)

MSCI E-Score (absolute)

Top Negative Portfolio Weights
General Building Contractors
Water Transportation
Coal Mining
Insurance Agents, Brokers, & Service
Holding and Other Investment Offices
Insurance Carriers

SIC2
15
44
12
64
67
63

Top Negative Portfolio Weights
General Building Contractors
Nondepository Institutions
Auto Repair, Services, & Parking
Communications
Water Transportation
Insurance Carriers

SIC2
15
61
75
48
44
63

Top Positive Portfolio Weights
Railroad Transportation
Transportation by Air
Furniture & Homefurnishings Stores
Textile Mill Products
Building Materials & Gardening Supplies
Tobacco Products

SIC2
40
45
57
22
52
21

Top Positive Portfolio Weights
Chemical & Allied Products
Textile Mill Products
General Merchandise Stores
Lumber & Wood Products
Building Materials & Gardening Supplies
Tobacco Products

SIC2
28
22
53
24
52
21

Note: Table shows the industries (2-digit SIC code) with the largest average short and long positions in
the estimated hedge portfolios resulting from regressions presented in Tables I and II. Panel (a) explores
hedge portfolios based on regression 4 using innovations in the WSJ Climate Change News Index as CCt ,
while Panel (b) explores hedge portfolios based using innovations in the CH Negative Climate Change News
Index as CCt . All portfolios are constructed using the absolute demeaned value of the E-Scores. Within
each portfolio, industries are arranged in ascending order of portfolio weights.

27

using Sustainlytics E-Scores to hedge innovations in the CH Negative Climate Change News
Index, for example, the largest short position is “General Building Contractors,” followed
by “Water Transportation." The largest long positions are “Building Materials & Gardening Supplies“ and “Tobacco Products.” This analysis highlights that the resulting hedge
portfolios will not necessarily conform with common priors that the optimal way to hedge
climate change news involves primarily going long green energy stocks and short oil companies; this is consistent with our observation that industry membership can only explain
a small amount of the cross-sectional variation in firm-level E-Scores.

3.6

Results - Out-Of-Sample Fit

The most important test of the hedge portfolios is their ability to hedge out-of-sample
innovations to climate news, i.e., to hedge innovations in months that were not included
in the estimation of the portfolio weights. To construct a first measure of the out-ofsample performance of the hedge portfolios, for every period t we run regression 4 using
data between periods tmin and t − 1, where tmin corresponds to the first month for which
we observe all climate exposures and CCt series (September 2009). We then form the
hedge portfolio based on these estimates, and explore the correlation of the returns of
that hedge portfolio in period t with CCt . This corresponds to the approach one would
have taken to hedge climate news in real time. Since we require a certain amount of data
to estimate regression 4, we only compare the out-of-sample performance of the hedge
portfolios starting in period tmin + 30 (March 2012).19
Figure 7 presents the out-of-sample performance of portfolios constructed to hedge
innovations in the WSJ Climate Change News Index. The top panels show portfolios constructed using absolute values of the Sustainalytics E-Score, the bottom panels show portfolios that build on the absolute values of the MSCI E-Score. The left columns present
scatter plots of the out-of-sample returns of the hedge portfolios together with the realizations of the innovation of climate news. The right panels plot the time-series of the
19

To improve the out-of-sample performance of the hedging portfolio, there may be benefits in further
reducing the number of portfolios onto which to project CCt . Given the short sample size available, in this
paper we decided not to optimize the hedge portfolio further along this dimension.

28

Hedge Portfolio Return
-20
0
20

40

Climate News / Hedge Portfolio Return
-50
0
50
100

Figure 7: Out-of-Sample Fit: WSJ Climate Change News Index

-40

2009m7
-40

-20
0
20
40
WSJ Climate Change News Index (Innovation)

Period: 2012m3 - 2016m12;

2011m1

60

2012m7

Date

2014m1

2015m7

2017m1

WSJ Climate Change News Index (Innovation)
Hedge Portfolio Return

Correlation: 0.17

Hedge Portfolio Return
-20
0
20

Climate News / Hedge Portfolio Return
-50
0
50
100

40

(a) Sustainalytics Hedge Portfolio

-40

2009m7
-40

-20
0
20
40
WSJ Climate Change News Index (Innovation)

Period: 2012m3 - 2016m12;

2011m1

60

2012m7

Date

2014m1

2015m7

2017m1

WSJ Climate Change News Index (Innovation)
Hedge Portfolio Return

Correlation: 0.01

(b) MSCI Hedge Portfolio
Note: Figures explore the out-of-sample performance of hedge portfolios constructed to hedge the WSJBased Climate News Measure. The top panel presents hedge portfolios built on the absolute values of the
Sustainalytics E-Score, the bottom panel presents portfolios built on the absolute values of the MSCI
E-Score.

29

Table IV: Cross-correlations: WSJ Climate Change News Index
PANEL A: Out-of-Sample Fit
CC W SJ

SU S_A
HOOS

SU S_R
HOOS

M SCI_A
HOOS

M SCI_R
HOOS

ET F
HOOS

rtXLE

rtP BD

CC W SJ

1.000

SU S_A
HOOS
SU S_R
HOOS
M SCI_A
HOOS
M SCI_R
HOOS
ET F
HOOS
rtXLE
rtP BD

0.174

1.000

0.206

0.973

1.000

0.013

0.688

0.621

1.000

0.019

0.677

0.624

0.988

1.000

-0.005

0.427

0.349

0.861

0.852

1.000

0.068

-0.138

0.004

-0.097

-0.039

-0.141

1.000

0.111

0.185

0.272

0.294

0.350

0.190

0.656

1.000

ET F
HCross

rtXLE

rtP BD

PANEL B: Cross-Validation Fit
CC W SJ

SU S_A
HCross

SU S_R
HCross

CC W SJ

1.000

SU S_A
HCross
SU S_R
HCross
M SCI_A
HCross
M SCI_R
HCross
ET F
HCross
rtXLE
rtP BD

0.244

1.000

0.300

0.976

1.000

0.039

0.742

0.671

M SCI_A
HCross

M SCI_R
HCross

1.000

0.067

0.733

0.676

0.982

1.000

-0.069

0.454

0.390

0.678

0.651

1.000

0.068

0.041

0.072

-0.009

-0.034

0.297

1.000

0.111

0.272

0.266

0.310

0.298

0.470

0.656

1.000

Note: Table shows cross-correlations of different portfolios and innovations in the WSJ Climate Change News
Index. Panel A focuses on the performance of hedge portfolios from our out-of-sample approach, Panel on
the performance of hedge portfolios from our cross-validation approach.

30

climate news series and the return series of the hedge portfolios. There is a clear, positive
out-of-sample correlation with CCt of 0.17 for the Sustainalytics hedge portfolio. In other
words, the hedge portfolios indeed have higher returns during periods with positive innovations to climate news. Portfolios based on MSCI E-Scores or ETFs, on the other hand,
have very little ability to hedge innovations in the WSJ Climate Change News Index, with
an out-of-sample correlation of just 0.01.
Panel A of Table IV provides additional information about the out-of-sample performance of the various portfolios designed to hedge innovations in the WSJ Climate Change
News Index. The first column is the most important one, showing the correlation between
SU S_A
the realizations of CCtW SJ and the returns of the various hedge portfolios (e.g., ROOS

corresponds to the out-of-sample returns of a hedge portfolio constructed using absolute values of the Sustainalytics E-Score). The hedge portfolios based on Sustainalytics
E-Scores substantially outperforms the hedge portfolios based on the MSCI E-Scores. In
addition, hedge portfolios based on ranked E-Scores marginally outperform those based
on absolute E-Scores, though the returns of portfolios based on absolute and ranked EScores from the same data provider are highly correlated. Finally, the out-of-sample performance of the Sustainalytics E-Score-based hedge portfolios is substantially better than
that of portfolios based on ETFs. The returns of most hedge portfolios are negatively correlated with the returns to XLE, suggesting that these hedge portfolios are likely to hold
short positions in the energy firms that constitute XLE. Similarly, we observe a positive
correlation between the returns of all climate hedge portfolios and the returns of PBD,
suggesting that the hedge portfolios likely hold long positions in many of the green energy firms that constitute PBD.
We also conduct a second test for the performance of the hedge portfolios based on
a cross-validation approach. In particular, for every period t0 we run regression 4 for all
periods t 6= t0 , and then use the resulting estimates to construct a hedge portfolio in a
similar way as described above. The return of that hedge portfolio in period t0 is then
compared to CCt0 . Panel B of Table V explores the cross-validation performance of the
various hedge portfolios. The hedge portfolios based on Sustainalytics E-Scores continue
to outperform those based on MSCI E-Scores or ETFs substantially.
31

To sum up, the hedge portfolio built using the Sustainalytics E-Score performs out-ofsample substantially better than any other hedge portfolio, including the ETFs we have
considered. The worse hedging performance of the MSCI E-Scores highlights the importance of choosing characteristics that properly capture (both in and especially out-ofsample) cross-sectional variation in exposure to climate change risks.
Figure 8 and Table V present similar results as Figure 7 and Table IV, this time analyzing the performance of portfolios designed to hedge innovations in the CH Negative
Climate Change News Index. Portfolios based on Sustainalytics E-Scores have similar ability
to hedge this second climate news series as they had in hedging the CH Negative Climate
Change News Index, both in the out-of-sample evaluation as well as in the cross-validation
evaluation. The hedging ability of the MSCI indexes is in this case much higher than
for the WSJ measure of climate change risks, suggesting that the MSCI E-Scores are more
suited to capture negative climate change news as opposed to general coverage of climate
change by the WSJ. Overall, the out-of-sample correlation between realization of climate
change news and the hedge portfolios are 0.22 when using Sustainalytics E-Scores and
0.18 when using MSCI E-Scores.

4

Conclusion and Directions for Future Research

We demonstrate how a mimicking portfolio approach can be successful in hedging innovations in climate change news across a number of out-of-sample performance tests.
Across our two indices for climate news, the hedge portfolios based on Sustainalytics EScores have the best in-sample fit as well as the best out-of-sample and cross-validation
performance. Portfolios based on MSCI E-Scores and ETFs (XLE and PBD) have a lower
(but still positive) ability to hedge innovations in climate news. There are no systematic
differences in the relative performance of hedge portfolios based on absolute or ranked
versions of the raw E-Scores. In general, however, the differences between the out-ofsample and cross-validation performance of some of the portfolios highlight that the portfolios we construct are somewhat sensitive to the exact time series on which our models
are trained. This is likely the result of only having a relatively few data points in each of
32

Climate News / Hedge Portfolio Return
-40
-20
0
20
40

-5

Hedge Portfolio Return
0
5
10

15

Figure 8: Out-of-Sample Fit: CH Negative Climate Change News Index

-10

2009m7
-20

-10
0
10
CH Negative Climate News Index (Innovation)

Period: 2012m3 - 2016m12;

2011m1

20

2012m7

Date

2014m1

2015m7

2017m1

CH Negative Climate News Index (Innovation)
Hedge Portfolio Return

Correlation: 0.22

Climate News / Hedge Portfolio Return
-40
-20
0
20
40

-5

Hedge Portfolio Return
0
5
10

15

(a) Sustainalytics Hedge Portfolio

-10

2009m7
-20

-10
0
10
CH Negative Climate News Index (Innovation)

Period: 2012m3 - 2016m12;

2011m1

20

Correlation: 0.18

2012m7

Date

2014m1

2015m7

2017m1

CH Negative Climate News Index (Innovation)
Hedge Portfolio Return

(b) MSCI Hedge Portfolio
Note: Figures explore the out-of-sample performance of hedge portfolios constructed to hedge the
Newspaper-Based Negative Climate News Measure. The top panel presents hedge portfolios built on the
absolute values of the Sustainalytics E-Score, the bottom panel presents portfolios built on the absolute
values of the MSCI E-Score.

33

Table V: Cross-correlations: CH Negative Climate Change News Index
PANEL A: Out-of-Sample Fit
CC N egN ews

SU S_A
HOOS

SU S_R
HOOS

M SCI_A
HOOS

M SCI_R
HOOS

ET F
HOOS

rtXLE

rtP BD

CC N egN ews

1.000

SU S_A
HOOS
SU S_R
HOOS
M SCI_A
HOOS
M SCI_R
HOOS
ET F
HOOS
rtXLE
rtP BD

0.217

1.000

0.183

0.992

1.000

0.179

0.869

0.852

1.000

0.175

0.865

0.850

0.998

1.000

0.157

0.780

0.767

0.961

0.960

1.000

-0.066

-0.412

-0.353

-0.387

-0.367

-0.410

1.000

0.063

0.061

0.112

0.096

0.127

0.119

0.656

1.000

ET F
HCross

rtXLE

rtP BD

PANEL B: Cross-Validation Fit
CC N egN ews

SU S_A
HCross

SU S_R
HCross

M SCI_A
HCross

M SCI_R
HCross

CC N egN ews

1.000

SU S_A
HCross
SU S_R
HCross
M SCI_A
HCross
M SCI_R
HCross
ET F
HCross
rtXLE
rtP BD

0.148

1.000

0.154

0.991

1.000

0.024

0.864

0.836

1.000

0.048

0.885

0.861

0.993

1.000

0.053

0.829

0.799

0.973

0.968

1.000

-0.066

-0.208

-0.183

-0.205

-0.237

-0.223

1.000

0.063

0.169

0.171

0.158

0.157

0.185

0.656

1.000

Note: Table shows cross-correlations of different portfolios and innovations in the CH Negative Climate
Change News Index. Panel A focuses on the performance of hedge portfolios from our out-of-sample approach, Panel B on the performance of hedge portfolios from our cross-validation approach.

34

our estimations. As we observe longer time series of E-Scores and climate news measures,
our proposed method should deliver ever-better portfolios to hedge climate change news.
Similarly, moving from hedging climate news that materializes over a monthly level to
hedging on a daily level should allow researchers to substantially expand their training
data, and thereby improve the out-of-sample performance of the hedge portfolios.
More generally, we view this article as providing a rigorous methodology for constructing portfolios that hedge against risks that are otherwise difficult to insure. We
do not view our resulting hedge portfolios as the definitive best hedges against climate
change risk, but instead as a starting point for further exploration. Indeed, there are many
valuable directions for future research on climate finance, and we discussed a number of
the dimensions that should be explored further, including the addition of more assets to
the hedge portfolios (such as international stocks), and the formation of hedge portfolios
based both characteristic-sorted portfolios and ETFs.
One additional important direction for future work is to integrate more and better data
to measure firm-level climate risk exposures. This data could come from commercial data
providers or could be constructed by researchers themselves, for example by including
information such as geographical proximity to potential climate disasters (e.g., rising sealevels or hurricane-prone regions). Indeed, articles in this volume, such as Choi et al.
(2018) and Kumar et al. (2018) make valuable progress towards developing new ways to
quantify climate risk exposures.
Another direction for follow-on work is to develop alternative definitions of the climate change risks. One interesting question is whether it is important to differentiate
between physical and policy-oriented climate risks. For example, a tax on greenhouse
gas emissions, if comprehensively applied at an appropriate level, would reduce the demand for climate hedge portfolios and consequently the cost of insuring against climate
change. Thus good regulation will mean less need for climate hedges. But regulation
itself creates winners and losers from regulatory risk, and one might therefore want to
construct regulatory hedge portfolios. The stability of such regulatory hedge portfolios
may well be sensitive to the prevailing political environment.
A related question pertains to the expected returns of the various hedge portfolios.
35

Indeed, an increasing use of climate hedge portfolios by investors will increase the price
(and thus reduce the expected returns) of those firms whose stock provides the most effective hedge against innovations in climate change news. This lower expected return
corresponds to the insurance premium paid for the climate hedge portfolio. An interesting avenue for future work will be to quantify the cost of the climate hedge portfolios by
looking at the associated risk premia.20 It is also interesting to study the general equilibrium effects resulting from the fact that a lower cost of capital for firms with high E-Scores
might actually have a direct effect on the climate trajectory. For example, to the extent that
green energy firms see a reduction in their cost of capital, this might allow them to achieve
efficient scale faster, and thereby affect the path of greenhouse gas emissions. The design
of structural asset pricing models that feature such general equilibrium feedback loops
seems a promising direction for research.

20
Note that this requires a substantial time-series data, since realizations of negative climate news insample might actually lead the hedge portfolios to outperform over any given period.

36

References
Amihud, Y. 2002. Illiquidity and Stock Returns: Cross-Section and Time-Series Effects.
Journal of Financial Markets 5:31–56.
Andersson, M., P. Bolton, and F. Samama. 2016. Hedging Climate Risk. Financial Analysts
Journal 72.
Bakkensen, L., and L. Barrage. 2018. Flood Risk Belief Heterogeneity and Coastal Home
Price Dynamics: Going Under Water? Working Paper .
Baldauf, M., L. Garlappi, and C. Yannelis. 2018. Does Climate Change Affect Real Estate
Prices? Only If You Believe In it. Working paper .
Balduzzi, P., and C. Robotti. 2008. Mimicking Portfolios, Economic Risk Premia, and Tests
of Multi-Beta Models. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 26:354–368.
Bernstein, A., M. Gustafson, and R. Lewis. 2018. Disaster on the Horizon: The Price Effect
of Sea Level Rise. Journal of Financial Economics, Forthcoming .
Black, F., and M. Scholes. 1973. The Pricing of Options and Corporate Liabilities. Journal
of Political Economy 81:637–654.
Breeden, D., M. Gibbons, and R. Litzenberger. 1989. Empirical Tests of the ConsumptionOriented CAPM. Journal of Finance 44:231–262.
Chen, N.-F., R. Roll, and S. Ross. 1986. Economic Forces and the Stock Market. Journal of
Business 59:383–403.
Choi, D., Z. Gao, and W. Jiang. 2018. Attention to Global Warming. Working paper .
Daniel, K., R. Litterman, and G. Wagner. 2015. Applying Asset Pricing Theory to Calibrate
the Price of Climate Risk. Working paper, Columbia University .
Fama, E., and K. French. 2008. Dissecting Anomalies. Journal of Finance 63:1653–1678.

37

Fama, F., and J. MacBeth. 1973. Risk, Return, and Equilibrium: Empirical Tests. Journal of
Political Economy 81:607–636.
Gentzkow, M., B. T. Kelly, and M. Taddy. 2018. Text as data. Working Paper 23276, National
Bureau of Economic Research .
Giglio, S., M. Maggiori, and J. Stroebel. 2015. Very Long-Run Discount Rates. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 130:1–53.
Giglio, S., M. Maggiori, J. Stroebel, and A. Weber. 2018. Climate Change and Long-Run
Discount Rates: Evidence from Real Estate. Working paper .
Giglio, S., and D. Xiu. 2018. Asset Pricing with Omitted Factors. Working Paper .
Hong, H., and L. Kostovetsky. 2012. Red and blue investing: Values and finance. Journal
of Financial Economics 103:1–19.
Hong, H., F. Li, and J. Xu. 2018. Climate Risks and Market Efficiency. Journal of Econometrics, forthcoming .
Hou, K., C. Xue, and L. Zhang. 2015. Dissecting Anomalies: An Investment Approach.
Review of Financial Studies 28:650–705.
Huberman, G., S. Kandel, and R. Stambaugh. 1987. Mimicking Portfolios and Exact Arbitrage Pricing. Journal of Finance 42:1–9.
Kumar, N., A. Shashwat, and R. Wermers. 2018. Do Fund Managers Misestimate Climatic
Disaster Risk? Working Paper .
Lamont, O. 2001. Economic Tracking Portfolio. Journal of Econometrics 105:161–184.
Lönn, R., and P. Schotman. 2017. Empirical asset pricing with many assets and short time
series. Working Paper, Maastricht University .
Merton, R. 1973. An Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model. Econometrica 41:867–887.
Murfin, J., and M. Spiegel. 2018. Is the Risk of Sea Level Rise Capitalized in Residential
Real Estate. Working paper .
38

Roll, R., and A. Srivastava. 2018. Mimicking Portfolios. Working Paper, California Institute
of Technology .

39

A

Appendix

A.1

Review of the Fama-MacBeth approach

In this section, we review the Fama-MacBeth estimator for hedge portfolios in the context
of our model. To apply the Fama-MacBeth procedure, the econometrician needs to take
a stand on all the factors in the model: CCt and vt . Once the factors in the model are
determined, the procedure follows two steps. In the first step, the risk exposures βCC
and β are estimated via time-series regressions of returns onto the factors, CCt and vt . In
i
particular, for each asset i, (β̂CC
, β̂ i ) are estimated from the time-series regression:

i
rti = αi + βCC
CCt + β i vt + ut

In the second step, in each period t, hedge portfolios for all factors are obtained via crosssectional regressions of returns rt onto the estimated betas (β̂CC , β̂):
rt = hCC
t β̂CC + ht β̂ + et
where β̂CC and β̂ are the betas estimated in the first step. The slopes of this regression in
(that hedges
each period t are precisely the returns of the hedge portfolio in period t: hCC
t
CCt ) and ht (that hedges the remaining factors vt ). The hedge portfolios hCC
and ht have,
t
by construction, a beta of one with respect to the corresponding factors and zero with
respect to all other factors. Their time-series means (the expected excess returns of the
hedge portfolios) recover the risk premia of the factors: E[hCC
t ] = γCC and E[ht ] = γ.
The Fama-MacBeth procedure for constructing hedge portfolios has two potential
drawbacks. First, it requires knowing all the factors in the model, CCt and vt . Second,
the procedure is not robust to measurement error in the factor of interest, CCt , which is
a natural concern in many settings, including in ours (see further discussion on omitted
factors and measurement error in Giglio and Xiu, 2018).

40

A.2

Source of Climate Change Vocabulary (CCV)

To create the Climate Change Vocabulary, we collect 12 climate change white papers from
various sources including the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and the U.S. Global Change Research Program. We
complement this with 59 climate change glossaries from sources such as United Nations,
NASA, IPCC, and EPA.

12 Climate change white papers: Table VI reports the institution, title and published year
of climate change white papers that we use to construct the CCV.

59 climate change glossaries: We collect climate change glossaries–both words and their
definition–from U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), BBC, United Nations(UN),
Center for Climate and Energy Solutions Glossary of Key Terms, Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change (IPCC), World Health Organization(WHO), European Climate Adaptation Platform, International Petroleum Industry Environmental Conservation Association(IPIECA), Lenntech, Wikipedia, Met Office, Integrated Regional Information Networks(IRIN), Climate Change in Australia, Guardian, International Rivers, Mekong River
Commission, Exploratorium, New York Times, US Forest Service, US Department of
Transportation, Durham Region, Classroom of the Future, Government of Canada, International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), New Zealand Government, University of Miami , German Climate Finance, California Government, South West Climate
Change Impacts Partnership (SWCCIP), Scent of Pine, Natural Climate Change, UN Climate Change Conference, Center for Strategic and International Studies(CSIS), Watts Up
With That?, UK Climate Impacts Programme (UKCIP), Climate Change Zambia, Canadian Broadcasting Corporation(CBC), Auburn University, Global Warming Solved, REDD+,
Climate Resilience Toolkit(CRT), What’s your impact, The Nitric Acid Climate Action
Group (NACAG), Garnaut Climate Change Review, Climate Policy Information Hub,
Explaining Climate Change, Four Degrees Preparation, The European Initiative for Upscaling Energy Efficiency in the Music Event Industry (EE MUSIC), Regional Education

41

and Information Centre (REIC), Ecology, Climate Reality Project, National Geographic,
Agricultural Marketing Resource Center (AgMRC), Global Greenhouse Warming, Conservation in a Changing Climate.

42

Table VI: The list of climate change white papers
Source
Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC)

Title

Year
1990, 1995, 2001,
2007, 2014

IPCC Systhesis Report

IPCC

IPCC Special Report : The regional impacts of climate change :
an assessment of vulnerability

1997

IPCC

IPCC Special Report : Aviation and the Global Atmosphere

1999

IPCC

IPCC Special Report : Methodological and Technological Issues
in Technology Transfer

2000

IPCC
IPCC

IPCC Special Report : Safeguarding the Ozone Layer and the
Global Climate System: Issues Related to Hydrofluorocarbons
and Perfluorocarbons
IPCC Special Report : Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage

2005
2005

IPCC

IPCC Special Report : Renewable Energy Sources and Climate
Change Mitigationn

2011

IPCC

IPCC Special Report : Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and
Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptationn

2012

What We Know : The reality, risks, and response to climate
change

2014

American Climate Prospectus

2015

Climate Change Indicators in the United States (4th Edition)

2016

Social and economic impacts of climate

2016

The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity

2017

U.S. Global change
Research Program

Our change planet : The U.S. Global Change Research Program
for Fiscal Year 2017

2017

U.S. Global change
Research Program

Climate Science Special Repor (4th National Climate Assessment,
Volume I)

2017

American Association
for the Advancement
of Science
U.C. Berkley
U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency
(EPA)
Science
International
Monetary Fund (IMF)

Note: IPCC reports provide scientific and technical assessments of the current state of climate change. Generally, these reports comprise of three volumes, one for each of the Working Groups of the IPCC. In addition
to the main reports, Summaries for Policymakers and Synthesis Reports are provided. A Synthesis Report
integrates materials covered by Assessment Reports and Special Reports. It is a non-technical report whose
target audience is policymakers, and addresses a broad-range of policy-relevant but policy-neutral questions.
Summary for Policymakers is an abridged version of the full Synthesis Report. In addition, IPCC Special
Reports provide an assessment of a specific issue relating to climate change. They are generally structured
similar to a volume of an Assessment Report.

43

A.3
MSCI.

Sub-categories for "E" scores
Positive indicators are: Environmental Opportunities - Clean Tech, Waste Man-

agement - Toxic Emissions and Waste, Waste Management - Packaging Materials & Waste,
Climate Change - Carbon Emissions, Property/Plant/Equipment, Environmental Management Systems, Natural Resource Use - Water Stress, Natural Resource Use - Biodiversity & Land Use, Natural Resource Use - Raw Material Sourcing, Natural Resource Use Financing Environmental, Environmental Opportunities - Green Buildings, Environmental Opportunities in Renewable Energy, Waste Management - Electronic Waste, Climate
Change - Energy Efficiency, Climate Change - Product Carbon Footprint, Climate Change
- Insuring Climate Change Risk, Environment - Other Strengths.
Negative indicators are: Regulatory Compliance, Toxic Emissions and Waste, Energy &
Climate Change, Impact of Products and Services, Biodiversity & Land Use, Operational
Waste, Water Stress, Environment - Other Concerns.
Sustainalytics.

Sub-categories are Formal Environmental Policy, Environmental Man-

agement System, External Certification of Environmental Management Systems (EMS),
Environmental Fines and Non-monetary Sanctions, Participation in Carbon Disclosure
Project, Scope of Corporate Reporting on GHG emissions, Programmes and Targets to
Reduce GHG Emissions from Own Operations, Programmes and Targets to Increase Renewable Energy Use, Carbon Intensity, Carbon Intensity Trend, % of Primary Energy
Use from Renewables, Operations Related Controversies or Incidents, Reporting Quality Non-Carbon Environmental Data, Programmes and Targets to Protect Biodiversity,
Guidelines and Reporting on Closure and Rehabilitation of Sites, Environmental and Social Impact Assessments, Oil Spill Reporting and Performance, Waste Intensity, Water Intensity, Percentage of Certified Forests Under Own Management, Programmes & Targets
to Reduce Air Emissions, Programmes & Targets to Reduce Air Emissions, Programmes &
Targets to Reduce Water Use, Other Programmes to Reduce Key Environmental Impacts,
GHG Reduction Programme, Programmes and Targets to Improve the Environmental
Performance of Own Logistics and Vehicle Fleets, Programmes and Targets to Phase out

44

CFCs and HCFCs21 in Refrigeration Equipment, Formal Policy or Programme on Green
Procurement, Environmental Supply Chain Incidents, Programmes to Improve the Environmental Performance of Suppliers, External Environmental Certification Suppliers,
Programmes and Targets to Stimulate Sustainable Agreculture, Programmes and Targets
to Stimulate Sustainable Aquaculture/Fisheries, Food Beverage & Tabacco Industry Initiatives, Programmes and Targets to Reduce GHG Emissions from Outsourced Logistics
Services, Data on Percentage of Recycled/Reused Raw Material Used, Data on Percentage
of Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) Certified Wood/Pulp as Raw Material, Programmes
and Targets to Promote Sustainable Food Products, Food Retail Initiatives, Products &
Services Related to Controversies or Incidents, Sustainability Related Products & Services, Revenue from Clean Technology or Climate Friendly Products, Automobile Fleet
Average CO2 Emissions, Trend Automobile Fleet Average Fleet Efficiency, Products to
Improve Sustainability of Transport Vehicles, Systematic Integration of Environmental
Considerations at R&D Stage, Programmes and Targets for End-of-Life Product Management, Organic Products, Policy on Use of Genetically Modified Organisms (GMO)
in Products, Environmental & Social Standards in Credit and Loan Business, Responsible Asset Management, Use of Life-Cycle Analysis(LCA) for New Real Estate Projects,
Programms and Targets to Increase Investment in Sustainable Buildings, Share of Property Portfolio Invested in Sustainable Buildings, Sustainability Related Financial Services,
Products with Important Environmental/Human Health Concerns, Carbon Intensity of
Energy Mix, Mineral Waste Management, Emergency Response Programme.

21

Chlorofluorocarbons and Hydrochloroflourocarbons

45

