                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              TAX PROFESSIONALS:
                TAX-EVASION FACILITATORS OR INFORMATION HUBS?

                                        Marco Battaglini
                                           Luigi Guiso
                                          Chiara Lacava
                                       Eleonora Patacchini

                                       Working Paper 25745
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25745


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2019




We are very grateful to the Italian Revenue Agency for granting us access to the data. We are the
sole responsible for the ideas expressed in the paper. We received beneficial suggestions from
seminar participants at the London School of Economics and the University of Rome Sapienza.
We thank Philipp Kircher for very useful comments and Matteo Paradisi for helpful discussions.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Marco Battaglini, Luigi Guiso, Chiara Lacava, and Eleonora Patacchini. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Tax Professionals: Tax-Evasion Facilitators or Information Hubs?
Marco Battaglini, Luigi Guiso, Chiara Lacava, and Eleonora Patacchini
NBER Working Paper No. 25745
April 2019
JEL No. H26,K34

                                          ABSTRACT

To study the role of tax professionals, we merge tax records of 2.5 million taxpayers in Italy with
the respective audit files from the tax revenue agency. Our data covers the entire population of
sole proprietorship taxpayers in seven regions, followed over seven fiscal years. We first
document that tax evasion is systematically correlated with the average evasion of other
customers of the same tax professional. We then exploit the unique structure of our dataset to
study the channels through which these social spillover effects are generated. Guided by an
equilibrium model of tax compliance with tax professionals and auditing, we highlight two
mechanisms that may be behind this phenomenon: self-selection of taxpayers who sort
themselves into professionals of heterogeneous tolerance for tax evasion; and informational
externalities generated by the tax professional activities. We provide evidence supporting the
simultaneous presence of both mechanisms.

Marco Battaglini                                           Chiara Lacava
Department of Economics                                    Goethe University Frankfurt
Uris Hall                                                  House of Finance
Cornell University                                         Theodor-W.-Adorno-Platz 3
Ithaca, NY 14850                                           Frankfurt am Main, HE 60320
and EIEF                                                   Germany
and also NBER                                              lacava@safe.uni-frankfurt.de
battaglini@cornell.edu
                                                           Eleonora Patacchini
Luigi Guiso                                                Cornell University
Axa Professor of Household Finance                         Uris Hall
Einaudi Institute for Economics and Finance                Cornell University
Via Sallustiana 62 - 00187                                 Ithaca, NY 14850
Rome, Italy                                                ep454@cornell.edu
luigi.guiso55@gmail.com
1         Introduction
The traditional literature on tax evasion and tax avoidance focuses on the direct relationship
between the tax authority and taxpayers: individuals are assumed as independent utility
maximizers who trade off costs and benefits of violating the laws. It is, however, increasingly
the case that the relationship is more complex, as it is mediated by tax professionals. In
the U.S. alone it has been estimated that 65% of individuals use some type of paid tax
return preparer (Bloomquist et al., 2007; Book, 2008); and, indeed, the number of individual
tax returns prepared by practitioners increased from 63 million to 80 million from 1996 to
2005. The same is true for most of the other developed countries: for example, tax preparers
represent 75% of taxpayers in Australia (Devos, 2012) and in Italy there is one registered tax
professional for every 515 citizens (Fondazione Nazionale dei Commercialisti, 2017). This
evolution in the relationship between taxpayers and the tax authorities is caused by the
increasing complexity of the tax code and, at least for corporations and the upper tail of the
income distribution, by globalization which stimulates the demand for professional advice
by creating opportunities for avoidance and evasion.
    In this context, understanding the role of tax professionals is key to minimizing the cost
of compliance and making auditing more efficient. What do tax professionals do beyond
helping their clients understand and apply the laws? Recent informal accounts suggest
that tax professionals play a key role in the formation of their clients’ expectations regarding
enforcement probabilities and the risk of certain practices (see Braithwaite, 2005). They also
help shape tax norms and ethical standards (see Smith and Kinsey, 1987; Raskolnikov, 2007).
For example, Braithwaite (2005) finds from interviews of tax professionals that tax advisers
played an important role in the diffusion of tax shelters with a “supply driven” contagion
effect. A precise understanding of what tax professionals do seems important for tax policy:
information diffusion may be in the interest of both taxpayers and the tax authority; the
diffusion of ambiguous ethical standards or the use of informational advantages to avoid
controls certainly are not. Is it really true that tax professionals serve as informational and
ethical hubs for their clients? Is this good or bad? Addressing these questions with hard,
quantitative evidence has proven so far elusive because most of the relationship is private.
    In this paper, we take advantage of an exclusive dataset to shed light on these questions.
Our dataset merges individual level information from two separate administrative records
from the Italian tax revenue agency (henceforth, IRA): the return files for approximately
2.5 million taxpayers and the audit files, for which we have records for seven fiscal years or
three full auditing cycles, from 2007 to 2013.1 The data provide detailed information about
    1
        In the Italian system the IRA has up to five years to audit a taxpayer report after it is filed.



                                                          2
the taxpayer’s reported income, demographic characteristics and audit history, including
the outcome of any audit: i.e. the resulting assessed taxable income and the amount of
found evasion, measured by the difference between the assessed and the reported income.
Importantly, the data also provide information regarding whether a taxpayer employs a tax
accountant: around 97% of taxpayers in our sample rely on the services of a tax accountant
who is identified by a unique code by law. This allows us to match taxpayers with accountants
and follow the history of the taxpayer-accountant relationship over time.
    We start by documenting a strong correlation between a taxpayer’s evasion and that
of the other clients of his or her accountant–a social spillover effect.2 Even controlling for
demographic characteristics (gender, age), location, time of filing of tax returns, business
sector and size of business activity, the share of evasion over reported income by taxpayer
i served by tax accountant j, ei,t , is positively correlated with the average share of evasion
by the other customers of i’s accountant, Ej−i . One standard deviation increase in Ej−i is
associated with a higher evasion rate of each single taxpayer of 8.7%. In addition to using
a rich array of controls, we show that the result is robust in two ways. First, we replicate
it in a Heckman selection model that accounts for non-random audits.3 Second, we show
it is robust to a placebo test replacing Ej−i with the average evasion of clients of other
accountants in similar groups (for example, the same geographical province and business
sector of i) implying that social spillovers arise through the tax accountant.
    We then exploit the unique structure of our data-set to study the channels through which
these social spillover effects are generated. Guided by an equilibrium model of tax compliance
with tax accountants and auditing, we study two mechanisms behind this phenomenon:
self-selection of taxpayers who sort themselves into accountants of heterogeneous tolerance
for tax evasion; and informational externalities generated by the tax accountant activities.
The model highlights the fact that even if the IRA targets resources strategically to audit
taxpayers expected to evade more, self-selection of taxpayers who choose accountants that
better fit their tolerance for evasion and the fact that accountants acquire and share with
other clients information on the tax authority’s auditing strategy induce spillover effects.
Depending on the environment, either of these two channels, self-selection and informational
spillovers, independently or together can contribute to the correlation between own and
peers’ evasion.
   2
      Using Italian data, Filippin et al. (2013) document that the intensity of tax audits at the local level
boosts people’s attitudes against tax evasion.
    3
      Our dataset provides natural instruments to address the potential endogeneity of audits. We show that
a number of business cycle indexes at time t are correlated with the number of audits performed at time t on
years t − j tax filing, where j is predominantly equal to 4(see Section 3). The important observation is that
it is plausible to assume that at t − j taxpayers (as much as anyone else) are unable to predict the business
cycle at t.


                                                     3
    To test for the presence of the first channel, self-selection, we use the panel structure of
our data-set and look at taxpayers who switch their accountant. This allows us to test two
clean implications of self selection. The first is that if taxpayers self-select into the choice
of tax accountants, we expect the type of the accountant before the switch (as measured
by the observed historical tendency of its clients to evade) to be correlated with the type
of the accountant after the switch. We show this is indeed true both in the entire sample
of taxpayers who switch accountants, and in the sub-sample of taxpayers who are forced to
switch because their accountant retires. Although the closure of a tax practitioner’s activity
is a relatively rare event, the large size of our data-set allows us to do this analysis which
is robust to endogenous switching.4 The second implication of self-selection is more “micro”:
if taxpayers self-select into the choice of tax accountants, we expect that the behavior of
taxpayer i who is with accountant j at time t to be correlated with the behavior at t of
customers of accountant k selected at t + 1 when j ends his/her activity, because i would
select an accountant with similar characteristics as j. We find that taxpayer i’s evasion at
t strongly correlates with the average evasion at t of the customers of the new accountant
chosen at t + 1. Once again this test is possible because of the richness of our dataset.
    To shed light on the informational spillovers hypothesis, which is that tax accountants
play a role as informational hubs, we study whether the income reported by a taxpayer
i at time t depends on whether other clients of his/her accountant j have been audited
at t − 1, and how this compares to the effect of a direct audit to i at t − 1. We control
for time-varying characteristics of the taxpayer, the characteristics of the accountant and a
taxpayer fixed effect to reflect time invariant characteristics. We find that an audit of i at
t − 1 induces a 7.7% increase in the income reported at t; while an audit at t − 1 to some
other customer of accountant j induces an increase of 1% of i’s reported income at t. This
latter result is robust to a placebo test: if we use audits to other taxpayers in comparable
groups but with a different accountant, we see no relationship between a taxpayer’s income
declaration at t and the t − 1 audits in the comparable group. These accountant-induced
peer effects tend to magnify the effect of audits along two dimensions: first an audit on i
has an effect on all peer-customers of i’s accountant j; second, the peer effects tend to be
persistent over time. The effect on i0 s currently reported income of a three-year old audit
on other customers of the same accountant is not only positive but even larger that the
one-year old effect. Cumulatively, after three years, an audit on the other customers of the
same accountant increases reported income by 9.7%. In comparison, if taxpayer i is audited,
   4
    In our sample, we indeed observe 183,300 forced switches due to the closure of the tax practitioner and
for 90,666 of them we can calculate the average evasion of clients of both the old and the new accountant,
that is they are cases for which both the old and new accountant have at least one client who has been
audited in the observed period.


                                                    4
the effect on reported income fades away with time: after three years it is 40% of the one
year lagged effect and cumulatively is worth a 16.6% increase in reported income. We find
that this spillover does not depend on whether the other customers are geographically close,
but they are larger for peers in the same sector, age and size of business. This suggests
that the vehicle through which the spillover diffuses among customers is the accountant, not
geographic proximity; and that the accountant selectively shares with their customers the
information that they gather from their activities.
    Sharing of information about other taxpayers audits through the tax accountant also
affects the taxpayer’s decision to voluntarily switch accountants. We find that a given tax-
payer is less likely to separate from his accountant when the share of audited taxpayers
is higher. This is fully consistent with the informational hub role of the accounts. First,
because the taxpayers can only come to know that other clients have been audited because
their accountant notifies them about the IRA activities. Second, because taxpayers that
are notified are less likely to switch their accountant precisely because he is passing them
more valuable information. In sum, our evidence lends strong support to the idea that tax
accountants play the dual role of informational hubs as well as of tax-evasion facilitators for
taxpayers prone to evasion.
    Our work is at the intersection of two literatures that have remained mostly separated
up until now. First, the relatively small literature on tax practitioners, and second, the
literature on social spillovers in tax compliance. With respect to the first, the research on
tax practitioners has traditionally focused on the role of tax accountants as providers of
expert advice but has ignored the potential social spillovers between clients of the same
practitioner, implicitly assuming that the tax accountant does not change the nature of the
traditional direct relationship between the tax authority and an individual taxpayer.5 The
focus instead has fallen on the determinants of the choice of hiring a practitioner or not
(Erard, 1993), the usefulness of tax practitioners (Slemrod, 1989), the effect on the level
and type of compliance (Klepper et al., 1991; Erard, 1993), the role played by practitioners
in reducing uncertainty and costs of compliance (Scotchmer, 1989; Beck and Jung, 1989;
Reinganum and Wilde, 1991). The role of tax accountants in collecting and distributing
information has been suggested by anthropological and social studies (Smith and Kinsey,
1987; Braithwaite, 2005; Raskolnikov, 2007), albeit informally.
    The literature on social spillovers has focused on showing network externalities in compli-
ance behavior. Early work tested the hypothesis of social spillovers using laboratory experi-
ments (see Fortin et al., 2007; Alm et al., 2009; and Alm et al., 2017). More recent research
has used field data and experiments to investigate the role of spatial proximity. Studying
  5
      See Andreoni et al. (1998) for a survey of this literature.


                                                         5
compliance in TV license fees in Austria, Rincke and Traxler (2011) find that household
compliance increases with enforcement in the vicinity. Galbiati and Zanella (2012) estimate
social externalities of tax evasion in a model in which a social multiplier is induced by con-
gestion of the auditing resources of local tax authorities. Perez-Truglia and Troiano (2018)
find evidence that tax delinquents respond to shaming penalties that increase the salience of
their violations. On the contrary, however, Meiselman (2018) finds no evidence that sending
letters to Detroit city income tax non-filers induces neighbors to file with higher frequency.6
    For the most part this literature has ignored the affiliation to a common tax practitioner as
a source of network effects. An exception is Boning et al. (2018), who study the comparative
effect of either the visit of an IRS Revenue Officer or of an informational letter from the
IRS on firms suspected of noncompliance with the requirement to remit withheld income
and payroll taxes, which are due every quarter. They look for network effects on other firms
related to the targeted firm by a parent-subsidiary link or, as we do, firms who share the
same tax practitioner. They find neither network effects of letters nor network effects of
visits on remittances more than a quarter from the visit, but they find evidence at the 10%
significance level of effects on firm i’s remittances in the following quarter of direct visits to
other firms served by the same tax practitioner as i’s. This is an important finding consistent
with ours, but it still leaves open the question of the existence of network effects in income
tax returns. Tax returns are filed on a yearly basis, thus peer effects have an impact on
returns only if they survive for more than one quarter. As mentioned above, we find that the
effect of an audit on peers–arguably a more intrusive intervention than a mere visit–persists
for years. One advantage of Boning et al. (2018)’s work with respect to ours is that it
relies on a controlled experiment on over 12,000 firms suspected of violations.7 Whereas one
advantage of our work is that we observe one-third of the universe of sole proprietorship
taxpayers in Italy for seven years, thus allowing us to exploit the size of the dataset (over 10
million individual observations) and its panel structure to explore the mechanisms behind
the observed network effects. In addition, while the controlled experiment speaks about
the network effect of the policy, it is silent about whether the tax authority discounts these
network effects in the design of its policy. Our data are informative of the IRA policy and
show that the authority’s audit policy is biased towards taxpayers served by accountants
with a record of higher than average density of evaders.
    We proceed as follows. In Section 2 we provide an overview of the institutional back-
   6
     A different type of externality is considered by Bordignon (1993) who looks at the effect of fairness on
taxpayers’ compliance. In this context, perceived tax evasion of other tax payers is assumed to be a key
determinant of the decision to evade.
   7
     The authors assigned 12,172 firms suspected to be noncompliant to one of three treatments or to a
control group. The treatments consisted of either an informational letter or a visit by an IRS revenue officer.



                                                      6
ground. In Section 3, we describe our dataset. In Section 4 we provide evidence of spillovers
among clients of the same tax practitioner. In Section 5 we set up a formal model to study
the mechanism thorough which the spillovers can be generated. In this section we use our
dataset to study empirically these two channels and provide evidence of IRA strategic evasion
deterrence policy. Section 6 puts our results in perspective and concludes.


2    Institutional background
In Italy, the Italian Revenue Service (IRA henceforth) is the agency in charge of tax collection
and tax enforcement. It is also the primary agency responsible for performing tax audits with
the main objective of enforcing compliance so as to maximize tax revenue net of auditing
costs.
    The IRA performs its tax collection and auditing activities through a rich network of
local branches, one for each province (a geographical entity roughly the size of a US county).
To bridge the distance between the IRA and the taxpayers, each provincial branch has a
contained set of local offices (between 2 and 7 depending on population and geographical
size). Local offices serve the dual role of disseminating information among taxpayers and
offering them assistance, as well as gathering relevant tax compliance information to help
target tax audits. Provincial branches are also responsible for tax management and litigation,
tax collection and tax auditing. Based on its business location, each taxpayer is attached to
a specific provincial branch. Although provincial branches have a certain degree of autonomy
in their operations, all province branches conform to a common strategy centrally defined by
the IRA’s national headquarters. In addition, their activities are coordinated and supervised
by 20 regional departments (Italy is divided into 107 provinces, grouped into 20 regions).
However, differences between territorial departments, for instance in the efficiency of tax
audits, may arise due to specific local factors and choices made at the province or regional
branch level reflecting the degrees of freedom they enjoy.
    As a general rule, audits are not random and do not involve commitment (the taxpayer
is not audited if he/she conforms to a pre-set rule, such as reporting a minimum level of
income, see Andreoni et al., 1998). Audits are decided ex post after taxes have been filed
conditioning on any information available to the IRA. This includes imputed incomes based
on statistical models (called “studi di settore”, ssy), mapping reported expenses on inputs
using sector- and input-specific parameters. In this setting, the IRA carries out its auditing
activities without disclosing its rules to the taxpayers. Hence, there is both scope and motive
for taxpayers to learn about the rule in order to infer probabilities of being audited.
    In this regard, tax accountants can play an important role. Like in other countries, Italian

                                               7
taxpayers rely on tax accountants to file taxes. This is particularly true for taxpayers in our
sample: the sole proprietorship taxpayers.
    These types of firms rely on tax accountants both to keep their accounting records–i.e.
for book-keeping and preparing financial statements–as well as tax consulting. As such, they
advise firms on how to file taxes, inform them of the opportunities offered by the tax code
and provide assistance to the taxpayers if audited or in case of litigation with the IRA. In
this role, tax accountants deal directly with the IRA when the taxpayers are asked to provide
additional information or clarifications about the tax files. Nearly all of these taxpayers have
a tax accountant (see Section 3). Because accountants serve several firms, and know who is
audited, they can exploit this mass of information to learn about the IRA auditing policy.
In turn, what is learned can be shared with all of their customers. This is particularly
valuable, compared to each taxpayer learning on his own, in light of the fact that auditing
probabilities are very low (unconditionally, 1.7%) so that pinning them down with precision
requires many observations.


3       Data
Our study relies on population-level data for all Italian sole proprietorship taxpayers located
in seven regions, distributed over the territory–two in the North (Lombardia and Veneto), two
in the Center (Lazio and Umbria), two in the South (Campania and Puglia) and one of the
Islands (Sardegna)–covering 55% of the country’s population. The data merge information
from two different administrative records from the IRA: returns files and audit files. In both
cases, records are at the individual level and cover filings of incomes generated in seven fiscal
years, from 2007 to 2013, reported between 2008 and 2014, and audited between 2009 and
2015. By law, tax filings older than five years cannot be audited, and so one needs at least
five years of data to observe a full auditing cycle. Accordingly, our data contain at most
three full sets of tax reports with completed audits. The data contains detailed information
on all components of taxpayers reported income and his/her demographics (gender, age,
marital status, location, detailed sector of activity). It also documents whether and when
the taxpayer was audited and the tax filing year being audited. The data also contains the
result of the audit with the assessed taxable income, and thus the amount of evasion found
(if any) computed as the difference between reported and assessed income. Importantly
for our purposes, the data reports the identifier of the tax accountant/consultant that filed
the taxpayer’s tax statement.8 Because we have population-level data we can trace all
    8
    We drop observations with negative filed income (3.3% of the observations), taxpayers that do not use
an accountant (3.4% of the observations) and filings of tax accountants (2% of the observations).


                                                   8
taxpayers in a region that are served by the same tax consultant, observe taxpayers’ mobility
from one accountant to another, as well as accountant closures which force taxpayers to
match with a new tax accountant. Because we know the location of the taxpayer and that
of the accountant, we can portray the geography of the accountant clientele and identify
accountants that are likely to be closer substitutes for the one currently serving a given
taxpayer. As we will show, these properties are important for documenting peer effects and
establishing their nature.

Taxpayers The taxpayers we focus on are individuals who own a sole proprietorship, where
no legal distinction is made between the enterprise and the sole owner. Table 1, panel A shows
summary statistics. Overall, our sample contains almost 2.5 million taxpayers (unevenly)
distributed in the seven regions. About 27% are women and the average age is 46.5 years.
The average enterprise has been in operation for 13 years and, consistent with the small
size of these businesses, employs 0.8 workers with relatively limited variability (standard
deviation 3.3; 90th percentile 2 employees). The average reported gross annual income is
19,506 euros with relevant heterogeneity (standard deviation 54,032 euros; 90th percentile
41,465 euros) partly reflecting differences across industries.

IRA: Auditing and Evasion During the sample period, 138,263 taxpayers (5.6% of the
total) were audited at least once. The share of audited tax filings is around 1.7%. However,
there is some variation over time and substantial heterogeneity in auditing probabilities
across regions (Table A1 in the Appendix). Tax filings of larger firms, defined either in
terms of the number of employees or the value of filed income, are more likely be audited.
Conditional on being audited, the fraction of filings with positive evasion is 51% (Table 1,
panel B). Thus, for almost half of the audits, the IRA finds no evidence of tax evasion. The
distribution of the share and amount of income evaded are shown in the two panels of Figure
4 and are both quite dispersed. Around 12% of audited taxpayers are found to have evaded
all of the income produced. The average amount evaded, conditional on evasion, is about
21,124 euros, 1.1 times the average income filed with the tax agency (Table 1, panel B).
Conditional on auditing a taxpayer, the IRA can review any of the tax filings over the past
five years. Hence, each year, the population of tax filings at risk of being audited comprises
all tax filings up to five years old that have not been audited in the previous years (about
49.8 million filings in our sample). The share of audits over the population at risk is 0.37%
(184,673 audits divided by 49.8 million cases).
    Because filings older than five years can no longer be audited (except in the case of
suspected tax fraud), the IRA has an incentive to audit relatively older tax statements in


                                              9
order to avoid losing the option of auditing them. Figure 5 shows the distribution of the
age of the audited tax filings. Most of the distribution is comprised between 1 and 5, with
very few cases older than 5 years. The average age of audited tax filings is 3.9 years; in 48%
percent of the cases the IRA audits a 4-year old tax filing, around 20% are three and five
years old and 8% two years old; none of the audited tax statements are one year old. As we
discuss below, the fact that audited filings are relatively old ones will help with instruments
to adjust for selection when estimating spillover effects.

Accountants Except for a small minority (1.57%), all of the taxpayers rely on the services
of a tax advisor. Accountants serve taxpayers geographically close to them: in our sample
an accountant has 68% of the customers in the same municipality and almost all (96%) in
the same region. Overall there are 84,185 tax accountants serving the 2.5 million taxpayers
in our sample; hence, on average, a tax accountant serves 29 sole proprietorship taxpayers.9
There is, however, considerable heterogeneity in the size of tax accountants, as shown in
Figure 6, which plots the distribution of accountants in terms of the number of customers
(panel A) and of the overall income filed by their customers (panel B). Over the sample
period, we observe entries of new accountants and exits of existing ones. The average annual
entry rate is 6.4% and the exit rate is 5.9%. Interestingly, while taxpayers tend to have long
term relations with their tax accountant, some of them switch, sometimes as a consequence
of their accountant closing. Overall, we observe 7% of the customers switching accountants
(Table 1, panel C) from one year to the next, with one-third of such switches following the
closure of the accountant. In Section 5.2 we rely on switchers to test for sorting between
taxpayers and accountants based on their propensity to evade taxes. In Section 5.4, we study
the relationship between the IRA audit policy and accountants’ heterogeneity in tax-evasion
propensity.
    Figure 7 provides descriptive information on heterogeneity across accountants along two
dimensions: the share of customers that are audited (panel A) and the share of customers
that are found to evade taxes, conditional on being audited (panel B). In a given year, around
50% of the accountants have no customer audited. The rest of the distribution shows marked
heterogeneity across accountants in the fraction of their customers audited. The empirical
distribution of the share of evaders among the audited customers of each account also shows
substantial heterogeneity and a long tail to the right–a few accountants have very large
shares of evaders. The share of accountants with more than one-fourth of evaders among
their audited clients is 81.8%, while the share of accountants with no evaders among their
   9
     Needless to say, the customer base of a tax accountant is larger than this figure as they serve also
incorporated firms as well as individual taxpayers.



                                                   10
audited clients is 16.5%.


4        Tax Accountants and Tax Evasion Spillovers
We start by presenting evidence suggesting that tax accountants play a role in tax compli-
ance. We consider the universe of taxpayers who have been audited at least once during
the period under analysis and estimate the relationship between own tax evasion and the
average propensity to evade of the other clients of the same accountant. We use several
specifications of the model:

                           eijt = αEjt + β1 zit + β2 zjt + fT + fL + fS + εijt                               (1)

where i denotes the individual taxpayer, j indexes the accountant and t the year the audited
income has been produced. The lefthand side variable eij is an index of tax evasion–the
share of income evaded by taxpayer i , and Ej denotes the average share evaded among
the clients of accountant j, excluding i, over the period under analysis. For each i, we also
exclude from the average the value in the year when i is audited to avoid simultaneity issues
due to the presence of a spatially lagged dependent variable on the righthand side (see, e.g.
Anselin, 1988).10 The vectors zi and zj include taxpayer and accountant characteristics,
while fT , fL and fS are time fixed effects (capturing common trends in evasion), location
fixed effects (picking up systematic differences in the propensity to evade across areas due
e.g. to differences in audit costs), and sector fixed effects (reflecting e.g. differences in ease
of hiding income across sectors), respectively. A value α > 0 would be evidence of a spillover
effect on tax compliance.
    Before showing results we discuss two econometric problems that the identification of this
model poses: selection and measurement error. Consider the problem of selection first. While
evasion may characterize the behavior of a possibly large part of the population, it is only
observed for the sample of audited taxpayers. And as documented in Section 3, only a small
share of the taxpayers is audited. The issue here is selection. As discussed in Section 3.2,
while the IRA decides some audits randomly, it chooses others conditioning on observables
that have predictive power on both the probability that a taxpayer hides income from the
IRA and the extent of income under-reporting. The estimated correlation between eij and
Ej may be simply due to a correlation between Ej and a variable that is common to other
taxpayers served by other tax accountants based on which the IRA decides which taxpayers
to audit. That is, there could be nothing specific to the accountant; rather, accountants
    10
    To the extent that the errors are iid across units and time, lags and leads of the spatial lag are orthogonal
to the error term in equation 1. OLS thus provides reliable estimates.

                                                       11
and their taxpayers may have some tax-relevant common trait(s) observed by the IRA but
unobserved by us. Needless to say, depending on the specific uncontrolled variable, selection
can bias the estimated α but the sign of the bias is unknown. For example, the unobserved
variable affecting the auditing probability could be the efficiency of the local IRA auditors.
This decreases evasion and increases the auditing probability, implying that E(εijt ,uit ) < 0.
In this case, our OLS estimates would be a conservative estimate of the true α.
    We mitigate selection concerns using three different strategies. First, we insert a rich
set of controls in model (1), thus reducing the scope for omitted variables. This strategy is
likely to be particularly effective in our case because we observe all of the “hard” variables
(i.e. variables codified in the administrative records at IRA) that the IRA observes when
choosing the auditing strategy. In particular, we observe a measure of whether the income
the taxpayer reports to the tax authority conforms with the IRA expectations based on
the so called “studi di settore” (ssy in short)–an estimate of the taxable income capacity
of a given taxpayer based on a set of observable characteristics specific to a given industry,
narrowly defined. A taxpayer whose filed income falls short of ssy should be more likely
to be audited. This is captured in our model by two indicator variables called “congruent”
and “coherent,” respectively. A “coherent” taxpayer filing is one that, based on a vector of
business indicators, does not reveal anomalous behavior.11 A “congruent” taxpayer is one
whose reported income is not too far from an inputed range estimated by the tax authority
for a group of taxpayers sharing similar characteristics. Both indicators are provided by the
IRA in the data that they shared with us.12 Second, we run placebo regressions where for
each taxpayer i, we replace Ej in model (1) with a placebo given by the average evasion of the
clients of other accountants with similar characteristics (location, sector) and similar levels
of tax evasion. If there are unobserved characteristics which are common to all accountants
with a given threshold of tax evasion then the estimated spillover effect in these placebo
regressions should be statistically different from zero. Finally, we run a Heckman selection
model. Heckman selection corrections are notoriously difficult to implement because of the
difficulties in finding variables affecting selection (here audit decisions) and orthogonal to
outcome choices (here reported income). The unique structure of our dataset offers us an
opportunity to find such variables. We use three measures of local economic conditions at the
time the audit is notified by the IRA as instruments. Because the audit is announced years
after the income was filed, the local economic conditions at the time of audit notification are
  11
     That is, relevant and systematic departures from threshold values for the vector of indicators, defined
using the empirical distribution of measures of behavior of taxpayers with similar characteristics.
  12
     Because ssy is not defined for some taxpayers, we include as a control a dummy for those for which the
ssy is not defined. Hence, “coherent” and “congruent” capture the variability across taxpayers for which the
IRA observes the ssy.



                                                    12
not known by the taxpayer at the time of filing. Local economic conditions, on the other
hand, affect the audit decisions, as we will discuss in Section 5.4.
    Consider now the problem of measurement error. Evasion, as discussed in the previous
section, is computed as the difference between taxpayer reported income and the taxpayer’s
income assessed by the tax authority. If income is assessed with error, there are two conse-
quences: first, individual evasion eijt may be measured with error, and second, Ejt –being
the average of eijt over i – may also be measured with error. However, if the error is classical,
independent across taxpayers and the number of audited customers for each account is suffi-
ciently large (so that the measurement error in Ejt tends to average to zero as the number of
audited customers increases), the presence of measurement error has either no effect on the
estimate of α (for a large number of audited customers of the same accountant the measure-
ment error averages out to zero when computing Ejt ) or biases it downwards, leading to a
conservative estimate of the extent of spillovers. On the other hand, standard errors will be
overstated. Because we find significant evidence of correlated spillovers, measurement error
is unlikely to be a serious issue.


4.1     Results
Table 2 shows a first set of OLS estimates when eijt is the share of evasion by taxpayers i
scaled by reported income, and Ejt is the average share evaded by the other customers of
accountant j (also scaled by reported income). We retain all tax accountants with at least
two audited customers and at least one with positive evasion. For this sample, the average
number of audited tax filings per tax accountant is 25 with a standard deviation of 9.13
All regressions control for the gender of the taxpayer (a dummy=1 if taxpayer is a woman),
his/her age and the age and size of the business he/she manages. In addition, the first column
controls for location using region dummies. We cluster standard errors at the accountant
level in all regressions. Results reveal that women and younger people evade higher shares
of income, while owners of larger and older firms evade smaller shares of income. There are
systematic differences across regions in evasion, resulting in statistically significant location
dummies. Consistent with the tax spillover hypothesis, the value of α is positive, highly
statistically significant and economically relevant: one standard deviation increase in the
average evasion rate of the other co-customers of the accountant is associated with a higher
evasion rate of each single taxpayer of 8.7 percentage points (27.2% of the sample mean).
The second column adds finer geographical controls using a full set of province dummies.
The spillover effect is unchanged. In the third column, we add the indicators developed
  13
     We obtain the same results if we run the estimates on the sample of tax accountants with at least 50
customers.


                                                   13
by the IRA to gauge a taxpayer’s propensity to evade discussed above, and accountant’s
characteristics.14 Being “congruent” and “coherent” correlates negatively and strongly with
the share of evasion and the same is true for whether the taxpayer has been audited more
than once, while the size of the accountant predicts a larger share of evasion. These controls,
however, only marginally affect the evidence on the existence of a spillover. The fourth
column adds municipality fixed effects. Because Italy counts more than 8,000 municipalities,
these very granular geographical controls ensure that spillovers are not a reflection of omitted
local factors. Consistent with this, the point estimate of the spillover effect is only slightly
reduced and remains strongly statistically significant (p-value 0.006). 15 In the last column,
we add a correction term for non-random audits. As mentioned in the previous section, we
ran a Heckman selection model where we use as instruments the characteristics of the local
economy when the audit policy is decided, which were not known by the taxpayer at the
time of filing one or more years earlier. We devote Section 5.4 to the discussion of the audit
policy (first stage regression).16
    One concern with these estimates is that the relation between eij and Ej is not picking up
spillovers specific to the tax accountant of individual i, but other features that are common
to other tax accountants in the same location or sharing similar characteristics as those of i’ s
accountant. One such channel could be tax audits targeted to specific types of accountants, or
taxpayers (e.g. lawyers or restaurant owners) that tend to be served by different accountants.
The correlation would then be the reflection of a common strategy followed by the tax
authority to audit specific groups. In this case, the correlation between eij and Ej would
only be due to the fact that audits are targeted to groups of taxpayers with some specific
features other than belonging to a given accountant.
    To assess the validity of this concern we run placebo regressions replacing Ej with the
average evasion of the clients of other accountants in the same province as taxpayer i. We
run 1000 regressions, each time randomly reassigning each taxpayer to a new accountant
in the: i) same province and sector; or ii) same province and decile of the accountant size
(measured by the number of customers). Figure 1 shows the distribution of the estimated
α parameter for each of these placebos, as well as the distribution of the t-statistic of the
  14
      We report the results obtained when including among the accountant’s characteristics the number of
clients, the number of provinces with at least one client, and the share of evaders over audited clients until
the previous period. Results remain unchanged if we also include the share of clients by age, firm sector,
and firm size.
   15
      Results are similar to those reported in Table 2 if we estimate our empirical model when eijt is an
indicator for being an evader and Ejt is the share of evaders among the other clients of accountant j: the
probability that a taxpayer evades taxes is higher if the fraction of evaders among the clients of the same
tax accountant increases.
   16
      The correction in column 5 is obtained using the same set of controls in the first and second stage
regressions with the exclusion of the instrumental set that is only included in the first stage.


                                                     14
                   Panel A. Random accountant in same province and sector




                         100




                                                                                       .8
                         80




                                                                                              .6
                                                                               Kernel Density
                   Frequency
                         60




                                                                                     .4
                   40




                                                                                       .2
                         20




                                                                                       0
                         0
                                   -.01         -.005            0      .005                            -2            -1            0              1
                                               Estimated coefficient                                                   t-statistics
                                   α= 0 rejected in 0.30 % of cases                                kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.1172




                         Panel B. Random accountant in same province and size




                                                                                       .6
                         100  80




                                                                               Kernel Density
                                                                                          .4
                    Frequency
                   40    60




                                                                               .2
                         20




                                                                                       0
                         0




                                    -.005          0           .005    .01                         -2        -1         0          1           2       3
                                               Estimated coefficient                                                    t-statistics
                                   α= 0 rejected in 1.80 % of cases                                kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.1540




                Notes. Figures show the distribution of estimated coefficients and t-statistics for
                the OLS specification in Table 2, column 4 while randomly assigning accountants
                in the same province and with at least one client in the same sector as the taxpayer
                (panel A), and in the same province and decile of the taxpayer accountant’s number
                of clients (panel B). The spillover estimate obtained in Table 2, column 4 is 0.083.




                                     Figure 1: Placebo regressions: spillover effect

null α = 0. When the placebo is used, the spillover is statistically significant only in 3.4%
of the cases when the first assignment rule is used and in 4.8% of the cases using the second
assignment rule. The conclusion is clear: the average evasion at accountants other than
one’s own has no effect on own evasion except by chance. What matters is the behavior of
the other clients of one’s own accountant, which is consistent with the spillover arising from
a specific role of one’s own accountant.


5    Mechanisms
The evidence presented in the previous section is consistent with accountants playing some
specific role that affects the tax compliance of their customers. In Subsection 5.1 we present a
simple theoretical framework to rationalize this phenomenon and use it to derive a number of
testable hypotheses. In our model, accountants optimally choose the evasion of the taxpayers

                                                                             15
conditional on the information that, thanks to their role, they can aggregate by observing
several realizations of tax audits and use it to anticipate the IRA auditing probabilities. In
turn, the tax authority chooses these probabilities optimally to maximize tax revenues net of
auditing cost. The model predicts a positive relationship between individual tax evasion and
average tax evasion of the other clients of the tax accountant, highlighting two mechanisms:
self-selection of tax payers into accountants with heterogeneous attitudes about tax evasion,
and informational externalities generated in the tax accountant’s activities. In Subsections
5.2, 5.3 and 5.4 we leverage the structure of our dataset to explore the mechanisms suggested
by the model. A reader who is not interested in the details of the theoretical derivation can
jump to Section 5.2 and 5.3. The predictions of the model are summarized in Observations
1-5 at the end of Section 5.1.


5.1       Theory
Setup Assume there is a continuum of taxpayers with mass one. Taxpayer i chooses
whether to report all income or to evade ei dollars. Taxpayer i’s utility of choosing a level
of tax evasion ei ≥ 0 is assumed to be:

                      u(ei , mi ) = [(1 − pi ) (ei ) − pi (T ei )] − F (ei ) − e2i / (2mi ) .   (2)

where pi is the probability of being audited and discovered and T ei is the cost of being
audited with evasion ei . The term in brackets is the net expected benefit of the tax evasion;
the second term, F (ei ), is the fee to be paid to a tax accountant who prepares the tax
returns, that may be a function of ei (in the remainder we assume all taxpayers need a tax
accountant).17 The last term, e2i / (2mi ), is the “ethical” cost of violating the law, where mi
is the taxpayer’s type: the lower is mi , the more costly it is to violate the law. We assume
that the types mi are uniformly distributed in [m, m].
    We assume that there is a finite number J of tax accountants with heterogeneous dispo-
sitions to allow their customers to violate the law. Specifically, the utility of an accountant
who chooses a level of evasion ei for a customer i is:

                                                                      (ei )2
                                        U (F, ei , dj ) = F (ei ) −                             (3)
                                                                       2dj
                        2
where the term (e2di )j is again the “ethical” cost of allowing evasion, where dj is the accoun-
tant’s type. Accountants are ordered according to their disposition to violate the law with
 17
      In our dataset, only 3.4% of taxpayers choose to file without a tax accountant.



                                                        16
                          
dl > dk if l > k, dj ∈ d, d . With a slight abuse of notation, we denote the set of accoun-
tants as J. For simplicity, we assume that the dj ’s are equidistant (i.e. |dj − dk | = ∆d for
some ∆d > 0) and taxpayers are uniformly distributed around them (as in Figure 2 be-
low). If we denote as Sj the set of taxpayers mi who are closest to dj , then this assumption
implies |Sl | = |Sk | for all k, l. 18 Taxpayers and accountants share the net expected mon-
etary benefit of the tax evasion, with the accountant receiving a fraction α of it, implying
F (ej ) = α (1 − (1 + T ) pj ) ej , which can be positive or negative.
    We assume that neither the tax authority nor the tax accountant can observe the taxpay-
ers’ types. The tax authority may observe the accountant type and target its auditing effort
to specific types of accountants.19 The tax authority chooses the auditing rate to maximize
expected revenue collection net of the cost of the auditing. If zj dollars are spent in auditing
a taxpayer assisted by accountant j and a level of evasion ej , the probability of discovery
                        √
is equal to p(zj ) = zj . The expected benefit for the tax authority is p(zj ) · (T ej + ξj ).
The variable ξj is an i.i.d. realization reflecting idiosyncratic factors concerning j that may
affect the tax authority’s decision.20 We assume the distribution of ξj is a truncated normal
that takes only non-negative values, with mean ξ > 0 and variance 1/r. For simplicity, we
assume r is sufficiently large that for all practical purposes ξj can be assumed to be normal
with ξ > 0 and variance 1/r, which allows us to simplify the analysis. The cost of the audit
is λzj , where λ is the shadow cost of public funds. Naturally it must be that zj ≤ 1 for all j
(or else the probabilities of a discovery will be higher than one). In the following, we assume
that, as is natural, λ is sufficiently large such that this is always true. For simplicity, we will
therefore ignore the constraint zj ≤ 1 going forward.
    The timing of the game is as follows. In the first stage the tax authority chooses the
probability of auditing a taxpayer. As mentioned, this probability can be contingent on
the accountant type but not on the taxpayer type mi , which is unobservable (taxpayers are
otherwise identical). The model can be easily generalized to allow for different observable
classes of taxpayers (say different regions, etc.), and we will discuss this extension in greater
detail below. In the second stage, the taxpayers choose a tax accountant without observing
the tax authority’s auditing strategy. In the third stage, each tax accountant j observes L
informative signals sj = (sj,l )Ll=1 on the auditing probability pj and chooses the level of tax
evasion for each customer. We assume that each signal sj,l = p∗j +εl , l = 1, ..., L where εl is an
  18
      That is |mi − dj | ≤ |mi − dk | for all k ∈ J.
  19
      Intuitively, the tax authority can observe the tax accountant’s activity with many clients over time, thus
it can collect more accurate information on the tax accountant’s type.
   20
      As discussed above, many factors affect the decision to audit a taxpayer, including the business cycle
and the sector in which the taxpayer operates. To these factors, we can add other unobserved factors such
as the availability of tax inspectors and general guidelines periodically sent by the Treasury.



                                                      17
i.i.d. normal random variable with mean zero and variance 1/k, and p∗j is the actual auditing
probability. The idea is that the tax accountant can infer this probability by observing a
small sample from his/her audited clients.
     We study the perfect Bayesian equilibria in pure strategies of this game. A strategy
for a taxpayer is a function ϕ (mi ) mapping the taxpayer’s type to a tax accountant j. A
strategy for the tax authority is an allocation of available resources z = (zj )Jj=1 such that
zj ≥ 0 given the observed vector of shocks ξj .21 A strategy for a tax accountant is given
by a pair of functions e(dj , sj ) and µ(dj , sj ). The function e(dj , sj ) maps the accountant’s
type and the observed vector of signals sj = (sj,1 , ..., sj,L ) to a level of tax evasion in [0, ∞].
The function µ(dj , sj ) maps the observed vector of signals to a posterior distribution on the
level of auditing chosen by the tax authority. This belief is part of the equilibrium because
it depends on the tax accountants beliefs on the tax authority’s auditing strategy, given the
observed signals.

Equilibrium behavior We solve the game by backward induction. In the last stage, the
accountant of type dj chooses ej to maximize (3) given F (ej ). From the first order condition
we obtain:
                     (
                       αdj (1 − (1 + T ) E [p(zj , ξj ); sj ]) E [p(zj , ξj ); sj ] < 1/(1 + T )
       e(dj , sj ) =                                                                             (4)
                                       0                                       else

where E [p(zj , ξj ); sj ] is the expected level of auditing. The accountant chooses a positive level
of tax evasion only if the expected probability of auditing or the penalty T are sufficiently
small. In this case, the level of tax evasion is decreasing in E [p(zj , ξj ); sj ].
     To find the equilibrium, we follow a guess-and-verify approach where we first assume that
the equilibrium belief µ(dj , sj ) is that p(zj , ξj ) follows a normal distribution with mean equal
to Aj and precision Bj . We will then verify that this expectation is correct in equilibrium.
     When the accountant believes that p(zj , ξj ) is a N (Aj , Bj ) random variable, Bayes’ rule
implies that the posterior probability of the probability of auditing, conditional on the sample
sj , is normally distributed with mean and variance:

                                                            Aj Bj + Lk · sj,L
                           E [p(zj , ξj ); sj ] = Φ(sj,L ) =                                           (5)
                                                                 Bj + Lk
                                                      −1
                                                             −1
                         V ar [p(zj , ξj ); sj ] =   Bj + Lk                                           (6)
  21
                                                           P
    Implicitly, the tax authority has a budget R such that    zj = R. This is captured by the fact that the
cost of choosing zj is λ, a parameter that can be interpreted as the Lagrangian multiplier associated with
the budget.



                                                     18
where sj,L is the sample mean of the L signals.22 Intuitively, the posterior belief is an average
of the equilibrium belief on the strategy followed by the tax authority and the evidence
collected in the field, i.e. the signals sj .
    In the second stage, the tax authority chooses the amount to spend on auditing j’s
customers, zj , given the equilibrium strategy and beliefs of the tax accountants as described
by (4) and (5). The tax authority’s problem can be directly written as:
                            X             √
                     max              E        zj [αdj T (1 − (1 + T ) Φj (sj,L )) + ξj ] − λzj         (7)
                      z≥0         j


where the expectation reflects the fact that the tax authority does not know the actual
sample of signals sj,L observed by the consultant. Note that we have:
                                                                         √ 
                                    Aj Bj + Lk · (Esj,L )   Aj Bj + Lk ·  zj
                        EΦ(sj,L ) =                       =                                             (8)
                                          Bj + Lk                Bj + Lk

Substituting (8) in (7), the authority’s problem can be directly written in terms of the
auditing probabilities p = (pj )Jj=1 :
                                               h                                 i 
                                                                        A Bj
                                  X           pj αdj T 1 − (1 + T ) Bjj+Lk     + ξj
                            max                      
                                                        αdj T (1+T )Lk
                                                                                     
                            p≥0           j                                  2
                                                   −       Bj +Lk
                                                                       + λ pj

Because we assumed above that ξj is positive with arbitrarily high probability, we will ignore
for now the cases in which ξj < 0, and so:
                                                                       
                                                                Aj Bj
                                      αdj T 1 − (1 + T )       Bj +Lk                   ξj
                    p(zj∗ , ξj ) =                                        +                         (9)
                                             αdj T (1+T )Lk                     αdj T (1+T )Lk
                                         2      Bj +Lk
                                                            + λ              2     Bj +Lk
                                                                                               + λ

The auditing probability p(zj∗ , ξj ) can be approximated by a normal random variable with
mean equal to the expected value of the righthand side of (9) and variance equal to the
variance of the second term in the righthand side of (9). In equilibrium, we need that the
tax accountants’ beliefs are correct, implying:
                                                                     
                                                              Aj Bj
                              αdj T 1 − (1 + T )             Bj +Lk      ξ
                     Aj =                               +                                          (10)
                                     αdj T (1+T )Lk             αdj T (1+T )Lk
                                 2      Bj +Lk
                                                    +λ      2      Bj +Lk
                                                                               +λ
                              "                          2             #−1
                                     αdj T (1 + T ) Lk
                     Bj     =   2                       +λ     · r − Lk
                                           Bj + Lk
 22
      See, for instance Theorem 1 in DeGroot, 1970[ch. 9.5].


                                                             19
                                     Figure 2: The equilibrium

for all j. The next result shows that a pure-strategy equilibrium of the subgame between
the tax authority and the tax accountants exists and it characterizes the equilibrium level
of auditing and tax evasion.
Proposition 1. In equilibrium, the tax authority will monitor accountant j with probabil-
ity p(zj , ξj ) given by (9) with mean Aj and variance Bj given by the system of equations
(10). Tax accountant j chooses a level of evasion e(dj , sj,L ) given by (4) and (5) that is
monotonically decreasing in the sj,L .
    While the equilibrium level of evasion is not, in general, expressible in closed form, it is
easy to characterize it in the limit case in which the accountant observes a large number of
signals, or very precise signals. In the limit as L → ∞, e(dj , sj,L ) converges to e(dj , sj,∞ )
with:                           (                             
                                            (1+T )[αdj T +ξj ]   (1+T )[αdj T +ξj ]
                                  αdj 1 − 2[αdj T (1+T )+λ]      2[αdj T (1+T )+λ]
                                                                                    <1
                e(dj , sj,∞ ) =
                                              0                            else
which is increasing in dj .
    We now study the taxpayers’ decision. It is natural that if ξj or T are very large and
λ small, then tax evasion may be zero.23 In general, however, when λ is sufficiently large,
the probability of auditing will be sufficiently small so that e(dj , sj,∞ ) > 0. Moreover, as the
following results show, for a sufficiently large λ, auditing is insufficient to equalize the level of
  23
    Note that as L → ∞, we have sj,L → ξj by the law of large numbers, so it is as if the tax accountant
could see ξj .



                                                  20
evasion among tax accountants even if their types are observable. In this case, taxpayers will
sort themselves among tax accountants with taxpayers with higher mi choosing accountants
with higher dj .
Proposition 2. There is a λ∗ such that for λ ≥ λ∗ the equilibrium is characterized by a
partition of taxpayers types {m b j }Jk=1 with m
                                               b 1 = m, m    b J = m and m  bj < mb j+1 such that a
taxpayer of type mi ∈ (m     b j+1 ] evades e(dj , sj,L ) as defined in (4),(5) and (10).
                        b j, m
    Figure 2 illustrates the equilibrium. Taxpayers with a higher propensity to evade (higher
mi ) match with accountants that are more likely to allow them to do it (higher dj ), which
causes the distribution of tax evasion to be systematically dependent on the identity of the
accountant. This phenomenon is attenuated if the tax authority can see the accountants’
types because the authority can then check accountants with higher dj more intensively. For
a sufficiently high cost of public funds λ, however, this is not sufficient to eliminate sorting.
This leads to our first two observations. The first concerns the auditing strategy and it can
be summarized as follows:
Observation 1. (strategic auditing) The tax authority targets the customers of tax
accountants who are more likely to choose higher levels of tax evasion based on observables.
An increase in the cost of public funds induces a reduction in the probability of auditing and
an increase in the level of evasion.
   The second part of Observation 1 provides the theoretical underpinning for the instrument
we used in Section 4 to control for the endogeneity of the audits. Changes in the business
cycle at t affect the number of audits on incomes in periods t − j performed at time t, as we
have documented in the previous section. Changes in the business cycle at t, however, are
hardly predictable by taxpayers at t − j, so they do not affect their choices.
   The second observation concerns the limit of the tax authority in eliminating sorting:
Observation 2. (sorting effect) Except when the cost of auditing is zero, in equilibrium,
taxpayers with a higher propensity to evade match with tax accountants who are more accom-
modating. This implies that the expected tax evasion of a client of an accountant is increasing
in the share of other customers who are found evading taxes.
   A third important implication of the model is that the final level of tax evasion depends
not only on the accountant type, but also on the information that the accountant acquires
regarding the auditing strategy followed by the tax authority. The tax accountant fine-tunes
the level of tax evasion based on the accountant’s tolerance for evasion (i.e. the type dj )
and the observed signal sj . When dj ’s are positive (i.e. when there is some tolerance for
evasion), we observe heterogeneity in behavior due to heterogeneous signals. This leads to
the following observation:

                                                21
Observation 3. (informational externality effect I) Even if there is no sorting because
all tax accountants have the same type dj =d∗ , the expected tax evasion of a client of an
accountant is increasing in the share of other customers who are found evading taxes.
    Without directly observing the tax accountant’s types, it would be hard to separate the
sorting effect vs. the informational spillover effect and thus test Observations 2 and 3. The
the informational spillover effect, however, has two additional testable implications. The
most likely signal used by the tax accountant to fine-tune his/her activities at time t is
his/her direct experience with customers at time t − 1 and perhaps the experience of nearby
accountants if they can communicate. It follows that:
Observation 4. (informational externality effect II) The expected probability of receiv-
ing an audit at time t is increasing with the share of clients that are audited at t − 1, or, if
the accountant j is in communication with an accountant k, increasing with the share of k’s
clients who are audited. Hence, reported income (evasion) of a taxpayer at t is expected to
correlate positively (negatively) with the number of other clients of the same tax practitioner
audited at t − 1.
    To see the second implication, it is useful to consider a simple generalization of the model.
In the previous analysis we have assumed that the tax authority can only target auditing
at the tax accountant level. It is, however, natural to assume that the tax authority can
target with a finer grid that depends on observables: at the accountant/sector of the client
(for example, it can treat clients of a tax accountant differently if they are, say, new or old
businesses, lawyers, or plumbers). From a theoretical point of view, this scenario is exactly
as the one studied above, except that now the tax accountant receives sets of signals that
are contingent on the sector and/or demographics of the clients (say, the number of lawyers
vs. the number of plumbers who have been audited).24 If this is the case, then we should
expect evasion of i to be especially sensitive to the share of similar customers who have been
audited. Summarizing:
Observation 5. (informational externality effect III) The behavioral response of tax-
payers to audits of other customers of their tax accountant is higher when the other audited
taxpayers are similar to them in terms of observables, such as the business sector, size or
gender.
    In practice, we can have four cases. When the heterogeneity in the accountants’ types is
sufficiently important and the accountants’ signals are sufficiently precise, we should observe
  24
    A way to see that the formalization presented above extends easily to this scenario is to consider the
tax accountant/sector of client as independent entities in the model. A tax accountant with clients in, say,
three sectors, would then be split into three different “tax accountants.”


                                                    22
both self-selection and informational spillovers in the data. We might, however, have three
other cases: if accountants’ dj ’s are not very heterogeneous, but signals are important,
then we might observe only the informational spillover effect; when accountants’ types are
heterogeneous, but signals are uninformative, then we might observe only the sorting effect;
if both types of heterogeneity are weak and signals are uninformative, then we might not
observe either of the two effects.


5.2    The sorting hypothesis
The estimates in Table 2 suggest that the correlation between a taxpayer’s tax evasion and
the tax evasion of the other clients of his/her own accountant is neither spurious nor an
artifact of uncontrolled selection. The model presented in the previous section provides an
economic framework to interpret these correlations and suggests two potential mechanisms:
sorting and informational spillovers. In light of this, we now refine our empirical analysis to
test for the presence of these two possible channels.
    Taxpayers undoubtedly choose their tax accountant. A tax accountant can be chosen
based on competence or convenience (e.g. proximity), but can also be chosen according to
the accountant’s willingness “to close an eye (or maybe both)” to accommodate the clients’
demand for evasion. That is, evasion-prone taxpayers may tend to match with evasion-prone
accountants. If this happens, we should expect evasion-prone taxpayers to cluster among
evasion-prone accountants, leading to a positive correlation between own and other clients
evasion rates, as implied by Observation 2.
    To examine whether this channel can at least partially explain the correlation between
own evasion and the evasion of other clients of the same accountant, we start by looking
at taxpayers who have switched accountants. Specifically, we look at the correlation in
the propensity to evade of the accountant before the switch and that of the accountant
after the switch. Sorting implies that, upon moving, a client should match with a new tax
accountant with a similar propensity. We measure this propensity using the average evasion
rate of the clients of the new accountant. Figure 3 shows a bin-scatter of the evasion rates
of the old and new accountants, after we partial out year, sector and municipality fixed
effects as well as a set of switchers’ characteristics. These controls are meant to account for
endogenous switching decisions and, most importantly, for the possibility that evasion rates
have a local/sector component. The first panel shows the (non-parametric) relationship for
the whole sample of switchers (318,534 taxpayers for which we can compute the average
evasion of the clients of the old and new account) and is unambiguously strongly positive.
This lends support to the sorting hypothesis. The second panel shows the same relationship


                                              23
                             Panel A: All taxpayers switching accountant




                                              .4
                             average evasion of clients of new TA
                                .25         .3.2         .35

                                                                    0       .2                 .4             .6             .8   1
                                                                                      average evasion of clients of old TA




                  Panel B: Taxpayers switching because of accountant’s closure
                                              .4
                             average evasion of clients of new TA
                                 .25        .3.2         .35




                                                                        0        .2             .4             .6            .8   1
                                                                                      average evasion of clients of old TA



                  Notes. The sample includes taxpayers changing accountant at least once. The
                  x -axes shows the average share of evasion of the clients of the accountant of
                  origin binned in 100 quantiles. The y-axes reports the average share of evasion
                  of the clients of the new accountant after partially out the characteristics of the
                  taxpayer and his business, year and province fixed effects.




                        Figure 3: Sorting of taxpayers into accountants

but now computed on the sample of taxpayers that change accountants upon closure of
their old one (we have 90,666 such cases). This way we address more directly the issue of
endogenous switching. The evidence on positive sorting is even stronger: there is a steeper
relationship with a better fit. Table 3, panel A, confirms the graphical evidence of sorting
using formal OLS linear regressions of the average evasion at the old accountant on average
evasion at the new accountant, controlling for switchers’ observable characteristics and year,
location and industry fixed effects. The first four columns are run on the whole sample and
the last is run on the switchers after accountant closure. Irrespective of the controls used,
the relationship is positive and highly statistically significant. The coefficient on the average


                                                                                                  24
evasion of the new accountant doubles among those moving upon closure.
    The size of our sample allows us to refine this test further by running our regressions at
the individual level and focusing on taxpayers that switch and were audited at least once
before switching accountants. We can then measure tax evasion of the switcher when he/she
was served by the older accountant, and check whether high tax-evasion taxpayers, once
they switch accountant, match with another high-evasion accountant, as measured by the
average evasion of their clients. Table 3 panel B reports the results. Because we focus on
audited switchers, the sample size shrinks to 14,279 taxpayers but remains large enough for
reliable inference. The first three columns show regressions for the same specifications as
in panel A. The correlation between own evasion at the old accountant and average evasion
of the clients at the new accountant (measured before the switch occurs) is positive, highly
statistically significant and very similar in size to the slopes estimated in panel A.
    To deal with endogenous switching we perform two exercises. In the third column, we
limit the sample to audited movers who filed with the previous tax accountant but was
audited after switching. For example, a taxpayer that until 2010 was with accountant A,
switches to accountant B in that year and then has his/her 2009 filing audited in 2012 when
he is with the new accountant. In this way we deal with one particular source of endogenous
switching: that triggered by a taxpayer being audited (see next section for evidence). The
estimated correlation is hardly affected. The last column shows the estimates for the sample
of movers after accountant closure. The sample size shrinks further to 3,015 observations
and we lose some precision, but the estimate remains significant (at the 5% level) and of
comparable size as in the other columns.
    Finally, we run two placebo tests to corroborate the evidence presented thus far. In the
first, we match a switcher with a new, randomly selected tax accountant in the same province
and with at least one client in the same industry as the switcher. In the second, we match
the switcher with an accountant in the same province and decile of size of customer base as
the old accountant. We repeat this 1000 times, and each time we run the regression in the
third column of Table 3, panel A and record the coefficient on the average evasion of the
previous accountant and its significance. Figure 8 shows the distribution of the estimated
slope parameter and of the corresponding t-statistic. The graph shows that the estimates are
small and centered around zero. The highest value obtained is about 0.006, 10-times smaller
than the estimated slope. That is, randomly assigning switchers to another accountant never
results in sorting as strong as the one implied by the actual new tax accountant.
    Overall, the evidence strongly supports the idea that tax accountants play an important
role in facilitating tax evasion.



                                             25
5.3     The informational spillover hypothesis
To shed light on the information channel we bring the implications of Observations 3-4 in
Section 5.1 directly to the data. We follow two approaches: first we note that, if the tax
accountant acts as an information hub, reported income at t should increase if other clients of
the same accountant were audited at t − 1. Second, note that besides affecting filed income,
tax audits may also affect a taxpayer’s decision to switch accountant. We thus look at the
effect of audits of a customer i and of other customers −i served by the same tax accountant
on i’s decision to change tax accountant.
    With respect to the first effect, the first column of Table 4 shows the estimation of a
simple regression of log filed income where the only audit variable is an indicator equal to
1 if in the previous year other clients of the same accountant were audited (while excluding
the taxpayer in question). In the second column, we include an indicator for whether the
taxpayer was audited at t − 1. All estimates include year fixed effects, taxpayer fixed effects
and sector fixed effects. We also control for a set of time-varying taxpayer observables (age,
marital status, size of the business and number of years of activity) and for the size of the
tax accountant’s customer base.
    The effect of the others’ audits is positive and highly statistically significant. It triggers
a 1.2% increase in filed income in the following year.25 The second column adds an indi-
cator for whether a taxpayer was audited at t − 1; the effect of other customers’ audits is
somewhat smaller but retains its statistical significance. If a taxpayer was audited at t − 1,
then in the subsequent year he/she reports a higher income to the tax authority, roughly
7.7% higher. One’s own history of tax audits is obviously the first source of information
one draws on to learn about the IRA audit policy and this has a much stronger effect on
filed income than other customers’ audits. A stronger response to own that to others’ au-
dits may reflect heterogeneity in types among the clients of the accountant, together with
auditing policy being sensitive to individual characteristics. In other words, the accountant
may inform his customers that the tax authority is auditing taxpayers with a specific set
of individual characteristics. Taxpayers with those specific characteristics may react more
strongly, while taxpayers with different characteristics may feel un-targeted and, as a result,
not alter their reported income. The average response will then depend on the distribution
of these characteristics across clients.
As noted in Observation 4, if an accountant is in communication with other accountants
he/she can share information with his/her customers about the audits of other accountants’
  25
    A similar positive and significant correlation is obtained if we use the precise share of clients audited at
t − 1, including the taxpayer in question, which is part of the set of signals observed by the tax accountant,
while controlling separately for the own indicator.


                                                      26
customers. To test whether accountants share auditing information, we estimate a model
like the one in the second column of Table 4 but replace the share of clients of the same
accountant audited at t − 1 with the analogous share of another accountant. Because we
do not know who is in communication with whom, the share of the other accountant is
obtained by randomly assigning each taxpayer to another accountant in the following pairs:
i ) the same province and sector, ii ) the same province and decile of size of customer base,
or iii ) the same province and decile of share of audited clients that have evaded. We run
1000 regressions with a new randomly assigned accountant each time. If accountants are
informationally connected, we should see a significant effect of the share of audits of other
accountants’ clients in a large fraction of these regressions. Figure 9 plots the distribution of
the estimated parameter and of the corresponding t-statistics. Overall we find little support
for the idea that accountants form an information-sharing network. In the vast majority of
the cases, we find no effect on reported income at t of the share of audited customers of a
different accountant at t − 1.
     In Table 5, panel A we test the informational channel from a slightly different perspective:
taxpayers are interested in learning about the IRA policy in general but particularly about
the audit policy towards people like them. If the accountant informs his/her clients about the
characteristics of the taxpayers that have been audited, we should expect that individuals are
more responsive to audits of other taxpayers at the same accountant that are similar to them
along some dimension. This is a direct implication of our theoretical model (Observation 5).
To test this possibility, we add to the specification an interaction between the share of peers
audited and several measures of similarity with the taxpayer (a dummy for at least one other
audited client working in the same sector, of the same age, or in a firm of the same size).26
We find supportive evidence: reported income is higher in response to audits of clients of the
same accountant if the other clients have similar traits to those of the taxpayers and these
traits enter the IRA auditing policy estimated in the next section. An alternative story is
that the taxpayer comes to know about these audits directly from the peers and not through
the tax accountant. To investigate this possibility, in panel B we replace the peer audit and
similarity dummies with analogous dummies that indicate if other individuals that are not
clients of the taxpayer’s accountant, live in the same province and have similar characteristics
(same sector, same firm size or same age) have been audited in the previous year. We find
that these variables have no explanatory power, suggesting again that it is the information
disseminated by one’s own accountant that really matters.
     In Table 6 we dig deeper into the information mechanism by examining the persistence of
  26
    We consider as size threshold 10 employees. This follows the definition of micro-enterprise established
by EU Commission Recommendation 2003/36, and adopted by the IRA as reference for fiscal purposes.



                                                    27
the information effect. In the first column, we include three controls for own audit at t−1, at
t−2 and t−3 while controlling for other clients’ audits at t−1. Interestingly, the effect of own
audits is significant at all lags but the size decays over time, albeit slowly: the effect a three-
year old audit on current reported income is still 40% of the effect of a one-year old audit. The
cumulative effect of an audit after three years is to increase reported income by 16.6%–twice
as much as the one-year lagged effect. In this specification, the effect of an audit of other
clients in the last year is significant and of the same size as in Table 4. In the second column,
we also allow the audits of peers to affect reported income with lags of up to three years.
The three lags are all positive and highly statistically significant. Importantly, once they
enter together their size increases considerably (and the one-year lag effect doubles). Perhaps
most interestingly, the effect of the other audits observed by the accountants on taxpayer
reported income is larger for older audits. One potential explanation for this result is that
information disseminates with lags. A perhaps more plausible explanation is that details
about the IRA policy are revealed as the audits unfold after they have already been notified.
The variable for one-year lagged audits of others only captures the IRA’s notification of an
audit to the taxpayers (and to the accountant), while the two- and three-year old audits also
reveal what the IRA investigates. This additional information allows the tax accountants
to infer more about the IRA auditing policy. Both because estimated coefficients are larger
and because several lags matter, the cumulative effect of the information spillover increases
reported income by 9.7 percent. This is a non-negligible effect. To get a better sense of the
quantitative importance of the information channel on reported income, consider increasing
the number of audits by one unit for each tax accountant. In our sample there are 81,185
accountants, each serving an average of 20.8 clients that report an income of EUR 19,505 on
average. Our estimates imply that the total cumulative direct effect on the reported income
of these taxpayers amounts to EUR 420 million, and the information spillover effect amounts
to EUR 152 million–as much as a third of the direct effect.27
    We now turn to study the effects of tax audits on accountant switches. In Table 7 we
study whether tax audits may affect taxpayers decision to switch accountants in addition
to affecting filed income. The lefthand side is an indicator equal to 1 if the taxpayer has
  27
     These effects are estimated as follows. Let αi be the marginal direct effect of own audit at lag i = 1, 2, 3;
and let βi be the marginal effect of the others audits at lag i = 1, 2, 3. Also notice that the marginal spillover
effect of the audits of one other clients is βi /NP, where N is the number of clients of the accountant. The
direct effect is estimated as Number of audits× αi ×Average income=81,185×0.166×31,956 =430.7 million
euros, where the average income figure is that of the audited taxpayers from Table 1, panel P  B. The cumulative
spillover effect of an extra control is equal to Number of affected clients of a tax account×( βi /N )×Average
income= 19.8×(0.097/20.8)×19,905=1.84, where the average income is that of the total sample (Table 1,
panel A). The total spillover is obtained by multiplying this number by the number of tax accountants
(81,185).



                                                       28
switched accountants in that year. In all specifications of the probit estimates we include a
rich set of controls including time and region fixed effects, taxpayer characteristics (gender,
marital status, age, number of years of activity, firm size, firm sector dummies) and number
of customers of the accountant. Panel A shows that, indeed, taxpayers also respond along
this margin in an interesting way. The first column includes both the indicator for audits
of other clients last year and an indicator for own audit in the past year. Interestingly, the
effect of other clients’ audits is negative: a taxpayer is less likely to switch accountants if
other customers of his/her accountant have been audited. This effect is also quite sizable. If
at least one other client of the accountant has been audited, the probability of the taxpayer
switching accountants falls by 6 percentage points - amounting to 86% of the sample share of
switchers. While this negative effect may, prima facie, sound implausible, it is fully consistent
with the information dissemination role of the tax accountant. Indeed, a taxpayer can only
come to know that other clients have been audited because their accountant notifies them
about the IRA’s activities. Taxpayers that become aware of this are less likely to switch
accountants for two possible reasons. The first possible reason is the well-known behavioral
phenomenon known as the “gambler’s fallacy,” that is the mistaken belief that, if something
happens more frequently than normal during a given period, it will happen less frequently in
the future. The second and perhaps more important reason is that the taxpayer who has not
been targeted by the audit may appreciate the fact that the tax accountant shares valuable
information about the audits with other customers.
    Panel A also shows the effect of own audit is positive and significant: a taxpayer that
has been audited this year is more likely to switch accountants next year. The increase in
the probability of switching is about one percentage point, or 14% of the sample share of
switchers. One plausible interpretation of this positive effect is that the tax audit signals
some incompetence of the accountant to the taxpayer.28 The other columns enrich the
specification by adding interactions between the indicator for audits of other customers and
indicators for similarity between the others and the taxpayer to test whether the decision
to switch is sensitive to information that is more relevant to the taxpayer’s characteristics.
Indeed we find that others’ audits have a stronger negative effect on the probability of
switching when the other customer is similar to the taxpayer either in terms of gender, age
or firm sector and size.
    Finally, panel B studies dynamic effects of audits of others and own audit on the switching
decision by adding lags of these variables. Note that the effect of own audit is always positive
  28
   This phenomenon is not necessarily inconsistent with the gambler’s fallacy hypothesis described above.
However, the disappointment associated with the fact of being audited may overwhelm the effect of the
gambler’s fallacy in this case.



                                                   29
at all lags but fades away with time, while the effect of audits of others is always negative at
all lags and its absolute size is either constant or increasing over time. This pattern of effects
is very similar to the response in reported income documented in Table 6. The last two
columns repeat the estimates, adding as a control a dummy for whether the tax accountant
is still active to make sure that the switching decision is not triggered by accountant closure.
The results are qualitatively unchanged.


5.4    The IRA strategic auditing policy
Finally, we turn to discussing the implications of our evidence for the strategic behavior
of the tax authority, as predicted by Observation 1. Observation 1 asserts that a) the
IRA audit policy should respond to the public cost of funding, and b) it should target the
customers of tax accountants who, based on observable characteristics, display higher levels
of tax evasions. We start by estimating the determinants of the IRA’s audit policy and then
contrast the predictors of the audit policy with those of tax evasion estimated in Table 2.

Audit policy estimate As argued in Section 2, the IRA does not follow a random audit
policy but rather chooses targets based on available information, either gathered centrally
or obtained locally by its branches. Let pkirt = γzkirt + ukirt define the IRA auditing policy,
where pkirt is the probability of auditing in year t the tax filing k of taxpayer i in region
r; zkirt is a vector of observable tax filing and taxpayer characteristics, including those of
their tax accountant, and other variables that may affect IRA policy; ukirt is a random
component. The latter may itself be part of the optimal policy in so far as some audits are
chosen randomly. We only observe audit realizations Akirt :
                                             
                                             1 if p
                                                    kirt > 0
                                   Akirt   =
                                             0 otherwise

    To learn about IRA auditing policy we assume ukirt is normal and estimate a probit
model. Because the tax authority can audit a tax filing up to five years later, the sample
of tax statements that can be audited–the sample at risk–changes over time. In any given
year t, the sample at risk includes all filings of the taxpayers in our population that are up
to five years old and that have not yet been audited in the previous years. We estimate
the IRA auditing policy on this sample. We control for a rich set of observables, beginning
with a set of regional dummies. These can reflect both geographical heterogeneity in IRA
human resources and systematic differences in taxpayers compliance that call for stronger
deterrence in certain regions. We control for firm size by inserting a full set of dummies


                                                30
for the number of employees and for taxpayers’ demographic characteristics (gender, age
dummies, marital status, years of activity), but we do not attach any specific interpretation
to these variables.29 We also insert a full set of year of audit dummies to capture aggregate
movements in auditing policy.
     Our model in Section 5.1 predicts that the tax authority should respond to the cost of pub-
lic funding and react strategically to the type of the tax accountant, auditing evasion-prone
accountants more frequently. We proxy the cost of public funding with a set of measures of
performance of the local economy (the net rate of new firm creation, the unemployment rate
in the province and a measure of the local CPI inflation). We proxy the tax accountant type
with three observable characteristics: the share of evaders and that of evaded income among
audited customers, the number of provinces where the accountant has customers, and the
size of the tax accountant which is measured by the number of customers and captures a
higher reputation cost of backing tax evasion for large, successful tax accountants.
     Additionally, we include two binary indicators of conformability of the reported income
with the IRA’s expectations based on the so called “studi di settore” (or ssy). A taxpayer
is considered “coherent” when his/her filing, based on a vector of indicators, does not reveal
anomalous behavior; “congruent” if the reported income is not too far from an inputed range
estimated by the tax authority for a group of taxpayers sharing similar characteristics.30
     Table 8 shows the results of the audit policy estimates. Reported coefficients are marginal
effects. The sample at risk includes over 49.8 million observations. The first column includes
all taxpayer controls, as well as regional, time and age of tax filing dummies. Even after
controlling for taxpayers characteristics, there are systematic regional differences in the prob-
ability of auditing.    The characteristics of the taxpayer all have predictive power for the
auditing probability, which is higher for owners of larger firms that have been operating for a
longer time. The IRA policy is also predicted by taxpayers characteristics: older people are
more likely to be audited while women and married taxpayers are less likely to be audited.
The age of the tax filing very neatly shows the hump shape described in Figure 5, with a
marked spike at age four when the probability of an audit is eight times the sample mean,
and a very low probability of auditing a tax filing older than five years. The “congruent”
and “coherent” dummies both predict the probability of an audit and are very precisely
estimated. Both indicators negatively and significantly affect the probability of an audit
today. Quantitatively, a “congruent” tax filing is 3 percent less likely to be audited than the
  29
     Like many administrative data, demographic information is only the one which is relevant for the purpose
for which the data are collected. In our case, taxpayers’ education is not available.
  30
     To make sure that no relevant variable is left out, we have consulted a high-ranking IRA representative
who has confirmed the validity of our specification of the IRA audit policy, without taking a stand on the
estimated parameters.



                                                     31
unconditional mean, a “coherent” 9 percent less likely. A taxpayer that is simultaneously
“congruent” and “coherent” has an audit probability that is 12 percent lower than the sample
mean. While these variables have a relatively strong effect, they are far from being the only
information on which the IRA chooses its auditing policy.
    The second column adds the accountant controls. Importantly, they also predict the IRA
policy: taxpayers served by accountants with a higher share of evaders (an extensive margin)
and with a higher share of evaded income in the past (an intensive margin) are more likely
to be audited (a one standard deviation increase in the average share of evaders increases
the probability of an audit by as much as eight percent of the sample mean–a relatively large
effect) and so are taxpayers served by accountants with customers in several provinces. On
the other hand, customers of larger accountants are less likely to be audited. These effects
are predicted by the model developed in Section 5, where the IRA optimally chooses the
audit policy knowing the accountant type and targets its auditing effort to specific types of
accountants.
    The third column adds the measures of local economic performance: firm creation, CPI
inflation and unemployment at time of audit.31 All of these measures predict the auditing
probability with signs consistent with the idea that the tax authority tailors its auditing
policy according to the local business cycle. The probability of an audit is higher when
firm creation is higher and when demand is strong, as captured by CPI inflation. The
audit rate decreases when firms face worse local market conditions, as captured by a higher
unemployment rate and plant closure rate.32

IRA strategic behavior We now turn to discussing the implications of our evidence for
the strategic behavior of the tax authority as predicted by Observation 1. This asserts that
  31
     We used the provincial-level yearly time series released by the Italian National Institute of Statistics.
Firm entry is the share of companies registered in the year over the companies active at the end of the year.
The inflation rate is the Consumer Price Index for the population (NIC), with baseline year harmonized to
2010=1. The unemployment rate is the share of people seeking employment in the labor force (15 years and
over). We aggregated the provinces subject to administrative changes in boundaries during the period to
a unique fictional province and we assigned them the average value of the original series weighted by the
population in the 2011 ISTAT Census.
  32
     These variables are the instruments we use when running selection-adjusted regressions in Table 2,
column 6. First, notice that they have strong predictive power. Second, they are valid exclusion restrictions.
To understand this, notice that it is the current state of the local economy that affects the current auditing
policy; but the IRA audit refers to an income produced and filed at least 2 years and in most cases 4 years
before the audit is announced (see Figure 5). Thus at the time of filing, the state of the economy when
the audit is decided is unobserved to the taxpayers. Clearly, while these variables affect the auditing policy,
they do not affect the taxpayer’s filing decision. They therefore qualify as instruments when we estimate
selection-adjusted tax spillovers in Table 2. In the regression in third column of 8 we also control (coefficients
not reported) for the state of the economy in the province at time of filing to capture any effect on taxpayers
income reporting that is anticipated by the tax authority and incorporated in its audit policy.



                                                       32
the IRA audit policy a) should respond to the public cost of funding and b) should target
the customers of tax accountants with higher levels of tax evasions. We do so by putting
together the results in Table 8, which document the determinants of IRA audit policy, and
those in Table 2, which show evidence of the predictors of tax evasion.
    The estimates of the IRA policy in Table 8 are consistent with Observation 1, part a):
the IRA responds to the cost of public funding as proxied by the three measures of the local
economic conditions in the province of the taxpayers. The IRA is more likely to audit, and
thus to extract funds from, taxpayers that reside in provinces whose economies are doing
relatively well, thus allocating the burden of taxations to areas where its cost is presumably
lower.
    They are also consistent with Observation 1, part b). To see this, notice that strategic
auditing requires that the probability of an audit responds positively (negatively) to the ob-
servable characteristics of tax accountants that predict higher (lower) tax evasion. A similar
implication holds with respect to predictors of tax evasion that the IRA can construct based,
for instance, on the income statement of representative firms of an industry as the “congru-
ent” and “coherent” indicators discussed earlier. In Table 9 we reproduce the estimates of
the effects of the tax accountants’ characteristics and the “congruent” and “coherent” indi-
cators on the IRA policy in Table 8 and on tax evasion in Table 2. These variables predict
tax evasion well. Consistent with strategic auditing policy, they significantly affect the IRA
audit policy with the same sign. Finally, together with the evidence that sorting on propen-
sity to evade taxation occurs and is strong, the IRA’s strategic auditing behavior suggests
that auditing costs are still high enough to prevent a strategic audit policy strong enough to
equalize tax evasion behavior across accountants (an implication of Proposition 2).


6    Discussion, policy implications and conclusions
Tax codes in advanced countries have become increasingly complex, creating scope for ex-
perts’ advice. We argue that, depending on the role played, tax intermediaries can have pro-
found effects on the nature of the relationship between tax authorities and taxpayers. Tax
accountants can facilitate tax evasion by helping evasion-prone taxpayers take advantage of
the complexity of tax rules and game tax authorities by offering bilateral, taxpayer-specific
counseling on how to minimize income reporting within (or even outside) the boundaries of
the tax code. The implication is the emergence of a market for tax advisors where (some)
accountants specialize in offering evasion advice to evasion-prone taxpayers. A smart tax au-
thority should then invest resources to learn the accountants’ types, diverting attention from
the taxpayers to their intermediaries and auditing with higher probability clients of more

                                             33
evasion-prone accountants. This breaks the direct link between the tax authority and the
taxpayers assumed in the traditional literature on tax evasion and compliance (e.g. Alling-
ham and Sandmo, 1972; Graetz et al., 1986). In these models, absent tax intermediaries,
taxpayers comply only because they can be audited with some probability and punished if
found non-compliant. With tax intermediaries, taxpayers can also be disciplined by target-
ing with higher probability customers of tax-evasion prone accountants. We find that, as
predicted by our model, the IRA policy function is sensitive to tax accountants’ observable
characteristics, and significantly (economically and statistically) tilts audits towards accoun-
tants with a higher share of tax evaders in the past. This discourages sorting, but despite the
IRA’s targeted action, we find strong evidence that evasion-prone taxpayers match with eva-
sion prone-tax accountants, implying that indeed some accountants specialize as tax-evasion
facilitators.
    In addition (or alternatively), intermediation through tax accountants can change the
nature of the taxpayer/authority relationship because accountants act as information hubs:
taxpayers can learn about the tax authority’s policy because accountants can pool the audit
experiences of many customers over many years and share this information with each of
their clients. From the point of view of the taxpayer, this speeds up learning about the tax
authority policy function, providing an additional incentive to rely on tax accountants. From
the point of view of the tax authority, auditing one taxpayer can, through the information
disseminated by the accountant, affect the compliance of the other clients. We find evidence
that this is indeed the case. Reported income not only responds positively to a directly
experienced audit but also to the audits of the other customers of one’s own tax accountant.
The size and pattern of responses to the two types of audits is telling: taxpayers’ response
to own audits is strong on impact but its effect is short-lived and vanishes rapidly with
time. The response to other clients’ audits is milder on impact but persists unchanged
over time. Hence, while the difference in the impact effect between own and others’ audits
is large (eight times), the long-term difference is much more contained (1.7 times after
three years). One interpretation is that own audits have much greater salience than others’
audits, but salience vanishes as distance from the audit increases and a new audit that would
maintain high salience is rare. On the other hand, at each point in time, accountants are
much more likely than single taxpayers to observe an audit. Passing on this information
to their clients increases audit salience. Accountants have the ability to keep track of all
previous audits of their clients: information accumulates and becomes more precise as time
lapses. Understanding the dynamic response to direct and indirect exposure to audits is
both intriguing and of practical relevance to improve tax compliance design. Our analysis
moves a first step in this direction.


                                              34
References
Allingham, M. G. and A. Sandmo (1972). Income tax evasion: a theoretical analysis. Journal of Public
   Economics 1 (3-4), 323–338.

Alm, J., K. M. Bloomquist, and M. McKee (2017). When you know your neighbour pays taxes: information,
  peer effects and tax compliance. Fiscal Studies 38 (4), 587–613.

Alm, J., B. R. Jackson, and M. McKee (2009). Getting the word out: enforcement information dissemination
  and compliance behavior. Journal of Public Economics 93 (3-4), 392–402.

Andreoni, J., B. Erard, and J. Feinstein (1998). Tax compliance. Journal of Economic Literature 36 (2),
  818–860.

Anselin, L. (1988). Spatial Econometrics. Methods and Models. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic.

Beck, P. J. and W.-O. Jung (1989). The role of tax preparers in tax compliance. Policy Sciences 22 (2),
  167–194.

Bloomquist, K. M., M. F. Albert, and R. L. Edgerton (2007). Evaluating preparation accuracy of tax practi-
  tioners: a bootstrap approach. IRS Research Bulletin: Proceedings of the 2007 IRS Research Conference,
  78–90.

Boning, W. C., J. Guyton, R. H. Hodge, J. Slemrod, and U. Troiano (2018). Heard it through the grapevine:
  direct and network effects of a tax enforcement field experiment. NBER WP 24305 .

Book, L. (2008). Study of the role of preparers in relation to taxpayer compliance with internal revenue laws.

Bordignon, M. (1993). A fairness approach to income tax evasion. Journal of Public Economics 52 (3),
  345–362.

Braithwaite, J. (2005). Globalisation, redistribution and tax avoidance. Public Policy Research 12 (2), 85–92.

DeGroot, M. H. (1970). Optimal Statistical Decisions. John Wiley and Sons.

Devos, K. (2012). The impact of tax professionals upon the compliance behaviour of Australian individual
  taxpayers. Revenue Law Journal 22 (1), 31–56.

Erard, B. (1993). Taxation with representation: an analysis of the role of tax practitioners in tax compliance.
  Journal of Public Economics 52 (2), 163–197.

Filippin, A., C. Fiorio, and E. Viviano (2013). The effect of tax enforcement on tax morale. European
   Journal of Political Economy 32, 320–331.

Fondazione Nazionale dei Commercialisti (2017). Rapporto 2017 sull’albo dei dottori commercialisti e degli
  esperti contabili. Technical report.

Fortin, B., G. Lacroix, and M.-C. Villeval (2007). Tax evasion and social interactions. Journal of Public
  Economics 91, 2089–2112.


                                                      35
Galbiati, R. and G. Zanella (2012). The tax evasion social multiplier: evidence from Italy. Journal of Public
  Economics 96 (5), 485 – 494.

Graetz, M. J., J. F. Reinganum, and L. Wilde (1986). The tax compliance game: toward an interactive
  theory of law enforcement. Journal of Law Economics and Organization 2 (1), 1–32.

Klepper, S., M. Mazur, and D. Nagin (1991). Expert intermediaries and legal compliance: the case of tax
  preparers. Journal of Law and Economics 34 (1), 205–29.

Meiselman, B. S. (2018). Ghostbusting in detroit: Evidence on nonfilers from a controlled field experiment.
  Journal of Public Economics 158, 180 – 193.

Perez-Truglia, R. and U. Troiano (2018). Shaming tax delinquents. Journal of Public Economics 167,
  120–137.

Raskolnikov, A. (2007). The cost of norms: tax effects of tacit understandings. University of Chicago Law
  Review 74 (2).

Reinganum, J. F. and L. L. Wilde (1991). Equilibrium enforcement and compliance in the presence of tax
  practitioners. Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 7 (1), 163–181.

Rincke, J. and C. Traxler (2011). Enforcement spillovers. The Review of Economics and Statistics 93 (4),
  1224–1234.

Scotchmer, S. (1989). Who profits from taxpayer confusion? Economics Letters 29 (1), 49–55.

Slemrod, J. (1989). The return to tax simplification: an econometric analysis. Public Finance Quar-
   terly 17 (1), 3–27.

Smith, K. W. and K. A. Kinsey (1987). Understanding taxpaying behavior: a conceptual framework with
  implications for research. Law and Society Review 21 (4), 639–663.




A      Appendix
A.1      Proof of Proposition 1
In equilibrium the mean and variance of the accountant’s beliefs are a fix point (Aj , Bj ) =
F (Aj , Bj ), where F (Aj , Bj ) is defined by (10). Note that F is continuous in Aj , Bj and
Aj , Bj must be in [0, 1] × [0, B] where
                                                           −1
                                        B = (2λ)2 · r − Lk
                                           


It follows by the Kakutani fix point theorem that Aj , Bj exists. By construction, the tax
accountant choice of tax evasion is optimal given the beliefs and the beliefs are correct in


                                                     36
equilibrium. Similarly, the tax authority chooses the optimal level of auditing given the
correct beliefs of the accountant’s evasion. 


A.2     Proof of Proposition 2
The taxpayer does not know sj,L when choosing consultant, so expects evasion:
                                                                          
                                                           Aj Bj + Lk · Aj
            Ee(dj , sj,L ) = e(dj ) = max αdj 1 − (1 + T )                  ,0
                                                              Bj∗ + Lk

where A∗j and Bj∗ are the equilibrium levels of Aj and Bj given by (10). Taxpayers choose j
to maximize:
                                                                e(dj )2
                         (1 − α) (1 − (1 + T ) p(dj )) e(dj ) −
                                                                 2mi
Note that there is a λ∗ such that for λ ≥ λ∗ , e(dj ) is monotonically increasing in dj and
(1 − α) (1 − (1 + T ) p(dj )) > 0. This implies that (1 − α) (1 − (1 + T ) p(dj )) e(dj ) is in-
creasing in dj as well. Assume now that type mi prefers dj to dk with dj > dk . Then we
have:

                                              e(dj )2 − e(dk )2
                                                                                           
                    1
       ml ≥ mi ≥
                    2 (1 − α) [(1 − (1 + T ) p(dj )) e(dj ) − (1 − (1 + T ) p(dk )) e(dk )]

for any ml ≥ mi , implying that ml also prefers dj to dk . Similarly, we can show that mi
prefers dj to dk with dj < dk , then ml prefers dj to dk for any ml ≤ mi . This implies that
the set of mi s who chooses a consultant dj is convex and increasing in dj . That is there is a
                   b j }Jj=1 with m
set of cut points {m              bj ≤ m         b j ∈ [m, m], such that all types in (m
                                       b j+1 and m                                     b j, m
                                                                                            b j+1 ]
find it optimal to choose a consultant of type dj .     




                                                37
B           Figures

                  Panel A. Share of evasion                                  Panel B. Amount of evasion
        .15




                                                                       .1
                                                                       .08
        .1




                                                                       .06
    Share




                                                                   Share
                                                                       .04
        .05




                                                                       .02
        0




                                                                       0
              0      .2        .4          .6        .8   1                         20000            40000        60000
                          Average share of evasion                                    Amount of evasion (euros)

      Notes. Taxpayers with positive evasion. In panel B, values of evasion above the 95-th percentile are winsorized.




            Figure 4: Distribution of the share and amount of tax evasion across taxpayers




                          Figure 5: Distribution of the age of audited tax filings




                                                              38
              Panel A. Size: Number of clients                    Panel B. Size: Value of clients’ reported income

         .4




                                                                           .25
                                                                           .2
         .3




                                                                           .15
                                                                      Income
     Share
         .2




                                                                           .1
         .1




                                                                           .05
         0




                                                                           0
              0      50      100           150       200   250                   0         100           200              300         400
                             Number of clients                                        Total income of clients in thousands euros

Notes. In panel A, size is the number of unique clients over the entire period; in panel B it is the sum of the average income
of the clients over the entire period. For legibility, the mass above the 75-th percentile is collapsed in a single class.




                          Figure 6: Distribution of the size of tax accountants




              Panel A. Share of audited clients                   Panel B. Share of audited clients with positive
                                                                                     evasion
         .6




                                                                           .25
                                                                           .2
         .4




                                                                           .15
     Share




                                                                      Share
                                                                           .1
         .2




                                                                           .05
         0




                                                                           0




              0      .2       .4            .6       .8     1                    0    .2            .4            .6            .8      1
                          Share of audited clients                                   Share of audited clients with positive evasion

 Notes. Panel A includes all the tax accountants. In panel B, the sample includes all the accountants with at least two
 clients audited and at least one client with positive evasion.




                    Figure 7: Distribution of audited clients across tax accountants




                                                                 39
 Panel A. Random accountant in same province and sector




     150




                                                               .5
                                                               .4
        100




                                                         Kernel Density
 Frequency




                                                           .2     .3
     50




                                                               .1
                                                               0
     0

               -.002   0       .002        .004   .006                    -2               0                      2       4
                       Estimated coefficient                                                   t-statistics
                                                                          kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.1947




Panel B. Random accountant in same province and same size
     150




                                                               .5
                                                               .4
        100




                                                         Kernel Density
 Frequency




                                                           .2     .3
     50




                                                               .1
                                                               0
     0




              -.005      0            .005        .01                       -2             0                  2       4
                       Estimated coefficient                                                   t-statistics
                                                                          kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.1980




 Notes. Figures show the distribution of estimated coefficients and t-statistics
 from the OLS specification in panel A of Table 3, column 3, while randomly
 assigning accountants in the same province and with at least one client in the
 same sector as the taxpayer (panel A), and in the same province and decile
 of the taxpayer accountant’s number of clients (panel B). The estimate of
 the sorting effect obtained in Table 3, column 3 is 0.061.




                Figure 8: Placebo regressions: sorting channel




                                                     40
             Panel A. Random accountant in same province and sector




                   150




                                                                                          .5
                                                                                          .4
                    100




                                                                                   Kernel Density
             Frequency




                                                                                     .2     .3
                   50




                                                                                          .1
                                                                                          0
                   0
                             -.01        -.005         0            .005                             -4          -2           0            2    4
                                           Estimated coefficient                                                         t-statistics
                              α=0 rejected in 3.10 % of cases                                       kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.2023




       Panel B. Random accountant in same province and with same size
                 100




                                                                                       .5
                                                                                       .4
                 80




                                                                                 Kernel Density
            Frequency




                                                                                          .3
                  60




                                                                                   .2
            40




                                                                                       .1
                 20




                                                                                       0
                 0




                             -.01       -.005         0            .005                             -4          -2            0            2    4
                                          Estimated coefficient                                                          t-statistics
                             α=0 rejected in 2.70 % of cases                                        kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.1967




Panel C. Random accountant in same province and with same share of evaders
                                                                                          .5
                   100




                                                                                          .4
                        80




                                                                                   Kernel Density
              Frequency




                                                                                            .3
                  60




                                                                                     .2
             40




                                                                                          .1
                   20




                                                                                          0
                   0




                             -.01      -.005        0        .005          .01                       -4          -2           0            2    4
                                          Estimated coefficient                                                          t-statistics
                              α=0 rejected in 2.20 % of cases                                       kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.1922




Notes. Figures show the distribution of estimated coefficients and t-statistics from the OLS specifi-
cation in Table 4, column 2, while randomly assigning accountants in the same province and with at
least one client in the same sector as the taxpayer (panel A), and in the same province and decile of
the taxpayer accountant’s number of clients (panel B), and in the same province and decile of number
of evaders over the number of audited clients (panel C). The red line represents the actual estimate
obtained in Table 4, column 2, which is 0.009.




           Figure 9: Placebo regressions: pathway of spillover effect




                                                                             41
C   Tables

                               Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

                                                A. Taxpayers
     Unique taxpayers: 2,459,202                   mean      median          sd       10th pct   90th pct
     Woman                                          0.27        0           0.44          0          1
     Married                                        0.65        1           0.48          0         1
     Age                                           46.52       45          12.36         31         63
     Years of activity                             13.42       11          10.40         1          29
     N. employees                                   0.80        0           3.28          0         2
     Switcher                                      0.07         0           0.25          0          0
     Filed income                               19,505.87    10,735      54,032.41        0       41,465
     By industry:
     Agriculture                                 4,329.53        805     37,303.04       0        9,632
     Retail                                     15,193.09       9,958    27,855.95       0       32,444
     Manufacturing                              16,193.11      13,247    23,709.30      217      29,914
     Private services                           25,382.64      12,539    75,983.72       0       51,782
     Public services                            47,108.62      33,520    54,751.66     2,773     98,599

                                          B. IRA: Audits and   Evasion
     Audited filings:184,673, taxpayers:138,263
     Taxpayers audited at least once: 5.61%
     Taxpayers with positive evasion: 64.77%        mean       median        sd       10th pct   90th pct
     % audited tax filings                           1.72        2.25       1.20        0.19        3.17
     % tax filings with positive evasion            51.19       63.11      19.76       17.77       70.25
     % not congruent tax filings                    34.17       32.53       5.69       28.40       43.98
     % not coherent tax filings                     51.20       51.26       3.87       45.39       56.13
     % taxpayers audited more than once             7.01         7.17       0.77        5.80       7.77
     Age of audited tax filings                      3.89          4        0.90          3           5
     Reported income among audits                 31,956.85    14,014    107,809.62       0       64,046
     Evaded income                                21,123.98     4,080    158,202.48       0       35,794
     Evaded income of evaders                     33,999.74    10,000    199,614.11    2,564      56,264
     Share of evasion on total income               31.92       18.82      34.85          0       93.09

                                               C. Accountants
     Unique accountants: 84,185                   mean      median           sd       10th pct   90th pct
     N. taxpayers per accountant                   20.81       7.86        67.95         1        50.75
     % clients in the same municipality            68.31      70.11        25.46       32.16       100
     % clients in the same province                90.12      96.30        14.01       69.62       100
     % clients in the same region                  96.32       100          9.30       88.35       100
     % clients audited                              4.60         0         11.03          0       11.11
     % evaders on clients                           3.05         0          9.09          0        7.41
     % evaders on audited                          64.65      70.37        36.11         0         100
     % of new accountants in a year                 6.41       6.38         0.99        4.98       8.01
     % of closing accountants in a year             5.91       5.72         0.52        5.43       6.71




                                                    42
                            Table 2: Tax evasion spillovers

 Dep. Var.: Share of Evasion                  (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)

 Accountant: Average Evasion Others         0.129***     0.125***    0.099***    0.083***     0.102***
                                             (0.007)      (0.007)     (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.006)
 Lombardia                                  0.014***
                                             (0.005)
 Veneto                                     0.046***
                                             (0.006)
 Lazio                                      0.034***
                                             (0.005)
 Campania                                   0.090***
                                             (0.005)
 Puglia                                     0.048***
                                             (0.006)
 Sardegna                                   0.096***
                                             (0.007)
 Woman entrepreneur                         0.015***      0.015***    0.009***    0.009***      0.005**
                                             (0.003)       (0.003)     (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.003)
 Married entrepreneur                      -0.029***     -0.029***   -0.025***   -0.025***    -0.026***
                                             (0.002)       (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.002)
 Entrepreneur 31-50 y.o.                   -0.038***     -0.038***   -0.026***   -0.027***    -0.023***
                                             (0.004)       (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.004)
 Entrepreneur >50 y.o.                     -0.032***     -0.032***   -0.027***   -0.026***    -0.024***
                                             (0.005)       (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.005)
 Years of activity                         -0.002***     -0.002***   -0.002***   -0.002***    -0.001***
                                             (0.000)       (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)
 Firm size: 1-5                            -0.031***     -0.031***   -0.019***   -0.020***    -0.008***
                                             (0.002)       (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.003)
 Firm size: 6-10                           -0.026***     -0.026***     -0.008*      -0.007    0.017***
                                             (0.005)       (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.006)
 Firm size: 11-15                          -0.045***     -0.045***   -0.026***   -0.025***       0.008
                                             (0.008)       (0.008)     (0.007)     (0.007)      (0.009)
 Firm size: 16-20                           -0.026**      -0.026**      -0.006      -0.004      0.031**
                                             (0.012)       (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.012)      (0.013)
 Firm size: >20                            -0.052***     -0.052***   -0.037***   -0.036***       0.010
                                             (0.011)       (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.011)      (0.014)
 Congruent                                                           -0.105***   -0.105***    -0.107***
                                                                       (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.002)
 Coherent                                                            -0.091***   -0.090***    -0.096***
                                                                       (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.002)
 Accountant: n. of clients/1000                                         -0.002      -0.001      -0.002*
                                                                       (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)
 Accountant: n. of provinces                                          0.002***    0.002***     0.002***
                                                                       (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)
 Accountant: evaders/audited up to t-1                                0.022***    0.019***     0.024***
                                                                       (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.005)
 Inverse Mills ratio                                                                          -0.774***
                                                                                                (0.127)
 Constant                                  0.330***      0.377***    0.337***    0.350***      0.311***
                                            (0.014)       (0.013)     (0.015)     (0.015)       (0.015)
 Rho                                                                                             -.0006
 Year FE                                      yes           yes         yes         yes            yes
 Sector FE                                    yes           yes         yes         yes            yes
 Year of audit FE                             yes           yes         yes         yes            yes
 Age of filing FE                             yes           yes         yes         yes            yes
 Province FE                                                yes         yes                        yes
 Municipality FE                                                                     yes
 R-squared                                    .109         .111        .156         .187         .156
 N.Obs.                                     151,070      151,070     151,070      150,464      151,070
Notes. OLS estimates with standard errors clustered at the tax accountant level (in parentheses). The
sample includes all taxpayers audited at least once and whose accountant has at least another audited
client in at least one year other than the current one. The average evasion of other clients of the same
accountant is computed over all the years excluding the current one. Baseline categories: Umbria, age of
entrepreneur: younger than 30 years, firm size: no employee. *, **,*** denote statistical significance at
the 10, 5 and 1 percent level.
                                                    43
                                 Table 3: Sorting channel
Panel A
Dep. Var.: Avg Share of Evasion of Clients old accountant      (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)

AvgEva Clients new accountant                                0.076***    0.073***    0.061***    0.144***
                                                              (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.008)     (0.023)
Woman entrepreneur                                            -0.002*      -0.002      -0.002      -0.002
                                                              (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.002)
Married entrepreneur                                           -0.000      -0.000      -0.000      -0.001
                                                              (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.002)
Entrepreneur 31-50 y.o.                                     -0.009***   -0.008***   -0.007***   -0.011***
                                                              (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.004)
Entrepreneur >50 y.o.                                       -0.011***   -0.010***   -0.008***   -0.015***
                                                              (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.005)
Years of activity                                           -0.000***   -0.000***   -0.000***    -0.000**
                                                              (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
Firm size: 1-5                                               -0.005**    -0.005**   -0.005***      -0.005
                                                              (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.004)
Firm size: 6-10                                             -0.009***   -0.009***   -0.010***      -0.009
                                                              (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.006)
Firm size: 11-15                                              -0.008*     -0.007*    -0.009**      -0.010
                                                              (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.008)
Firm size: 16-20                                               0.002       0.003       0.002       -0.001
                                                              (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.006)     (0.012)
Firm size: >20                                               -0.014**    -0.013**   -0.016***     -0.018*
                                                              (0.007)     (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.010)
Congruent                                                   -0.009***   -0.008***   -0.008***   -0.008***
                                                              (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.001)     (0.003)
Coherent                                                    -0.013***   -0.013***   -0.012***   -0.009***
                                                              (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.003)
Constant                                                     0.419***    0.366***    0.363***    0.344***
                                                              (0.010)     (0.014)     (0.009)     (0.021)
Year FE                                                          yes         yes         yes         yes
Sector FE                                                        yes         yes         yes         yes
Region FE                                                        yes
Province FE                                                                yes
Municipality FE                                                                        yes         yes
No audit before move
Prev. accountant closed                                                                           yes
R-squared                                                    0.053       0.061       0.105       0.253
N.Obs.                                                      312,840     312,840     312,228      88,776




                                                   44
 Panel B
 Dep. Var.: Average Share Evasion of Switcher before switch         (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)

 AvgEva Clients new accountant before switch                      0.071***    0.071***    0.069***    0.069***     0.058**
                                                                   (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.013)     (0.016)     (0.028)
 Woman entrepreneur                                                0.014**     0.014**     0.020**      0.018*      0.030*
                                                                   (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.008)     (0.010)     (0.018)
 Married entrepreneur                                            -0.028***   -0.028***   -0.027***      -0.012    -0.032**
                                                                   (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.007)     (0.009)     (0.015)
 Entrepreneur 31-50 y.o.                                          -0.033**    -0.033**      -0.027     -0.036*      -0.060
                                                                   (0.015)     (0.015)     (0.017)     (0.019)     (0.044)
 Entrepreneur >50 y.o.                                              -0.025      -0.026      -0.017     -0.037*      -0.056
                                                                   (0.017)     (0.017)     (0.019)     (0.022)     (0.048)
 Years of activity                                               -0.002***   -0.002***   -0.002***   -0.002***     -0.002*
                                                                   (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.001)     (0.001)
 Firm size: 1-5                                                  -0.022***   -0.022***   -0.027***   -0.039***      -0.015
                                                                   (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.009)     (0.016)
 Firm size: 6-10                                                 -0.049***   -0.049***   -0.064***   -0.062***   -0.076***
                                                                   (0.013)     (0.013)     (0.014)     (0.019)     (0.029)
 Firm size: 11-15                                                -0.097***   -0.096***   -0.105***   -0.119***      -0.083
                                                                   (0.020)     (0.020)     (0.022)     (0.028)     (0.055)
 Firm size: 16-20                                                   0.024       0.028       0.003       0.016       -0.037
                                                                   (0.037)     (0.037)     (0.039)     (0.050)     (0.097)
 Firm size: >20                                                   -0.063**    -0.059**   -0.079***      -0.062    -0.147**
                                                                   (0.027)     (0.027)     (0.030)     (0.038)     (0.065)
 Congruent                                                       -0.058***   -0.058***   -0.056***   -0.065***   -0.048***
                                                                   (0.007)     (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.010)     (0.018)
 Coherent                                                        -0.056***   -0.055***   -0.049***   -0.064***   -0.058***
                                                                   (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.009)     (0.016)
 Constant                                                         0.444***    0.433***    0.381***    0.402***    0.426***
                                                                   (0.025)     (0.033)     (0.028)     (0.033)     (0.066)
 Year FE                                                              yes         yes         yes         yes         yes
 Sector FE                                                            yes         yes         yes         yes         yes
 Region FE                                                            yes
 Province FE                                                                    yes
 Municipality FE                                                                            yes         yes         yes
 No audit before move                                                                                   yes
 Prev. accountant closed                                                                                            yes
 R-squared                                                        0.088       0.091       0.213        0.233       0.276
 N.Obs.                                                           14,279      14,279      13,321       8,812       3,015
Notes. OLS estimates with standard errors clustered at the tax accountant level (in parentheses). In panel A, the sample
includes taxpayers who changed accountant at least once and whose old and new accountant have at least on client audited at
least once during the sample period. In panel B, the sample includes taxpayers who changed accountant at least once and were
audited before the switch. *, **,*** denote statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level.




                                                            45
Table 4: Information sharing channel

 Dep. Var.: Logarithm of income        (1)          (2)

 Peer audit at t-1                  0.012***     0.009***
                                     (0.003)       (0.003)
 Own audit at t-1                                 0.077***
                                                   (0.005)
 Married entrepreneur                0.373***     0.321***
                                      (0.009)      (0.009)
 Age of entrepreneur                -0.128***    -0.127***
                                      (0.002)      (0.002)
 Years of activity                   0.108***     0.078***
                                      (0.002)      (0.002)
 Size of the firm                   0.021***      0.014***
                                      (0.002)      (0.002)
 Accountant: n. clients/1000        -0.039***    -0.037***
                                      (0.013)      (0.008)
 Constant                           11.426***    12.034***
                                      (0.080)      (0.083)
 Year FE                                yes          yes
 Sector FE                              yes          yes
 ID FE                                  yes          yes
 R-squared                             0.678        0.684
 N.Obs.                             8,289,936    7,259,308
Notes. OLS estimates with standard errors clustered at the
tax accountant level (in parentheses). The sample includes
all taxpayers. “Peer audit at t-1” is a binary variable with
value 1 if the previous year the accountant was audited and
the taxpayer was not audited. *, **,*** denote statistical
significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level.




                            46
                           Table 5: Information sharing channel: peers vs accountant

     Dep. Var.: Logarithm of income                                   (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)

     Peer audit at t-1                                             0.007**       0.006*       0.006*         -0.029       -0.171       0.070
                                                                    (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.096)      (0.321)      (0.089)
     Peer audit at t-1*Peer Same Sector audited at t-1             0.026***
                                                                    (0.005)
     Peer audit at t-1*Peer Same Size audited at t-1                            0.010***
                                                                                 (0.004)
     Peer audit at t-1*Peer Same Age audited at t-1                                           0.028***
                                                                                               (0.004)
     Peer audit at t-1*Same Province & Sector audited at t-1                                                 0.038
                                                                                                            (0.096)
     Peer audit at t-1*Same Province & Size audited at t-1                                                                0.180
                                                                                                                         (0.321)
     Peer audit at t-1*Same Province & Age audited at t-1                                                                               -0.062
                                                                                                                                       (0.089)
     Own audit at t-1                                              0.073***      0.075***     0.073***     0.077***     0.077***      0.077***
                                                                    (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.005)      (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.005)
     Married entrepreneur                                         0.321***      0.321***      0.321***     0.321***     0.321***      0.321***




47
                                                                    (0.009)       (0.009)      (0.009)      (0.009)      (0.009)       (0.009)
     Age of entrepreneur                                          -0.126***     -0.126***    -0.126***    -0.127***    -0.127***     -0.127***
                                                                    (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)
     Years of activity                                             0.078***      0.078***     0.078***     0.078***     0.078***      0.078***
                                                                    (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)
     Size of the firm                                             0.014***      0.014***     0.014***     0.014***     0.014***      0.014***
                                                                    (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)
     Accountant: n. of clients/1000                               -0.039***     -0.037***    -0.039***    -0.037***    -0.037***     -0.037***
                                                                    (0.008)       (0.008)      (0.008)      (0.008)      (0.008)       (0.008)
     Constant                                                     12.016***     12.023***    12.013***    12.034***    12.034***     12.034***
                                                                    (0.084)       (0.084)      (0.084)      (0.083)      (0.083)       (0.083)
     Year FE                                                          yes           yes          yes          yes          yes            yes
     Sector FE                                                        yes           yes          yes          yes          yes            yes
     ID FE                                                            yes           yes          yes          yes          yes            yes
     R-squared                                                       0.684         0.684        0.684        0.684        0.684          0.684
     N.Obs.                                                       7,259,308     7,259,308    7,259,308    7,259,308    7,259,308     7,259,308
     Notes. OLS estimates with standard errors clustered at the tax accountant level (in parentheses). The sample includes all taxpayers. In
     panel A, “Peer audit at t-1” is interacted with a set of binary variables with value 1 if other clients of the same accountant with similar
     characteristics have been audited in the previous year. In panel B, “Peer audit at t-1” is interacted with a set of binary variables with
     value 1 if other individuals in the same province but not the same accountant and with similar characteristics have been audited in the
     previous year. *, **,*** denote statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level.
    Table 6: Memory of information

 Dep. Var.: Logarithm of income            (1)        (2)

 Peer audit at t-1                    0.012***    0.020***
                                       (0.004)     (0.005)
 Peer audit at t-2                                0.036***
                                                   (0.005)
 Peer audit at t-3                                0.041***
                                                   (0.005)
 Own audit at t-1                     0.081***    0.082***
                                       (0.008)     (0.008)
 Own audit at t-2                     0.051***    0.053***
                                       (0.008)     (0.008)
 Own audit at t-3                     0.033***    0.031***
                                       (0.007)     (0.008)
 Accountant: n. of clients/1000         -0.038     -0.044*
                                       (0.024)     (0.027)
 Constant                             7.660***    7.606***
                                       (0.048)     (0.051)
 Sector FE                                yes        yes
 ID FE                                    yes        yes
 R-squared                              0.736       0.740
 N.Obs.                               3,927,310   3,674,085

                      F tests - P-values

       own = β own = β own
 H0 : βt−1                                 .000      .000
              t−2     t−3

       peer    peer    peer
 H0 : βt−1  = βt−2  = βt−3                  -        .002
       peer    peer
 H0 : βt−2  = βt−3                          -        .304
Notes. OLS estimates with standard errors clustered at the
tax accountant level (in parentheses). In column 1 the sample
includes taxpayers filing in two consecutive years; in column
2 taxpayers filing in four consecutive years. *, **,*** denote
statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level.




                             48
                       Table 7: Audit and accountant switches
   Panel A
   Dep. Var.: Probability of switching accountant              (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)

   Peer audit at t-1                                       -0.059***     -0.050***    -0.040***    -0.048***
                                                            (0.003)       (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)
   Peer audit at t-1*Peer Same Sector audited at t-1                     -0.024***
                                                                          (0.002)
   Peer audit at t-1*Peer Same Size audited at t-1                                    -0.025***
                                                                                       (0.003)
   Peer audit at t-1*Peer Same Age audited at t-1                                                  -0.024***
                                                                                                     (0.003)
   Own audit at t-1                                        0.012***      0.016***     0.016***      0.016***
                                                            (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)
   Taxpayer’s characteristics                                 yes           yes          yes           yes
   Accountant’s n. clients                                    yes           yes          yes           yes
   Region FE                                                  yes           yes          yes           yes
   Year FE                                                    yes           yes          yes           yes
   Pseudo R-squared                                          0.033         0.037        0.039         0.038
   N.Obs.                                                  7,664,456     7,664,456    7,664,456    7,664,456

 Panel B
 Dep. Var.: Probability of switching accountant                 (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)

 Peer audit at t-1                                          -0.061***     -0.009***    -0.027***     -0.006***
                                                             (0.005)        (0.001)     (0.002)        (0.001)
 Peer audit at t-2                                                        -0.008***                  -0.005***
                                                                            (0.001)                    (0.001)
 Peer audit at t-3                                                        -0.014***                  -0.009***
                                                                            (0.001)                    (0.001)
 Own audit at t-1                                            0.010***      0.008***    0.008***       0.008***
                                                              (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.000)        (0.000)
 Own audit at t-2                                            0.008***      0.007***    0.007***       0.007***
                                                              (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.000)        (0.000)
 Own audit at t-3                                            0.005***      0.004***    0.004***       0.004***
                                                              (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.000)        (0.000)
 Taxpayer’s characteristics                                     yes           yes         yes            yes
 Accountant’s n. clients                                        yes           yes         yes            yes
 Region FE                                                      yes           yes         yes            yes
 Year FE                                                        yes           yes         yes            yes
 Previous accountant still active                                                         yes            yes
 Pseudo R-squared                                             0.041         0.018        0.019          0.014
 N.Obs.                                                     4,121,810     3,892,972    4,064,846     3,869,737


Notes. Marginal effects of probit models estimates with standard errors clustered at the tax accountant
level (in parentheses). The sample includes taxpayers with tax filings in at least two consecutive years in
panel A and in at least four consecutive years in panel B. Columns (3) and (4) of panel B exclude taxpayers
who moved to a new accountant simultaneously to the closure of the previous accountant. All specifications
include as controls the characteristics of taxpayers (gender, marital status, age class, years of activity), size
and macro-sector of the business, the number of clients of the accountant, region and year fixed effects. *,
**,*** denote statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level.




                                                      49
                              Table 8: IRA audit policy

 Dep. Var.: Received an audit                                 (1)             (2)             (3)

 Age of tax filing: 2 y.                                  0.00540***      0.00548***      0.00527***
                                                           (0.00011)       (0.00013)       (0.00013)
 Age of tax filing: 3 y.                                  0.01207***      0.01226***      0.01151***
                                                           (0.00022)       (0.00027)       (0.00026)
 Age of tax filing: 4 y.                                  0.03071***      0.03089***      0.02854***
                                                           (0.00047)       (0.00056)       (0.00056)
 Age of tax filing: 5 y.                                  0.02269***      0.02281***      0.02032***
                                                           (0.00039)       (0.00048)       (0.00049)
 Age of tax filing: 6 y.                                  0.00023***      0.00023***        -0.00008
                                                           (0.00007)       (0.00008)       (0.00007)
 Age of tax filing: 7 y.                                 -0.00041***     -0.00044***     -0.00067***
                                                           (0.00006)       (0.00006)       (0.00006)
 Woman entrepreneur                                      -0.00035***     -0.00034***     -0.00035***
                                                           (0.00001)       (0.00001)       (0.00001)
 Married entrepreneur                                    -0.00014***     -0.00016***     -0.00015***
                                                           (0.00001)       (0.00001)       (0.00001)
 Entrepreneur 31-50 y.o.                                  0.00020***      0.00021***      0.00021***
                                                           (0.00002)       (0.00002)       (0.00002)
 Entrepreneur >50 y.o.                                    0.00019***      0.00019***      0.00018***
                                                           (0.00003)       (0.00003)       (0.00003)
 Years of activity                                        0.00001***      0.00001***      0.00001***
                                                           (0.00000)       (0.00000)       (0.00000)
 Firm size: 1-5                                          0.00101***      0.00100***       0.00100***
                                                           (0.00002)       (0.00003)       (0.00003)
 Firm size: 6-10                                         0.00293***      0.00292***      0.00291***
                                                           (0.00008)       (0.00009)       (0.00009)
 Firm size: 11-15                                         0.00435***      0.00443***      0.00442***
                                                           (0.00015)       (0.00017)       (0.00017)
 Firm size: 16-20                                         0.00506***      0.00515***      0.00512***
                                                           (0.00024)       (0.00028)       (0.00028)
 Firm size: >20                                           0.00621***      0.00636***      0.00635***
                                                           (0.00028)       (0.00032)       (0.00032)
 Congruent                                               -0.00011***     -0.00010***     -0.00009***
                                                           (0.00001)       (0.00001)       (0.00001)
 Coherent                                                -0.00035***     -0.00034***     -0.00034***
                                                           (0.00001)       (0.00001)       (0.00001)
 Accountant: n. of clients/1000                                             -0.00014        -0.00014
                                                                           (0.00014)       (0.00015)
 Accountant: n. of provinces                                                0.00001         0.00001
                                                                           (0.00001)       (0.00001)
 Accountant: evaders/audited up to t − 1                                  0.00021***      0.00019***
                                                                           (0.00004)       (0.00004)
 Accountant: Average Evasion Others                                       0.00019***      0.00020***
                                                                           (0.00004)       (0.00004)
 Firm entry (share of total registered)                                                   0.01099***
                                                                                           (0.00199)
 Inflation rate (CPI)                                                                     0.00732***
                                                                                            (0.0007)
 Unemployment rate                                                                       -0.00229***
                                                                                           (0.00043)
 Region FE                                                    yes             yes              yes
 Year FE                                                      yes             yes              yes
 Year of audit FE                                             yes             yes              yes
 Province-level economic controls at time of filing                                            yes
 Pseudo R-squared                                            0.111           0.111            0.112
 N.Obs.                                                   49,857,346      42,233,624      42,233,624


Notes. Marginal effects of probit models with standard errors clustered at the tax accountant level
(in parentheses). Baseline categories: Umbria, age of entrepreneur: younger than 30 years, firm
size: no employee, age of tax filing: 1 year. *, **,*** denote statistical significance at the 10, 5 and
1 percent level.

                                                  50
           Table 9: Evidence on strategic audit
                                         IRA Audit Policy      Client Tax evasion
                                               (Table 8)           (Table 2)
Tax evasion predictors
 TA: n. of clients/1000                        -0.00014             -0.002*
 TA: n. of provinces                           0.00001             0.002***
 TA: evaders/audited up to t-1                0.00019***           0.024***
 TA: average evasion of others                0.00020***           0.102***
 Congruent filing                             -0.00009**           -0.107***
 Coherent filing                              -0.00034***          -0.096***
Cost of public funds
 Firm entry (t)                               0.01099***                  -
 Inflation rate (t)                           0.00732***                  -
 Unemployment rate (t)                        -0.00229***                 -
Sample share of audited tax filings            0.00370
N.Obs.                                        42,233,624            151,070




                          Table A1: Audit rates
  Region           2007    2008   2009    2010      2011    2012   2013       All
  Lombardia        2.31    2.56   1.73    1.85      0.84    0.39   0.33       1.45
  Veneto           2.27    2.19   1.56    1.74      0.70    0.27   0.13       1.29
  Umbria           3.73    3.80   2.77    2.53      1.71    0.70   0.27       2.25
  Lazio            2.92    4.46   2.92    2.41      0.80    0.21   0.10       2.00
  Campania         4.02    4.05   2.87    3.07      1.66    0.41   0.14       2.34
  Puglia           2.82    3.08   2.61    2.59      1.14    0.35   0.12       1.82
  Sardegna         2.74    2.92   2.33    2.18      1.11    0.25   0.10       1.69
  All regions      2.81    3.17   2.26    2.25      1.02    0.34   0.19       1.74

Notes. Percentage of audited filings on total filings by region and fiscal year
of filing.




                                         51
