NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE IMPACT OF PARENTAL INVOLVEMENT LAWS ON MINOR ABORTION
Theodore J. Joyce
Robert Kaestner
Jason Ward
Working Paper 25758
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25758

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2019

Partial financial support for this research was provided by grant #R01HD082133 from the
National Institutes of Health. We thank Isaac Maddow-Zimet from the Guttmacher Institute for
help understanding the construction of the resident teen abortion rates and Caitlin Myers for
comments on the manuscript and for sharing her data on teen abortion rates and knowledge of
parental involvement laws. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Theodore J. Joyce, Robert Kaestner, and Jason Ward. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Impact of Parental Involvement Laws on Minor Abortion
Theodore J. Joyce, Robert Kaestner, and Jason Ward
NBER Working Paper No. 25758
April 2019
JEL No. I12,I18,I31
ABSTRACT
In this article, we conduct a comprehensive analysis of the effect of parental involvement (PI)
laws on the incidence of abortions to minors across a span of nearly three decades. We contribute
to the extant literature on this topic in several ways. First, we explore differences in estimates of
the effect of PI laws across time that may result from changes in contraception, the composition
of pregnant minors, access to confidential abortions in nearby states, or through judicial bypass,
and the degree to which these laws are enforced. We find that, on average, PI laws enacted before
the mid-1990s are associated with a 15% to 20% reduction in minor abortions. PI laws enacted
after this time are not, on average, associated with declines in abortions to minors. Second, we
assess the role of out-of-state travel by minors, estimating models that allow the effect of PI laws
to differ by the distance to the nearest state without a PI law. We find that out-of-state travel is
not a substantive moderating factor of the effect of PI laws. Third, we use a synthetic control
approach to explore state-level heterogeneity in the effect of PI laws and find large differences in
the impact of PI laws on minor abortions by state. These differences are unrelated to the type of
law (consent versus notification) or whether contiguous states have enacted PI laws. Finally, we
show that estimates of the effect of PI laws using data from either the Centers for Disease Control
or the Alan Guttmacher Institute do not differ qualitatively once differences in coverage by state
and year across these data are harmonized.
Theodore J. Joyce
Department of Economics & Finance
Baruch College, CUNY
55 Lexington Ave, Box 10-226
New York, NY 10010
and NBER
theodore.joyce@baruch.cuny.edu
Robert Kaestner
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1307 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
kaestner@uchicago.edu

Jason Ward
Department of Economics
University of Illinois at Chicago
601 South Morgan Street
Chicago, IL 60618
jward28@uic.edu

Introduction
State regulation of fertility control methods, such as access to birth control medication and
abortion services, are widespread and have the potential to significantly affect the timing and number of
children born. The effect of such regulations on the abortion rates of minors is particularly important
because of the theoretical and empirical linkages between abortion and unintended childbearing. If state
laws reduce minor abortion rates, then it is likely, but not necessarily the case, that the birth rates of
minors will rise and most of these additional births will be unintended. And while there is some debate
over the consequences of teen births, it is likely that unintended births—births that would have been
aborted in the absence of a state restriction—adversely affect teens’ current and future wellbeing because
they impose a significant constraint on a teen’s choices related to schooling, work and household
formation.
A common type of state regulation is parental involvement (PI) laws. These statutes require that
an abortion provider notify a parent, or parents, of a minor's request for an abortion, or that the parent(s)
provide written consent before a procedure can be performed. While there have been a few studies of the
effect of such laws on minor abortion rates, which we review below, most of these studies are from an
earlier period and there remain several gaps in the evidence that warrant additional research. One of the
most important unanswered questions is whether the effect of PI laws differs by geography and time.
There are several plausible reasons to suggest that the effect of PI laws on minor abortion would
vary by time and geography. First, the incidence of PI laws has increased over time. Currently, 37 states
enforce PI laws and the widespread geographic coverage of current PI laws may make it more difficult for
teens to avoid compliance by traveling to another state. For example, Myers and Ladd (2017) reported
that the average distance to avoid a PI law increased from 55 miles in 1992 to 454 miles in 2017. So, over
time the effect of PI laws on abortion may have increased. On the other hand, the growing use of
medication abortion after 2000, when it became legal in the U.S., may have reduced the travel distance

2

required to avoid PI laws because of the wider geographic distributions of OB-GYNs relative to surgical
abortion clinics (Guttmacher Institute 2018).1
Second, methods of contraception have changed over time and the use of different methods varies
by region. The increased use of long-acting reversible contraception (LARC) is most notable (Daniels et
al. 2013; Kavanaugh and Jerman 2018). Temporal and geographic variation in contraception may have
altered the demographic characteristics of teens seeking an abortion and the effect of PI laws on abortion.
Abortion rates, for example, have been declining for all race/ethnic groups, but there has been a greater
decline among black teens relative to non-Hispanic whites (Child Trends 2014).
Another factor that may have altered the effect of PI laws is the surprising variation by states in
the use of judicial bypass for minors seeking an abortion without parental consent (Altindag and Joyce
2017). Fifteen percent of all abortions to minors in Texas were obtained via a judicial bypass between
2010 and 2012. In Alabama and Georgia less than 1% of abortions to minors were through a judicial
bypass.
Finally, family structure (e.g., cohabitation) and parental characteristics (e.g., age and education
of mother) differ significantly by geography and time, and these differences may affect child-parent
relationships and the composition of teens at risk of being affected by PI laws.2 Overall, there are ample
reasons to suggest that the effect of PI laws will differ by geography and time. However, no research has
assessed this issue systematically.

Medication abortions now account for one-third of all abortions at eight weeks of gestation or less, which is up
from 14% in 2004. However, many states that have PI laws for clinical abortions also have laws that constrain
access to medication abortion such as mandatory counseling, mandatory waiting periods, and restrictions on
telemedicine access to abortion medication (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2018).
2
An analysis of Census (1990 and 2000) and American Community Survey (5-year 2013) data reveal significant
changes over time and across states in the characteristics of mothers/families with teenage children. For example,
the share of mothers that are married was 78% in 1990 and 73% in 2013. The share of mothers who were married
also differed significantly across states by up to 12 percentage points. The share of mothers with a teen child and
with a Bachelor’s degree or higher was 14% in 1990 and 27% in 2013, and the share with Bachelor’s degree or more
differed by up to 11 percentage points across states. The average age of mothers also has increased over time and
differs across states by 1 to 2 years.
1

3

In this article, we add to the literature on the effect of PI laws on the abortion rates of minors by
exploring potential heterogeneity of the effect of PI laws by time and geography. We examine the effect
of PI laws on abortion rates of minors from 1985-2013 allowing effects to vary by time period and state.
A number of studies of PI laws in the 1980s and 1990s concluded that travel by minors to neighboring
states without a PI law greatly diminished its impact on abortion rates (Cartoof and Klerman 1986;
Henshaw 1995; Joyce and Kaestner 1996; Ellerston 1997; Dennis et al. 2009). We review this literature
critically and we use novel data to show that travel to other states by minors has likely been overstated. In
addition, we assess directly whether distance to a confidential abortion provider is an important moderator
of the effect of PI laws.
Another contribution of our research is the assessment of whether the two primary data sources
used in abortion research yield different estimates of the effect of PI laws and, if so, what may explain
these differences. Abortions by age, year and state of occurrence are published by the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC). The other major data source is from the Alan Guttmacher Institute (GI),
which uses its periodic survey of abortion providers to estimate abortions by age and state of residence.
These data sources differ in the number of states and years available, and most importantly, whether
abortion is measured by place of occurrence or place of residence. Previous research has used both CDC
and GI data, but our study is the first assessment of whether these two primary data sources yield different
estimates of the effect of PI laws and, if so, what may explain these differences.
Lastly, we advance the literature by using methods not previously employed: an event-study
approach applied to the standard difference-in-differences design and a synthetic control approach applied
to individual states. The latter approach allows us to explore heterogeneity of effects across states.
Results from our analyses indicate that there were significant declines of approximately 15% to
20% in abortions to minors aged 15 to 17 in states that adopted PI laws prior to the mid-1990s. After this
time we find little evidence that, on average, PI laws reduce abortions to minors. Second, results
indicated that the effect of a PI law did not differ significantly by the distance to a state without a PI law.
4

This suggests that the ability to travel out-of-state to avoid compliance with a PI law is limited among
minors and is consistent with case studies on travel in three states, and with the broader literature
demonstrating that distance to a provider is a significant barrier to abortion access. Third, we found that
results were qualitatively the same regardless of the source of abortion data, whether from the CDC or GI.
And once we harmonized these data sources to have the same states and years, estimates were
quantitatively very similar. Fourth, state-specific case studies using synthetic control methods suggest
significant heterogeneity in the effects of PI laws on abortions to minors. This heterogeneity does not
appear to be related to the type of law (notification or consent) or whether surrounding states have PI
laws, which provides additional evidence that travel is not a widely used option by minors.

Related Literature
There have been several previous studies of the effects of PI laws on minor abortion, and results
from these studies generally indicate that PI laws reduce minor abortions. The literature consists of statespecific case studies (Cartoff and Klerman 1986; Rogers et al. 1991; Ellertson 1997; Henshaw 1995;
Joyce and Kaestner 1996, 2001; Joyce et al. 2006; Colman, Joyce and Kaestner 2008; MacAfee, Castle
and Theiler 2015; Ramesh, Zimmerman and Patel 2016; Ralph et al. 2018) and analyses using a broader
set of states (Ohsfeldt and Gohmann 1994; Haas-Wilson 1996; Levine 2003; New 2011; Myers and Ladd
2017). However, the literature remains relatively small and there are several limitations that we describe
below.
One of the earliest studies of the effect of PI laws was by Cartoff and Klerman (1986) who
examined the effect of a PI law in Massachusetts in 1981 on abortions to minors. Results of the analysis
indicated that abortions among minors aged 15 to 17 in Massachusetts were 45% lower in 1982, the first
full year after the law’s enactment, than in 1980, the last full year prior to the law. The 45% drop in minor
abortions represented 192 abortions per month. There was no similar change in abortion among women
aged 18 and older. Cartoff and Klerman (1986) claim that, after accounting for the Massachusetts minors
5

that went out-of-state for an abortion and non-resident minors that stopped coming in to the state, “…this
state’s parental consent law had little effect on adolescent’s pregnancy-resolution behavior” (Cartoof and
Klerman 1986, p. 397). We show that this conclusion is likely overstated. Using their published data, we
estimate that abortions to resident minors fell 20% in Massachusetts.3
Henshaw (1995) analyzed Mississippi’s 1993 PI law and concluded, like Cartoof and Klerman
(1986), that the Mississippi statute had little effect on minor abortion because of increased travel out-ofstate. One challenge in evaluating Mississippi’s PI law was the confounding effect of Mississippi’s
mandatory delay statute that went into effect in August of 1992, eight months prior to the PI law. The
delay statute required two in-person visits to the provider and many women of all ages went out-of-state
for an abortion (Joyce, Henshaw and Skatrud 1997; Joyce and Kaestner 2000). Other challenges include
the small number of abortions and associated lack of statistical power, and potential bias related to
misreporting of abortions. Henshaw (1995) notes that his estimates cannot rule out a decline of 18% in
minor abortions.
Ellertson (1997) also conducted a before and after analysis of the effect of PI laws in three states:
Minnesota (1981), Missouri (1985) and Indiana (1982). She reported that PI laws were associated with a
26%, 20% and 17% decrease in in-state abortions to minors in Minnesota, Missouri and Indiana,
respectively. She also found that out-of-state travel by Missouri minors increased by 53% (relative to an
unreported base). However, Ellertson (1997) measured travel in 1989, four years after the law’s
implementation, a time lag that makes it difficult to make a claim that travel offset part of the effect of the
law in Missouri. Missouri’s PI law was also associated with a significant increase in out-of-state travel for

Cartoof and Klerman (1986) is frequently cited as the seminal example of travel by minors in response to a PI law
(See Dennis et al. 2009). Thus, it is worth detailing our claim. The Massachusetts PI law went into effect in May of
1981. There were 5,113 abortions to minors performed in the state in 1980; 6.3% of all abortions in the state were to
non-residents and 3% of Massachusetts residents obtained abortions in other states. If we assume 6.3% of abortions
to minors were also non-residents, and 3% of resident minors went out of state in 1980, then there were 4,935
abortions to resident minors in 1980. In 1982 there were 3,942 abortions to resident minors 2,802 were performed
in Massachusetts and 1,140 in other states. Accordingly, abortions to resident minors fell by 20.1 % from 1980 to
1982 ((4,935-3,942)/4,935).
3

6

an abortion among women aged 18 to 19 (13%) and 20 to 24 (18%) who should not have been affected
directly by the law.
Joyce and Kaestner (1996, 2001) analyzed the effect of PI laws in Mississippi, South Carolina
and Tennessee in the late 1980s and early 1990s. The laws in Mississippi and South Carolina were
associated with a decrease in abortions of between 8% and 10%.4 Results also indicated that Mississippi
minors were more likely to go out-of-state for an abortion in response to the law, but travel did not
obviate the law’s impact. However, as noted earlier, Mississippi’s law was possibly confounded by the
enforcement of a mandatory delay statute just 8 months earlier. Joyce and Kaestner (1996) found no
effect of Tennessee’s 1989 PI law. However, a recent review of legal decisions indicated that Tennessee’s
1989 statute was enjoined and the PI law did not go into effect until 1992 (Myers and Ladd 2017).
A recent case study of the effect of Texas’s PI law measured exposure to the law by age at
conception and not age at termination (Joyce, Kaestner and Colman 2006).5 The authors compared
changes in abortion to minors who were 17 years and 6 months at conception to those who had just turned
18 and were, thus, unexposed. The authors’ preferred estimate was that Texas’ PI law caused a 16%
decline in the abortion rate of 17-year-olds.
Three recent case studies looked at the effect of PI laws in New Hampshire and Illinois, but all
three were limited to an analysis of one or a few abortion clinics. MacAfee et al. (2014) reported that
abortion to minors in Planned Parenthood clinics in New Hampshire fell from 95 to 50 after the state
imposed a parental notification law in 2011. Abortions to Massachusetts residents accounted for 62% of
the decline. The law had no statistically significant effect on resident minors from New Hampshire.
Illinois began to enforce a parental notification law in 2013. Ralph et al. (2018) analyzed changes in

Joyce and Kaestner (2001) also report difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the PI law on the abortion
rate adjusting for age, race and other factors. In this case, there is no evidence of a decline in abortions in South
Carolina. The difference between this finding and the one reported above in the text is because the analysis reported
here was in absolute terms, not proportional changes. Because baseline abortion rates differed significantly between
the affected teens and older teens used as a comparison group, the difference-in-differences estimates differed.
5
See also Colman, Joyce and Kaestner 2008 and Colman and Joyce 2009.
4

7

abortion to minors and young adults at a clinic in Illinois on the border with Missouri. Abortion to Illinois
minors fell 26% (p<.17,) but they fell 32% to non-resident minors, almost all of whom were from
Missouri. Overall, abortion to all minors fell from 220 abortions the year before the law to 156 the year
after (p<.016). A similar study at a single facility in Cook County reported no meaningful change in
abortions to minors after Illinois’ PI law (Ramesh, Zimmerman and Patel 2016).
Among the studies that conducted broader analyses of the effect of PI laws across several states,
the first was by Ohsfeldt and Gohmann (1994) who studied the effect of PI laws in place in 1984, 1987
and 1988 in approximately 30 states using data on abortion by state of residence.6 They reported that PI
laws reduced minor abortion by approximately 20%. However, the research design used in this study did
not include state fixed effects and it used the ratio of the teen to adult (ages 18-19 or ages 20-44) abortion
rate as the dependent variable.
Haas-Wilson (1996) used data from 1978 to 1990 to examine the effect of PI laws on teen
abortion (ages 15 to 19). She used data from the CDC, which is measured by state of occurrence. The
research design used in this study was the now standard difference-in-differences (two-way fixed effects)
approach. Results indicated that PI laws reduced teen abortion by 13%. Notably this was the effect of PI
laws on teens aged 15 to 19, but only teens aged 15 to 17 were affected. Given that not all teens were
affected, it is reasonable to multiply the estimate reported by Haas-Wilson by a factor of three because
only one-third of abortions among those aged 15 to 19 are among those aged 15 to 17 (Henshaw and Kost
1992). Doing so, yields an estimate of the effect of PI laws on minor abortions of 39%. Scaling the HaasWilson estimate in this way assumed that all of the decline in abortions was among those 15 to 17. If
there was a fall in abortions among older women, then scaling by a factor of three overstates the effect
size.

Myers (2017) examined the effect of parental consent on the probability of giving birth in the early 1970s.
Although abortion was legal nationally in 1973, many states required that minors have parental consent before a
termination could be performed. Parent’s blanket veto power over a minor’s decision to abort was ruled
unconstitutional by U.S. Supreme court in Danforth (1976). Myers found that the probability that a teen gave birth
prior to 19 years of age was 5.2 percentage points lower in states that granted minors confidential access to abortion.
6

8

Levine (2003) used a difference-in-differences design with GI data on abortion by state of
residence for teens aged 15 to 17 for four years: 1985, 1988, 1992 and 1996. Results indicated that PI
laws reduced abortions among minors by 15% to 20%. However, estimates were sensitive to the inclusion
of state-specific trends and there was some evidence that PI laws were associated with reductions in
abortions among teens aged 18 to 19.7
The most recent study is Myers and Ladd (2017) who analyzed the effect of PI laws on the birth
rates of minors from 1980 to 2014.8 Myers and Ladd (2017) argued that the impact of PI laws would
increase as more states enforced them because access to confidential abortion providers would require
more extensive travel. While their analysis focused on births, Myers and Ladd (2017) reported estimates
of the effect of PI laws on abortion using GI data from 1985 to 2011. They find that PI laws were
associated with a 12% to 13% decline in the abortion rates of minors. Myers and Ladd (2017) found no
significant effect of distance necessary to avoid a law on minor abortions.9
Summary and Contributions of Our Research
Taking an inventory of results from previous studies indicates that most studies find that PI laws
decreased abortions of teens aged 15 to 17, and that an effect size of 15% is typical, although there is
meaningful variation across studies. This consensus masks several unresolved issues that we attempt to
address.
An important consideration in the analysis of PI laws has been the extent to which minors will
travel to other states for an abortion without parental involvement (Dennis et al. 2009). While Cartoof and
Klerman (1986) is often cited as evidence that there is significant travel among teens to evade the law, the

With only four years of data (1985, 1988, 1992, and 1996), state-specific trends are estimated from only a few data
points and are, thus, unlikely to be estimated with much precision.
8
Also see New (2011) who examined the effect of PI laws using CDC from 1985 to 2005. He reported a 15%
decline in the abortion rate of minors associated with PI laws. New (2011) did not include state or year fixed effects.
9
Distance necessary to avoid a PI law is measured as the difference in distance between the nearest abortion
provider and distance to nearest confidential provider. Thus, a teen who is 10 miles from nearest provider and 110
miles from nearest confidential provider faces the same avoidance distance as a teen who is 110 miles from the
nearest provider and 210 miles from the nearest confidential provider.
7

9

authors’ conclusions were arguably overstated. Minors did travel, but this did not negate the impact of the
law. The study also pertained to a small state in 1981 with short travel distances to nearby states without
PI laws. Similarly, MacAfee et al. (2015) and Ralph et al. (2018) showed that abortions fell more among
out-of-state minors following PI laws in New Hampshire and Illinois than among resident minors of the
state. But their results pertain to one clinic or a few clinics in close proximity to states where parental
consent was not required. Other evidence of travel is less compelling. Ellertson’s (1997) simulation
analysis is speculative and uses data on travel four years after the implementation of the PI law to argue
that travel may have offset much of the effect of the PI law in Missouri. Henshaw (1995) argued that
Mississippi’s PI law had no effect on the abortion rate of minors as most resident minors went out of state
for an abortion in response to the law. However, Henshaw’s estimates are potentially confounded by
Mississippi’s mandatory delay law that was enforced just 8 months prior to its PI law, which also induced
many non-minors to leave the state for an abortion.
Identifying the extent of out-of-state travel by minors for a confidential abortion is a central
empirical issue for national analyses of PI laws. The impact of distance to a confidential abortion provider
becomes increasingly salient as more states enforce PI laws. Recent studies by Colman and Joyce (2011),
Lindo et al. (2018) and Fischer et al. (2018) of abortion in Texas after closures of abortion clinics reported
that distance to an abortion provider represents a substantial barrier to obtaining an abortion.10 These
studies, which apply to women of all ages, suggest that travel would be an even larger barrier for minors
who lack the resources and capabilities of adult women and raise questions about whether out-of-state
travel is an easily exercised option for teens. We explicitly analyze whether the distance necessary to
evade a PI law affects abortion rates among minors (and older teens). We also assess whether the effect of
PI laws has changed over time as distance to a confidential abortion provider has grown.

Also see Jewell and Brown (2000) who reported that, among teens in Texas, the increased cost of travelling to a
county with an abortion provider for teens living in a county without one, was associated with a 10% decline in
abortions.
10

10

The issue of travel by minors is also relevant to our second contribution, in which we compare the
effect of PI laws in state-year panels with data on abortions by state of residence and state of occurrence.
The Guttmacher Institute estimates abortions to minors and older teens by state of residence, while the
CDC’s abortion surveillance system reports abortions by state of occurrence. State-year analyses of PI
laws based on abortion rates by state of occurrence will overstate the impact of the law if resident minors
leave the state for a confidential abortion and non-resident minors stop coming into the state with a PI
law. Abortions by state of residence would resolve the issue, but such data are unavailable nationally and
they are estimated by Guttmacher Institute. The GI data may not account for travel by minors in response
to a law, as we describe below. Another complication is that the states and years included in the CDC and
GI data differ (see Appendix Table 1). We harmonize these data and report estimates using a common set
of states and years to illuminate the source of differences, if any, in estimates obtained using the two data
sources.
Finally, we conduct several state-specific case studies using a synthetic control approach to assess
heterogeneity of effects by state and time period. As argued earlier, there are several plausible reasons to
expect that the effect of PI laws will differ by state and year. The case studies we conduct vary over time
and include states with different types of PI policies and different proximity to confidential providers. The
synthetic control approach also provides an assessment of whether minors adjust their behavior overtime
in response to a PI law (Kane and Staiger 1996).

Empirical Approach
We use two empirical approaches to obtain estimates of the effect of PI laws on abortions to teens
aged 15 to 17. And, as noted earlier, we use two data sources: information on abortions by state of
residence provided by the GI and abortions by state of occurrence available from the CDC.
Difference-in-differences

11

The first approach is a difference-in-differences (DiD) research design (i.e., two-way fixed
effects) that measures changes in abortions to teens aged 15 to 17 pre- and post-adoption of a PI law in
states that did (treatment states) and did not (control states) adopt a law.
The DiD will be implemented using multivariate regression methods and the following regression
model specification:
𝐴𝑗𝑡 = 𝛼𝑗 + 𝛿𝑡 + 𝛽𝑃𝐼𝑗𝑡 + 𝜆 𝑍𝑗𝑡 + 𝑢𝑗𝑡

(1)

In equation (1), the abortion rate (A), or log of the abortion rate, of teens aged 15 to 17 in state j
and year t depends on: state fixed effects (𝛼𝑗 ); year fixed effects (𝛿𝑡 ); and a binary indicator of whether
any PI law is enforced in that state and year. In addition, the model includes the following state-specific,
time-varying covariates (Zjt): state unemployment rate, state median wage for women ages 25 to 44; and
shares of women ages 15 to 19 who are black, non-Hispanic and white-Hispanic. The coefficient, β, is the
adjusted DiD estimate. The DiD regression model in equation (1) is standard. We estimate the model
using weighted least squares where the weight is the state population of women ages 15 to 17. Standard
errors allow for non-independence of observations within state (i.e., cluster robust standard errors).11
The primary threat to the validity of the DiD approach is from unmeasured confounders that vary
by state and year (i.e., violation of parallel trends). To assess this problem, we estimate an event-study
specification of the DiD regression model in which we allow the effect of the PI law to differ by the years
surrounding implementation. Specifically:
𝑙=5

𝐴𝑗𝑡 = 𝛼𝑗 + 𝛿𝑡 + ∑ 𝐵𝑙 𝟏(𝑃𝐼𝑗 ∗ 𝛿𝑙=𝑡−𝑡∗ ) + 𝜆𝑍𝑗𝑡 + 𝑢𝑗𝑡
𝑙=−6

The indicator function (1) means δl=t-t* is 1 if l=t-t* and zero otherwise; t* is the year a PI law was
enforced; l = -6 includes all years more than 5 years prior to the implementation of a PI law and l = 5

We also estimated unweighted regressions and report results from these regressions in Appendix Table 2.
Unweighted estimates are somewhat smaller than results reported in the text.
11

12

(2)

includes all years more than 4 years after the implementation of a PI law. The test of the validity of the
DiD is that estimates of Bl in periods prior to the implementation of the law are zero.
We also address the potential threat from confounding factors by estimating a modified version of
equation (1) that allows the effect of state-specific, time-varying covariates (Zjt) to differ by year. This
specification is given by:
𝐴𝑗𝑡 = 𝛼𝑗 + 𝛿𝑡 + 𝛽𝑃𝐼𝑗𝑡 + 𝜆 𝑍𝑗𝑡 + 𝜋𝑘𝑡 (𝑍𝑗𝑘𝑡 ∗ 𝛿𝑡 ) + 𝑢𝑗𝑡

(3)

The inclusion of the covariates (Zjt)-by-year effects is one way to control for potential confounding (see
Jaeger et al. 2018). Note that we have used the subscript k to index covariates. An alternative approach is
to include state-specific linear time trends, as in the following model:
𝐴𝑗𝑡 = 𝛼𝑗 + 𝛿𝑡 + 𝛽𝑃𝐼𝑗𝑡 + 𝜆 𝑍𝑗𝑡 + 𝜋𝑗 (𝛼𝑗 ∗ 𝑇𝑅𝐸𝑁𝐷𝑡 ) + 𝑢𝑗𝑡

(4)

Finally, to assess whether the effect of a PI law differs by the distance to the nearest non-PI law
state, we estimate a model that allows the effect of the PI law to differ by the distance to the nearest state
without a PI law. Distance is measured as in linear miles from the most populous city in the state with a
PI law to the most populous city of the nearest state without a PI law.12
𝐴𝑗𝑡 = 𝛼𝑗 + 𝛿𝑡 + 𝛽1 (𝑃𝐼𝑗𝑡 ∗ 𝐷𝐼𝑆𝑇_1) + 𝛽2 (𝑃𝐼𝑗𝑡 ∗ 𝐷𝐼𝑆𝑇_2)
+𝛽3 (𝑃𝐼𝑗𝑡 ∗ 𝐷𝐼𝑆𝑇_3) + 𝜆1 𝑍𝑗𝑡 + 𝜋𝑗 (𝛼𝑗 ∗ 𝑇𝑅𝐸𝑁𝐷𝑡 ) + 𝑢𝑗𝑡

(5)

The new variables in equation (5) are the interactions between the indicator that the state had adopted a PI
law and the distance to the nearest state without a PI law. We divided states that adopted a PI law into
three groups that refer to the tercile of the distribution of distance from a state with a PI law to the nearest
state without a PI law (DIST_1 being the shortest distance tercile, DIST_2 being the middle distance
tercile, and DIST_3 being the farthest distance tercile). The distance to a state without a PI law is updated
as states adopt laws. Note that the model does not include a main effect for the indicator that the state

We also used an alternative measure of distance: distance from the population centroid of the state with a PI law
to the population centroid of the nearest non-PI state. Results did not differ meaningfully from those reported here
and are available on request.
12

13

adopted a PI law because, in this specification, coefficients on the interaction terms measure the effect of
a PI law in each type of state.13
We estimate equations (1), and (3) through (5) using two data sources on abortions to teens ages
15 to 17: CDC data on abortions measured by state of occurrence and GI estimates of abortion by state of
residence. The CDC data contain information on between 30 to 40 states depending on the year and cover
each year from 1985 to 2013. The GI data have information on all 50 states but for only ten different
years between 1985 and 2013 (see Appendix Table 1).
We also test whether the effect of PI laws has changed over time. If distance to a confidential
abortion matters, then, all else equal, the effect of PI laws on the abortion rates of minors should increase
as minors have to travel further to avoid parental involvement. To explore this hypothesis, we estimate
equation (3) for five time periods of approximately 12 years each defined by the span of years available in
the GI abortion data (1985-1996, 1988-2000, 1992-2005, 1996-2008, 2000-2013). In addition, we
estimate equation (3) in ten-year rolling panels using only the annual reported CDC data so as to trace out
the evolving impact of PI laws over the 28-year study period.
Finally, we repeat the analyses just described, but using the abortion rate of teens ages 18 to 19.
This group is almost completely unaffected by PI laws and the analysis of these teens is a falsification test
that provides further evidence on the validity of the DiD approach.14
Synthetic Control Approach
We conducted a series of case study analyses using the synthetic control method of Abadie et al.
(2010). The methodology is well-suited to case studies because it adjusts for pre-law trends among states
with and without PI laws and uses randomization inference to determine statistical significance.

We also estimated this model using the regression model specification of equation (3) as an alternative and results
(available upon request) were similar to those reported in the text.
14
Joyce, Kaestner, and Colman (2006) show that some older minors, 17 years and between 8 and 11 months of age
at the time of conception will delay their abortion until age 18 so as to avoid parental involvement. Thus, a small
portion of abortions to teens 18 and 19 years of age include some who were minors at conception and exposed to the
PI law.
13

14

Synthetic control methods also provide evidence as to whether the effect of a law persists or whether
there is adjustment to the law over time.
For each state that adopted a PI law and for which we had sufficient data, the synthetic control
approach uses a matching procedure to construct a counterfactual minor abortion rate consisting of a
weighted average of minor abortion rates in states that did not adopt a PI law. However, not all states that
did not adopt a law are used to construct the counterfactual minor abortion rate. The selection of control
states is accomplished using a matching algorithm that minimizes the pre-adoption difference between the
abortion rate in the treated state and the weighted average of abortion rates of the control states. Only
states that have positive weights contribute to the counterfactual abortion rate.
The Abadie et al. (2010) approach is in the same spirit of the DiD approach because the estimate
of the effect of a PI law on minor abortions is obtained by taking the difference in mean abortion rates
between the treated state and weighted average of control states (i.e., synthetic control), but only in the
post-adoption period. The synthetic control approach assumes that the pre-adoption difference in abortion
rates between the treated and synthetic control group is zero. The reasonableness of this assumption can
be verified not only through visual inspection, but also numerically.
The key decision in implementing the synthetic control approach is the selection of the weights
that are used to construct the counterfactual outcome for each state that adopts a PI law from a pool of
potential “donor states.” There are a variety of ways to select the weights that are used to construct the
counterfactual outcome, and there is no generally accepted “best” method. Accordingly, we use three
methods. Method one uses the annual value of the dependent variable in each of the pre-period years to
match and derive weights for control states. Method two uses the average level of the dependent variable
across all pre-period years and the average level of controls for state unemployment rate, state median
wage, state share of 15-19 year-olds black, and state share of 15-19 year-olds Hispanic in the pre-period
years to match and derive weights for control states. Method three is the same as method 2 but adds the
value of the dependent variable in year t-1 to match and derive weights for control states
15

Once the weights are selected and the counterfactual outcome is constructed, the estimate of the
effect of the PI law in state j on the abortion rate of minors in that state is derived by taking the postadoption mean difference in abortion rates between the treated state and the synthetic comparison state.
Inference for the estimate is obtained through permutation testing (randomization inference). This test
consists of conducting the synthetic control analysis for all non-treated states. For example, if there are 20
non-treated states (even if they did not contribute a positive weight), then we obtain 20 synthetic control
estimates corresponding to treating each of the 20 states as if they had a PI law. We then calculate the
share of “randomized” estimates that are larger in absolute value than the estimate obtained using the
actual treatment state. This share is the p-value corresponding to a two-sided hypothesis test.
We conducted case study analyses for any state that adopted a PI law as long as we had sufficient
data. In practice, we required there to be five years of pre-adoption data and three years of post-adoption
information, and for potential donor states to have no PI law change over this period.15 However, we
eliminated “treated” states from the analysis if we could not obtain a reasonable pre-period match, as
measured by whether the mean abortion rate of the counterfactual state tracked the mean abortion rate of
the treated state in the pre-adoption period.16 Other data considerations, as described in detail below,
resulted in a final sample of 12 “treated” states that we use with the synthetic control method. As a
falsification exercise, we also conducted synthetic control analyses for the 12 states using teens ages 18 to
19. We expected to find no effect of PI laws on teens in this age group.

Data
Individual-level Data on Abortions

In order to maximize the number of states we analyze, we also generated synthetic control estimates for
Minnesota, which had four years of pre-period data. All other potential treated states had three or fewer.
16
We dropped two states for this reason: Idaho and Wyoming. These states are also dropped as potential donor
states when constructing counterfactual outcomes.
15

16

We obtained individual-level data on abortion that included abortions to residents performed instate and out-of-state as well as to non-residents performed in-state. The three states with data covering
the date that a PI law was adopted are: Mississippi (1993), North Carolina (1996) and Texas (2000).
Unlike with births, there is no mandatory reporting agreement between states in which induced
termination of pregnancy certificates to residents in state A that occur in state B, for example, are sent
back to the vital records office in state A. However, states that do collect data on abortions as part of the
vital statistics surveillance often report a non-resident’s state of residence. In the case of North Carolina,
for example, we use data from South Carolina and Virginia to track the change in abortions to minors of
North Carolina before and after the law. We did not have data on North Carolina residents who may have
gone to Tennessee. In the case of Texas, we had data on abortions to Texas residents performed in
Arkansas, New Mexico and Oklahoma. We lacked data from Louisiana, but Louisiana has had a parental
consent law since 1981. In the case of Mississippi, the state Department of Health collected data on
induced abortion to residents of Mississippi that occurred in other states with the exceptions of Florida
and Louisiana. These data are used to illustrate the extent of travel by minors and older teens in response
to PI laws. Large flows of minors in response to a PI law suggest that the use of occurrence data would
overstate the effects of a PI law whereas minimal flows suggest that the bias from out-of-state travel is
minimal.
State-year Panel Data
The primary data source on teen abortion is provided by the Centers for Disease Control (CDC)
abortion surveillance system that collects annual data from participating states on abortions by age and
state of occurrence. The data span 1985 to 2013, but a number of states do not report abortions to the
CDC in every year. California and New Hampshire have never reported abortions to the CDC. Several
states do not report abortions by age: Alaska, Florida, Illinois, South Dakota and, in more recent years,

17

Maryland and Wisconsin. Other states, such as Colorado, Hawaii, and Oklahoma, only began reporting
abortions by age in recent years.17
Another data source on teen abortions is from the Guttmacher Institute (GI). GI’s surveillance
system of abortion is considered a more accurate estimate of total abortions than the CDC’s.18 The mean
value of the ratio of abortions to 15 to 17 year-olds reported by the CDC to abortions to 15 to 17 year-olds
reported by the GI among the states present in both the CDC and GI data sets for the years of the GI data
is 0.86. However, the Guttmacher Institute does not collect information on the age or the state of
residence of a person. Instead, they generate estimates of the total number of abortions by age and state of
residence from their total counts of abortion by state of occurrence using the age distribution and
information on residence collected by the CDC and state reporting agencies. GI data are available for the
years 1985, 1988, 1992, 1996, 2000, 2005, 2008, 2010, 2011, and 2013. One limitation of the GI data is
that, in states and years when there is no CDC information, abortions to minors in a state are estimated
using age distributions in either surrounding states or, in some cases, the national average. Therefore, in
these cases, the GI data may not reflect the effect of PI laws on minor abortions because the share of
minor abortions in other states will not change with the adoption of a PI law in the state of interest.
Similarly, in states without PI laws, using the share of minors in surrounding states that have PI laws will
introduce similar errors.19 To address this difference, in some analyses, we restrict the GI data to the states
and years present in the CDC data. Notably, analysts at the Guttmacher Institute note that their residence
abortion rates do not account for potential out-of-state travel by minors in response to PI laws (Kost,
Maddow-Zimet and Arpaia 2017).
Parental Involvement Laws

We drop data from a small number of states due to either direct knowledge of fundamental changes in data
reporting (e.g., Washington DC), or because of the presence of extreme outlier observations (year-to-year changes in
abortion >3 standard deviations). The state-years excluded are: all years for Washington DC; Delaware prior to
1999; Kentucky prior to 1988; Texas prior to 1988; and West Virginia prior to 1992.
18
See: https://www.guttmacher.org/gpr/2015/06/abortion-reporting-promoting-public-health-not-politics
19
For some states, Guttmacher uses an averaging procedure on the distributions of abortions by age in surrounding
states that has varied over time (e.g., https://www.guttmacher.org/report/us-adolescent-pregnancy-trends-2013).
17

18

Information on PI laws was obtained from several sources.20 We created a dichotomous indicator
of whether a PI law was in effect in a state and year. In states that adopted a PI law mid-year, we used the
fraction of the year the law was in effect to the nearest half-month. We did not make a distinction between
parental notification statutes that require a physician performing the abortion to notify the parents in
advance of the procedure and parental consent statutes that require one, or in some cases both, parents to
give written consent to the termination.

Results
Analysis of Out-of-state Travel in Three States
In Table 1, we show the number for abortions one year before and after a PI law went into effect
in North Carolina (1996) and Texas (2000). For Mississippi (1993), we chose the number of abortions in
1991 as the pre-law period because Mississippi imposed a mandatory delay law in August of 1992 that
required two in-person visits to the provider, one for the counseling and a second for the procedure. The
mandatory delay law had a large impact on travel out of state for an abortion (Joyce, Henshaw and
DeClerque Skatrud 1997). Data in Table 1 presented by age, state of occurrence and state of residence.
The simple difference-in-differences analysis in Table 1 is descriptive and intended to highlight changes
in abortions by state of residence and occurrence, and the role of out-of-state travel.
In Mississippi, there were large absolute and relative changes in total resident abortions to minors
(180, 25.2%) and teens 18 to 19 years of age (226, 25.7%). One hundred and forty-five resident minors
left the state for an abortion and 173 non-resident minors stopped coming into the state. Similar changes
in travel were observed for older teens aged 18 to 19. Thus, abortions by state of occurrence fell by 501
(89%) among minors and 471 (64.7%) among older teens suggesting a difference-in-difference estimate

Our initial source up to 1994 was Merz, Jackson and Klerman 1996; We also relied on volumes of “Who Decides”
published by the NARAL Foundation. The most complete compilation of PI laws is available from Myers (2017).
We also had personal communication with Elizabeth Nash of the Guttmacher Institute.
20

19

in relative terms of 24.3% (89.0% – 64.7%). In contrast, abortions by state of residence suggested no
relative changes.
Changes in minor abortions pre-to-post law in North Carolina and Texas indicate that resident
abortions fell 17.2% more among minors relative to older teens in North Carolina (23.7% versus 6.5%)
and 12.5% more in Texas (21.4% versus 8.9%). Similar estimates are obtained using occurrence data.
The lack of difference in the estimates obtained with resident and occurrence data is due to the small
amount of documented out-of-state travel in NC and TX.
It is not clear whether this difference in out-of-state travel between Mississippi and the other two
states is related to the distance to confidential providers. All states surrounding Mississippi had PI laws in
1993 and the closest states that did not have a law were Texas, Florida, North Carolina and Virginia—all
relatively far from Mississippi. Despite these distances, out-of-state travel was substantial. However,
Mississippi required that both parents consent to the termination, which may explain why some minors
travelled to Alabama and Arkansas, in which only a single parent was required to be involved. In
contrast, the seemingly limited travel by minors both into- and out-of-state in North Carolina and Texas
occurred despite the absence of PI laws in some nearby states. In the case of North Carolina, Virginia,
which borders North Carolina, did not have a law in 1995. With respect to Texas, there were no PI laws
in New Mexico and Oklahoma in 2000, but given the size of Texas, travel to these two states was likely
difficult for many residents. Overall, the results in Table 1 on the extent of out-of-state travel are
consistent with a weak relationship between distance to a confidential abortion provider and minor travel,
suggesting that distance to a confidential provider may not be an important confounder of the association
between PI laws and abortions to minors.
State Panel Data
We begin the presentation of results by showing the mean abortion rate by year for three groups
of states: states that adopted a PI law pre1997, states that adopted a PI law post-1996, and states that
never adopted a PI law (Figure 1). These figures are based on CDC data. A few patterns are notable.
20

Throughout the sample period, states that never adopted a PI law have higher abortion rates than states
that adopted a PI law. It is also evident that the trend in abortion rates for states that adopted a law, either
early or late, is very similar. Therefore, the adoption of PI laws appears to explain little of the secular
decline in abortion rates to minors. Finally, for all three groups of states, there is a marked decrease in
abortion rates from 1989 onward. Of course, Figure 1 does not exploit differences in the timing of state
adoption of a PI law and does not adjust for any state, year or covariate influences on abortion rates.
Event-study Estimates
Next, we present the estimates from equation (2), the event-study specification of the DiD model.
We use CDC data, and show results for minors in Figures 2 and for teens aged 18 to 19 in Figure 3. If the
DiD design is valid, then estimates of the effect of adopting a PI law should be zero in periods prior to
implementation. This is exactly the pattern found in Figure 2 in both panels A (abortion rate) and B (log
abortion rate).21 Estimates also suggest a negative effect of PI laws on abortion rates of minors after
implementation of approximately 20 percent (e.g., minus 0.2 log points, panel B). It is also evident in
Figure 2 that the effect of the PI law appears to persist for several years after implementation.
In contrast to estimates in Figure 2, estimates in Figure 3, which pertain to teens aged 18 to 19,
indicate that the adoption of a PI law by a state had no effect on the abortion rates of teens of this age. All
estimates in both panels A (abortion rate) and B (log abortion rate) are statistically insignificant and
relatively small (<5%). This evidence is also supportive of the research design, although we note the
somewhat imprecise nature of the estimates.
Difference-in-differences Estimates
Given the evidence in Figures 2 and 3, which support the validity of the DiD approach, we
proceed by presenting DiD estimates based on models specified in equations (1), and (3) through (5).
Table 2 presents estimates for each model using two measures of abortions: the abortion rate per 1000
F-tests for these event study analyses all fail to reject the null hypothesis that all estimates of the coefficients on
the interaction terms between an indicator that a state adopted a law and pre-period years are jointly equal to zero.
The smallest p-value was 0.33.
21

21

women of the indicated age, and the natural logarithm of this abortion rate. We refer to estimates from
equation (1) as Model A; estimates from equation (3) as Model B; estimates from equation (4) as Model
C; and estimates from equation (5) as Model D. For each model, we present estimates using CDC and GI
data. The CDC data are an unbalanced panel of states and span the years 1985 to 2013. The GI data are a
balanced panel of states (50 states plus DC), but for selected years (1985, 1988, 1992, 1996, 2000, 2005,
2008, 2010, and 2013). To explore the sensitivity of the estimates to the number of states and years
covered by each data set, we also present estimates from models that use CDC data limited to the years
available in the GI data panel and from models that use only the GI data state-year observations that are
present in the CDC data panel. To focus more on models that we think are preferred on statistical
grounds, we will limit discussion of results to estimates obtained from Models B through D. Model A is
the most basic model, and it is clear from the variation in estimates and standard errors that the addition of
controls for state-specific confounders matters. However, there is general consistency among estimates
obtained from Models B and C suggesting that the way we adjust for state-specific confounding is not
particularly important.
Beginning with results from models that used the natural logarithm (log) of the abortion rate,
estimates from Models B and C indicate that adoption of a PI law is associated with between a 13% and
24% decrease in abortions to teens aged 15 to 17, and all estimates are statistically significant. Estimates
from Models B and C using the full CDC and GI data sets are around -13% to -18%%. Estimates from
models B and C that use the CDC data limited to the years in the GI data panel and the GI data limited to
state-years in the CDC panel are larger and indicate that PI laws decrease abortions by an average of
approximately 22%.
The larger (more negative) estimates found when the GI data are limited to the CDC states and
years is consistent with how the GI data are constructed. As noted, in years when there are no CDC data
with which to estimate the distribution of abortions by age in a given state-year, researchers at GI apply
the share of abortions to minors in other states to their total count of abortions (or use the national average
22

age distribution). In these cases, the minor abortion rate will not reflect any effect of the PI law in a state
that adopted a law. In control states, using the share of minors from states with PI laws will also result in
measurement error. Both of these sources of measurement error will attenuate estimates towards zero,
which is what we observe. After accounting for this issue, the data source (CDC or GI) does not affect the
estimates in a qualitatively meaningful way, as evidenced by the similarity of estimates using models B
and C in the last two columns of each panel in Table 2.
Finally, estimates from Model D indicate that the effect of PI laws does not differ statistically or
quantitatively by distance to a non-PI state. This finding suggests that minors do not travel much in
response to the adoption of a PI law. If they did, we would expect the effect of a PI law to be larger in
states that are far from another state that does not have a PI law. The estimates in Model D do not support
this expectation.
Results from models that use the abortion rate are generally consistent with those that use the log
abortion rate. In this case, however, there is a bit more variability of estimates between Models B and C.
But all estimates from Models B and C are negative, generally similar in magnitude, and those from
Model C are statistically significant (and larger). Estimates from Model B indicate that adoption of a PI
law is associated with between a 10% (1.59/15.4) and 17% (1.81/10.9) decrease in abortions to teens aged
15 to 17, relative to the mean abortion rate. From Model C, estimated effects are between 12% and 29%
and are, as noted, statistically significant. The 29% effect size is an outlier from the specification that uses
CDC data limited to GI years. The difference in magnitude is similar to that observed in the analogous log
abortion rate model. The other three estimates from Model C are between 12% and 22%. Estimates from
Model D are all negative and statistically significant and suggest, again, that the effect of PI laws does not
differ by distance to the nearest non-PI law state.
Overall, estimates in Table 2 provide consistent evidence that PI laws are associated with a
decrease in abortion rates to teens aged 15 to 17. While there is some variability in estimates, all estimates
are negative, most are statistically significant, and most are in the 15% to 20% range. In fact, taking a
23

simple average of estimates from Model B (across all eight models) yields 16.0% and from Model C
yields 19.6%. A second finding is that distance to the nearest non-PI state does not seem to affect
estimates. This finding suggests that travel by minors is not a particularly important behavioral response
to the adoption of a PI law. This finding is consistent with the evidence from the three-state analysis
presented earlier. It is also consistent with the broader literature demonstrating that distance is an
important barrier to obtaining an abortion among all women, which suggests that even modest distances
would significantly limit out-of-state travel by minors to avoid compliance with a PI law. Finally, while
there is some variability of estimates across data sets, estimates obtained using either CDC or GI data are
similar, particularly when the samples are harmonized to include the same states and years. Estimates
obtained using CDC data are larger on average, which is consistent with the likely attenuation bias
associated with the GI data because of its method of construction.22
To further assess the validity of the DiD research design, we re-estimated the models in Table 2,
using a sample of teens aged 18 to 19. These women were largely unaffected by PI laws. Estimates for
this sample are presented in Appendix Table 3. No estimates from models B or C in Appendix Table 3 are
statistically significant and there is no systematic evidence of a negative effect or any other consistent
pattern. Effect sizes are also quite small; estimates from Models B and C in log abortion rates models are
between -0.006 (>1%) and .059 (≈5%). In sum, estimates in Appendix Table 3 add to the previous
evidence of a valid design found in the event study analysis.
Period-specific Estimates
We next assess whether the effects of the PI law differ by time period. As noted, the increasing
adoption of PI laws by states over time has dramatically increased the distance from a state with a PI law
to a state without a PI law. If teens were travelling out-of-state to avoid the effect of a PI law, the

As an additional assessment of the sensitivity of our estimates to years used in the analysis, Appendix Table 5
presents estimates using a restricted subset of the CDC data. First, we restricted to the years to 1991-2013. In earlier
years, several states are missing information (see Appendix Table 1). Second, we kept only a set of states that are
missing no more than two observations over this 23-year period. The results using this sample are similar to those
reported elsewhere in the text.
22

24

increasing adoption and increasing distance necessary to evade the law would manifest as an increasingly
negative effect of a PI law on the abortion rate of minors, all else equal. Alternatively, changes in the
composition of minors at risk of abortion, as well as other factors affecting the impact of PI laws, may
have changed over time and across states, and this would cause estimates to differ by time period. To
assess these hypotheses, we conducted two exercises. First, we obtained estimates of the effect of PI laws
for five, approximately 12-year periods. These periods are: 1985-1996, 1988-2000, 1992-2005, 19962008, and 2000-2013. We selected these periods based on the availability of GI data.
Table 3 presents estimates using these five, partially overlapping time periods for Model B. The
general pattern of the estimates is as follows: for the periods that begin with the years 1985, 1988 and
1992, the effect of PI laws was always negative, statistically significant in all but one instance, and effect
sizes ranged from -11% to -26% (i.e., -0.303 log points). Conversely, in the periods beginning with 1996
and 2000, estimates of the effect of PI laws are usually not statistically significant and not always
negative. Among the estimates using the full set of states and years in the CDC and GI panels only three
of the eight estimates are negative and none are statistically significant.
We also conducted an analysis similar to that in Table 3 using a sample of teens aged 18 to 19
(Appendix Table 5). This group is unaffected by PI laws and we expect estimates to be zero on average if
the research design is valid. This is what we found. In the earlier periods we estimated imprecise, usually
negative, point estimates that are quite small (averaging -2.4% across all the estimates using the log
abortion rate outcome). In the latter periods, around half the estimates change sign, with only two
(positive) estimates across all specifications having marginal statistical significance.
As a further exploration of the time-varying effect of PI laws, Figure 4 shows estimated effects of
a PI law using 10-year rolling panels of the CDC data. This exercise resulted in 20 estimates covering the
periods 1985-1994 through 2004-2013. All estimates from the earlier panels were negative, statistically
significant, and increasing in magnitude through the estimate for the period 1991-2000. The largest effect
size during these periods was approximately -25%. After this period, there is a clear, monotonic decline in
25

the effect size and estimates become statistically insignificant after 1995-2004. The same rolling panel for
18- to 19-year-olds in the right-side panel of Figure 4 shows no statistically significant effect of PI laws
on the abortion rates of older teens in any time period.
It is clear from estimates in Table 3 and Figure 4 that the effect of PI laws declined over time.
The declining pattern is inconsistent with the notion that the effect of PI laws should increase as the travel
distance required to evade the laws increases. Instead, our results are consistent with the notion that
earlier evidence showing travel by minors to states with confidential access to abortion in response to a PI
law was overstated. Moreover, the assumption that PI laws have homogeneous effects on the abortion rate
of minors is also questionable. Enforcement of PI laws may vary as legal challenges create ambiguity
among patients and providers. Second, the ease with which minors can obtain abortions without parental
involvement through a judicial bypass also varies widely among states (Altindag and Joyce 2017). Lastly,
access to contraception as well as new methods of contraception can affect the composition of minors at
risk of an abortion. In the next section we use the synthetic control method to explore potential
heterogeneity in the effect of PI laws by state.
Synthetic Control Estimates
We conducted a series of case studies using synthetic control methods to examine the effect of PI
laws in 12 states: AZ, GA, MD, MN, MS, NE, NC, PA, SC, TN, TX and VA. These 12 states do not
represent all of the states that passed a PI law, but are those that we can feasibly examine using given data
limitations. Specifically, to implement this approach, we required that there be data for five years prior to
adoption of the PI law and three years subsequent to adoption of the law.23 We also limited the analysis to
states in the CDC data because the synthetic control approach requires several pre-period observations

As mentioned above, we included Minnesota with only four years pre-period data. For all other states besides
South Carolina, which only had available five pre-period observations, we generated synthetic control estimates
using six pre-period years. Results from these analyses were quantitatively the same. We preferred the five-year preperiod because it increased the number of potential donor states and therefore the statistical power of the
randomization inference procedure.
23

26

that are unavailable in the GI data that has a limited number of unevenly-spaced years.24 If a state passed
a law after the beginning of the year, we assigned the adoption year to be the actual year if the law was
passed prior to July. Otherwise, we assigned the adoption year as the next year.
We group the states between those that had a PI law before 1997 and those that enforced laws
after 1996. The early group of states and the type of law (parental notice or consent) include: GA (1992,
notice), MD (1992, notice), MN (1990, notice), MS (1993, consent), NE (1991, notice), NC (1995,
notice), PA (1994, consent), SC (1990, consent) and TN (1992, notice). The late-adopting group of states
and type of law are: AZ (2003, consent), TX (2000, notice) and VA (1997, notice).
Among the early adopters of PI laws, there are clear, substantial and (marginally) statistically
significant effects of the laws on the abortion rates of minors in Mississippi, North Carolina and
Pennsylvania (Figures 9, 11 and 12 and Appendix Tables 10, 12 and 13). We note that the match between
the actual and counterfactual in Mississippi is not as good as in the other two states and thus we are
cautious in interpreting these estimates as valid causal effects. Effects size range from 0.24 to 0.29 log
points in North Carolina, between 0.33 and 0.39 log points in Pennsylvania, and approximately 0.60 log
points in Mississippi depending on the specification. The effect size for Mississippi is substantially larger
than that reported by Henshaw (1995) and Joyce and Kaestner (2000), although the absolute decline in
minor abortions reported in Table 1 is approximately 60%. The negative effects of the PI law on minor
abortions in Mississippi, North Carolina and Pennsylvania were found despite a difference in the type of
law (consent v. notice) and differences in the distance to a confidential provider. In Mississippi all
surrounding states had a PI law in effect at the time. In North Carolina and Pennsylvania here were
nearby states that did not have PI laws; in the case of North Carolina, Virginia did not have a law, and in

Among states with the requisite data, we dropped ID, and WY due to an inability to generate a good pre-period
match using our three specifications. Given this, we also eliminated these states from the pool of potential “donor”
states to use in constructing the synthetic control units. In Kansas, during the same year the law was enacted,
reported abortions among all age groups increased by around 20% and stayed at this higher level across several
subsequent years. In the regression models we use a Kansas times post-1992 dummy variable to address this global
issue, but in the synthetic control method, there is no analogous solution to this data anomaly.
24

27

the case of Pennsylvania both New York and New Jersey did not have PI laws. Estimates in Mississippi
and Pennsylvania indicate a growing effect of the law over time and estimates are relatively constant in
North Carolina. These increasing or persistent effects of PI laws are inconsistent with the hypothesis that
minors adapt to the law (Kane and Staiger 1996).
Four of the early adopting states experienced declines in minor abortion relative to the
counterfactual, although the declines were not statistically significant despite being sometimes large. The
decline in Minnesota (Figure 8, Appendix Table 9) was between 0.09 and 0.19 log points; in Nebraska
(Figure 10, Appendix Table 11) the decline was between 0.19 and 0.24 log points; in South Carolina
(Figure 13, Appendix Table 14) the decline was between 0.10 and 0.12 log points, and in Tennessee
(Figure 14 and Appendix Table 15) the decline was between 0.02 and 0.12 log points.25 In these states,
there were differences in the type of law and differences in the distance to a nearest confidential provider,
but little systematic relationship between the magnitude of the effects and these potential moderators of
the effect of PI laws. The lack of statistical significance of even large estimates reflects the relatively
small number of states that could be used in the randomization inference procedure and the associated
lack of statistical power.
Among the early adopting states, only Georgia (Figure 6 and Appendix Table 7) and Maryland
(Figure 7 and Appendix Table 8) did not experience a decline in minor abortions relative to the
counterfactual. In the case of Maryland, the absence of an effect is consistent with the nature of the law
that allowed a physician to certify that the minor was mature and, if so, to bypass the notification
requirement. There was also easy access to abortion services for minors in Maryland in Washington DC,
Pennsylvania and Delaware at the time.
For later adopting states, there is some evidence of a decline in the abortion rates of minors
associated with the PI law in Texas (Figure 15 and Appendix Table 16), and Arizona (Figure 5 and

The effect size reported here for Minnesota is similar to that reported by Ellertson (1997) and the effect size for
South Carolina is similar to that reported by Joyce and Kaestner (2001).
25

28

Appendix Table 6), but in both cases, the magnitude of the estimated effects depends meaningfully on
how the counterfactual outcome is constructed (i.e., using all pre-period values of the outcome or the
other two methods that use covariate values along with pre-period outcome measures). In Arizona,
estimated effect sizes are between -10% and -20% with two of the three estimates using the natural log of
the abortion rate being statistically significant. In Texas, effect sizes range from 0.16 to 0.36 log points,
consistent with Joyce, Kaestner and Colman (2006). However, estimates are only marginally significant.
In Virginia (Figure 16 and Appendix Table 17) we find no effect of the PI law.
We also estimated effects of a PI law for women aged 18 to 19 using the same synthetic control
approach. These results are presented in Appendix Figures 1 to 12. The great majority of these estimated
effects are positive and not close to being statistically significant. But one important exception is Texas,
where we estimated marginally significant, negative effects that are similar (40% to 75% of the
magnitude) to the effects found for 15- to 17-year-olds. The effect implied by taking the difference
between the estimated effects for women ages 15-17 and 18-19 ranges between -4% and -20%, but the
lack of a clear null result for older teens suggests that the results for Texas minors may be confounded by
unobservable factors. For this reason, we suggest caution in interpreting the Texas results causally.
Conclusion
State parental involvement laws that limit the ability of minors to obtain an abortion have
potentially serious consequences. Besides the effect of such laws on abortion, these laws may affect
unintended births, contraception and, through changes in these outcomes, the human capital investments
of young women. In this article, we examined the effect of the PI laws on the abortion rates of minors.
We added to the existing literature in several ways, most notably by assessing whether the effect of PI
laws vary significantly across states and over time.
Results from our study indicated that PI laws adopted prior to the mid-1990s reduced abortion
among minors, but that after this time the adoption of PI laws had little effect, on average, on the abortion
rate of minors. Estimates suggest that earlier PI laws reduced minor abortions between 15% and 20%. We
29

also found that there was little relationship between the effect of PI laws and the distance to a state
without a PI law. This finding suggests that the ability to travel out-of-state to avoid complying with a PI
law is not sufficient to offset the constraint such laws impose on abortion to minors as some previous
research has suggested (Cartoof and Klerman 1986; Henshaw 1995). Third, we found evidence to suggest
substantial state heterogeneity in the effect of PI laws, although the variation in effects did not appear to
be related to the type of law, or, as already noted, whether surrounding states had laws that may have
made it more difficult for minors to travel out-of-state to avoid compliance. We also note that the statespecific analyses were underpowered to detect reliably small to moderate effect sizes and therefore we
view these results as more suggestive than definitive.
The finding of substantial heterogeneity in the effects of PI laws by year and state is an
interesting result. We were unable to identify the causes of these heterogeneous effects, although we have
provided evidence that this heterogeneity is not likely related to the ability to travel out-of-state or the
type of law. One possibility is that the heterogeneity across states and over time is related to differential
changes in the composition of teens at risk of abortion due to differences in the use of contraceptive
technology, access to medication abortion and to changes in parent-child relationships. Differences in the
availability of judicial and physician bypass may also play an important role in some settings. Other
causes are also possible. This is clearly an important area for future research to investigate.
Finally, this study compared estimates using the two primary abortion surveillance data sets
available in the U.S. The CDC data are the most detailed data available by state, year and age, but key
states such as California and Florida are not included and these data reflect abortions by state of
occurrence instead of residence. The GI survey of abortion providers is considered the most accurate
count of total abortions by state, but researchers at the GI estimate abortions by age and state of residence
using the age distribution of abortions obtained from the CDC. Additionally, the intermittent periodicity
of the GI estimates, which omit as many as four years at a time, means that potentially important year-toyear variation will not be recorded. Given these important limitations, it is somewhat reassuring that both
30

data sources yielded roughly similar estimates of the effects of PI laws on the abortion rates of minors,
particularly when a common set of states and years were used in the analysis.

31

References:
Abadie, Alberto, Alexis Diamond, and Jens Hainmueller. 2010. “Synthetic Control Methods for
Comparative Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California’s Tobacco Control Program.”
Journal of the American Statistical Association 105 (490): 493–505.
https://doi.org/10.1198/jasa.2009.ap08746.
Altindag, Onur, and Ted Joyce. 2017. “Judicial Bypass for Minors Seeking Abortions in Arkansas Versus
Other States.” American Journal of Public Health 107 (8): 1266–71.
https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2017.303822.
Cartoof, V G, and L V Klerman. 1986. “Parental Consent for Abortion: Impact of the Massachusetts
Law.” American Journal of Public Health 76 (4): 397–400.
https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.76.4.397.
Child Trends. Teen Abortions. https://www.childtrends.org/wpcontent/uploads/2012/07/27_Teen_Abortions.pdf, website last accessed January 26, 2019
Colman, Silvie, and Ted Joyce. 2009. “Minors’ Behavioral Responses to Parental Involvement Laws:
Delaying Abortion Until Age 18.” Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health 41 (2): 119–
26. https://doi.org/10.1363/4111909.
———. 2011. “Regulating Abortion: Impact on Patients and Providers in Texas.” Journal of Policy
Analysis and Management 30 (4): 775–97. https://doi.org/10.1002/pam.20603.
Colman, Silvie, Ted Joyce, and Robert Kaestner. 2008. “Misclassification Bias and the Estimated Effect
of Parental Involvement Laws on Adolescents’ Reproductive Outcomes.” American Journal of
Public Health 98 (10): 1881–85. https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2007.116509.
Daniels, K, Mosher, WD and Jones, J. Contraceptive methods women have ever used: United States,
1982–2010, National Health Statistics Reports, 2013, No. 62.
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nhsr/nhsr062.pdf (last accessed January 28, 2019)
Dennis, Amanda, Stanley K. Henshaw, Theodore Joyce et al. 2009. “The Impact of Laws Requiring
Parental Involvement for Abortion: A Literature Review.”
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.637.2442&rep=rep1&type=pdf (last
accessed January 28, 2019)
Ellertson, C. 1997. “Mandatory Parental Involvement in Minors’ Abortions: Effects of the Laws in
Minnesota, Missouri, and Indiana.” American Journal of Public Health 87 (8): 1367–74.
https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.87.8.1367.
Fischer, Stefanie, Heather Royer, and Corey White. 2018. “The Impacts of Reduced Access to Abortion
and Family Planning Services on Abortion, Births and Contraceptive Purchases.” Journal of
Public Economics 167 (November): 43–68. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2018.08.009.
Haas-Wilson, Deborah. 1996. “The Impact of State Abortion Restrictions on Minors’ Demand for
Abortions.” The Journal of Human Resources 31 (1): 140–58. https://doi.org/10.2307/146045.
Henshaw, Stanley K. 1995. “The Impact of Requirements for Parental Consent on Minors’ Abortions in
Mississippi.” Family Planning Perspectives 27 (3): 120–22. https://doi.org/10.2307/2136110.
Henshaw, Stanley K., and Kathryn Kost. 1992. “Parental Involvement in Minors’ Abortion Decisions.”
Family Planning Perspectives 24 (5): 196–213. https://doi.org/10.2307/2135870.
Jewell, R. Todd and Robert W Brown. 2000. "An economic analysis of abortion: the effect of travel cost
on teenagers", The Social Science Journal, Volume 37, Issue 1,2000, Pages 113-124,
Joyce, Ted, and Robert Kaestner. “The Impact of Mississippi’s Mandatory Delay Law on the Timing of
Abortion.” Family Planning Perspectives 32, no. 1 (2000): 4–13.
https://doi.org/10.2307/2648143.
Joyce, Ted, and Robert Kaestner. 2001. “The Impact of Mandatory Waiting Periods and Parental Consent
Laws on the Timing of Abortion and State of Occurrence among Adolescents in Mississippi and
South Carolina.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 20 (2): 263–82.
32

Joyce, Theodore, Stanley K. Henshaw, and Julia DeClerque Skatrud. 1997. “The Impact of Mississippi’s
Mandatory Delay Law on Abortions and Births.” JAMA 278 (8): 653–58.
https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.1997.03550080063040.
Joyce, Theodore, and Robert Kaestner. 1996. “State Reproductive Policies and Adolescent Pregnancy
Resolution: The Case of Parental Involvement Laws.” Journal of Health Economics 15 (5): 579–
607. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-6296(96)00496-1.
Joyce, Theodore, Robert Kaestner, and Silvie Colman. 2006. “Changes in Abortions and Births and the
Texas Parental Notification Law.” New England Journal of Medicine 354 (10): 1031–38.
https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMsa054047.
Kane, Thomas J., and Douglas Staiger. 1996. “Teen Motherhood and Abortion Access.” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 111 (2): 467–506. https://doi.org/10.2307/2946685.
Kavanaugh, M.L., and J. Jerman. 2018. Contraceptive method use in the United States: trends and
characteristics between 2008, 2012 and 2014. Contraception 97:14–21.
Kost, Kathryn, Isaac Maddow-Zimet and Alex Arpaia. 2017. “Pregnancies, Births and Abortions Among
Adolescents and Young Women in the United States, 2013 National and State Trends by Age,
Race and Ethnicity (https://www.guttmacher.org/sites/default/files/report_pdf/us-adolescentpregnancy-trends-2013.pdf last accessed January 29, 2019)
Levine, Phillip B. 2003. “Parental Involvement Laws and Fertility Behavior.” Journal of Health
Economics 22 (5): 861–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-6296(03)00063-8.
Lindo, Jason M., Caitlin Myers, Andrea Schlosser, and Scott Cunningham. 2018. “How Far Is Too Far?
New Evidence on Abortion Clinic Closures, Access, and Abortions.” Working Paper 23366.
National Bureau of Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w23366.
MacAfee, Lauren, Jennifer Castle, and Regan N. Theiler. 2015. “Association Between the New
Hampshire Parental Notification Law and Minors Undergoing Abortions in Northern New
England.” Obstetrics & Gynecology 125 (1): 170.
https://doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0000000000000585.
Merz, J.F. Merz; C.A. Jackson and J.A. Klerman, 1996. “A Review of Abortion Policy: Legality,
Medicaid Funding and Parental Involvement, 1967-1994.” Working Papers, RAND - Labor and
Population Program, https://www.rand.org/pubs/reprints/RP565.html
Myers, Caitlin Knowles. 2017. “The Power of Abortion Policy: Reexamining the Effects of Young
Women’s Access to Reproductive Control.” Journal of Political Economy 125 (6): 2178–2224.
https://doi.org/10.1086/694293.
Myers, Caitlin Knowles, and Daniel Ladd. 2017. “Did Parental Involvement Laws Grow Teeth? The
Effects of State Restrictions on Minors’ Access to Abortion.” SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3029823.
Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network. https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=3029823.
New, Michael J. 2011. “Analyzing the Effect of Anti-Abortion U.S. State Legislation in the Post-Casey
Era.” State Politics & Policy Quarterly 11 (1): 28–47.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1532440010387397.
Ohsfeldt, Robert L., and Stephan F. Gohmann. 1994. “Do Parental Involvement Laws Reduce Adolescent
Abortion Rates?” Contemporary Economic Policy 12 (2): 65–76. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.14657287.1994.tb00424.x.
Ralph, Lauren J., Erin King, Elise Belusa, Diana Greene Foster, Claire D. Brindis, and M. Antonia Biggs.
2018. “The Impact of a Parental Notification Requirement on Illinois Minors’ Access to and
Decision-Making Around Abortion.” Journal of Adolescent Health 62 (3): 281–87.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2017.09.031.
Ramesh, Shanthi, Lindsay Zimmerman, and Ashlesha Patel. 2016. “Impact of Parental Notification on
Illinois Minors Seeking Abortion.” Journal of Adolescent Health 58 (3): 290–94.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2015.11.004.
Rogers, J.L., R.F. Boruch, G.B. Stoms, and D. DeMoya. 1991. “Impact of the Minnesota Parental
33

Notification Law on Abortion and Birth.” American Journal of Public Health 81 (3): 294–98.

34

Figure 1: Annual State-Level Means of Abortion Rates to Women Ages 15-17

Source: CDC Abortion Surveillance Reports, 1985-2013. Each point is the mean abortion rate per 1000 women aged 15-17
within a group of states as specified. Uses unbalanced panel that includes states with any valid CDC state-year observations
(this excludes California, Florida, Illinois, and New Hampshire). Each state’s contribution to the annual mean value is
weighted by female population ages 15-17.

35

Figure 2: Event Study Estimates of Effect of PI Law on Abortions Among Women Aged 15-17
Panel A: Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Panel B: Log of Abortion Rate per 1000 Women

Regression model controls for state and year fixed effects, state unemployment rate, state median wage, state share of women
15-19 black, non-Hispanic, and state share of women 15-19 white, Hispanic as well as each of these controls interacted with
year indicators. Regressions are weighted by state population of women 15-17 and standard errors are clustered at the state
level.

Figure 3: Event Study Estimates of Effect of PI Law on Abortion Rate per 1000 Women Aged 18-19
Panel A: Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Panel B: Log of Abortion Rate per 1000 Women

Regression model controls for state and year fixed effects, state unemployment rate, state median wage, state share of women
15-19 black, non-Hispanic, and state share of women 15-19 white, Hispanic as well as each of these controls interacted with
year indicators. Regressions are weighted by state population of women 18-19 and standard errors are clustered at the state
level.

36

Figure 4: Estimated Effect of PI Laws on Log of Abortion Rate using a 10-Year Moving Average
Panel A: Women Ages 15 to 17
Panel B: Women Ages 18 to 19

Source: CDC Abortion Surveillance Reports 1985-2013. Estimates are generated using a 10-year window of data incremented by 1 year
for each estimate as indicated on y-axis. Estimates generated using Model (“B” in text), which includes: state and year fixed effects, state
unemployment rate, state median wage, state share of women 15-19 black, non-Hispanic, and state share of women 15-19 white, Hispanic,
and interactions between these covariates and year fixed effects. Regressions weighted by female population aged 15-17 or 18-19.
Standard errors clustered at the state level.

Figure 5: Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of PI Laws on Abortion Among Women 15 to 17 – Arizona
Panel A: Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Panel B: Log of Abortion Rate per 1000 Women

Figure shows the path of abortions for the “treatment” state and the counterfactual path for three different synthetic control models as
indicated. “All Lags” model (Method 1 in tables) uses values of the dependent variable in the five pre-period years to match and derive
weights for control states. “Pre-per Avg & Covs” model (Method 2) uses the average of the dependent variable over the five pre-period
years and all pre-period values of controls for state unemployment rate, state median wage, state share of 15-19 year-olds black nonHispanic, and state share of 15-19 year-olds white, Hispanic to match and derive weights for control states. “Pre-per Avg, Covs, t-1
Lag” model (Method 3) uses the inputs for method 2 along with the value of the dependent variable in year t-1 to match and derive
weights for control states. Dashed line indicates year before policy began (t-1). When policies went into effect later than June 30 th of
a year, the following year is considered the year of initial policy enforcement.

37

Figure 6: Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of PI Laws on Abortion Among Women 15 to 17 – Georgia
Panel A: Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Panel B: Log of Abortion Rate per 1000 Women

See notes to Figure 5.

Figure 7: Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of PI Laws on Abortion Among Women 15 to 17 – Maryland
Panel A: Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Panel B: Log of Abortion Rate per 1000 Women

See notes to Figure 5.

Figure 8: Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of PI Laws on Abortion Among Women 15 to 17 – Minnesota
Panel A: Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Panel B: Log of Abortion Rate per 1000 Women

See notes to Figure 5. Note MN limited to 4 pre-period years.

38

Figure 9: Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of PI Laws on Abortion Among Women 15 to 17 – Mississippi
Panel A: Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Panel B: Log of Abortion Rate per 1000 Women

See notes to Figure 5.

Figure 10: Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of PI Laws on Abortion Among Women 15 to 17 – Nebraska
Panel A: Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Panel B: Log of Abortion Rate per 1000 Women

See notes to Figure 5.

Figure 11: Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of PI Laws on Abortion Among Women 15 to 17 – North Carolina
Panel A: Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Panel B: Log of Abortion Rate per 1000 Women

See notes to Figure 5.

39

Figure 12: Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of PI Laws on Abortion Among Women 15 to 17 – Pennsylvania
Panel A: Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Panel B: Log of Abortion Rate per 1000 Women

See notes to Figure 5.

Figure 13: Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of PI Laws on Abortion Among Women 15 to 17 – South Carolina
Panel A: Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Panel B: Log of Abortion Rate per 1000 Women

See notes to Figure 5.

Figure 14: Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of PI Laws on Abortion Among Women 15 to 17 – Tennessee
Panel A: Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Panel B: Log of Abortion Rate per 1000 Women

See notes to Figure 5.

40

Figure 15: Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of PI Laws on Abortion Among Women 15 to 17 – Texas
Panel A: Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Panel B: Log of Abortion Rate per 1000 Women

See notes to Figure 5.

Figure 16: Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of PI Laws on Abortion Among Women 15 to 17 – Virginia
Panel A: Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Panel B: Log of Abortion Rate per 1000 Women

See notes to Figure 5.

41

Table 1: Number of Abortions to Minors and Older Teens in Three States Pre and Post a Parental Involvement Law
by State of Residence and Occurrence
Minors

Mississippi
Teens 18-19

North Carolina
Minors
Teens 18-19

Minors

Texas
Teens 18-19

In-state,
resident
Pre
Post
Δ
(%Δ)

663
335
-328
(-68.2)

780
491
-289
(-46.2)

3146
2431
-715
(-25.8)

3860
3619
-241
(-6.4)

4769
3829
-940
(-22.0)

8578
7835
-743
(-9.1)

In-state, nonresident
Pre
Post
Δ
(%Δ)

187
14
-173
(-259.2)

209
27
-182
(-204.6)

544
330
-214
(-50.0)

501
484
-17
(-3.5)

173
149
-24
(0.7)

343
281
-62
(-9.6)

Out-of-state
resident
Pre
Post
Δ
(%Δ)

145
293
148
(70.3)

217
280
63
(25.4)

90
121
31
(29.6)

76
71
-5
(-6.8)

6
28
22
(154)

8
19
11
(86.5)

Total Resident
Pre
Post
Δ
(%Δ)

808
628
-180
(-25.4)

997
771
-226
(-25.7)

3236
2552
-684
(-23.7)

3936
3690
-246
(-6.5)

4775
3857
-918
(-21.4)

8586
7854
-732
(-8.9)

Total
Occurrence
Pre
Post
Δ
(%Δ)

850
349
-501
(-89.0)

989
518
-471
(-64.7)

3692
2761
-931
(-29.1)

4361
4107
-254
(-6.0)

4942
3978
-964
(-21.7)

8921
8116
-805
(-9.5)

There are five categories of abortion. Abortions obtained in-state by residents of the state; abortions obtained in-state by nonresidents; abortions to residents obtained out-of-state; total abortions to residents and total abortions that occurred in-state
irrespective of residency. The pre-periods in MS, NC and TX are 1991, 1994 and 1999 respectively and the post-periods are
1994, 1996 and 2000. Sources: Abortions to residents and non-residents that occurred in MS, NC and TX are from state health
departments in the three states. Data on resident of MS, NC and TX performed in other states came from individual level records
in AL, AR, CO, GA, KS, MO, OK, SC, TN, UT, VA. Data from New Mexico was from Joyce et al. (2006). Percent changes are
calculated as ln(pre)- ln(post).

42

Table 2: Estimates of the Effect of Parental Involvement Laws on Abortions Among Women Ages 15-17, 1985 to 2013

1985 to 2013

CDC
Occurrence

Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
CDC
GI
Occurrence
Residence
GI Years

GI Residence
CDC StateYears

Log of Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
CDC
GI Residence
CDC
GI
Occurrence
CDC StateOccurrence
Residence
GI Years
Years

Model A

-1.907*
(0.803)

1.240
(1.802)

-1.895*
(0.857)

-0.742
(1.010)

-0.241**
(0.067)

-0.159*
(0.071)

-0.316**
(0.084)

-0.259**
(0.070)

Model B

-1.916*
(0.846)

-1.592
(1.389)

-1.807*
(0.827)

-1.744*
(0.736)

-0.181**
(0.058)

-0.129*
(0.055)

-0.220**
(0.059)

-0.209**
(0.049)

Model C

-2.305**
(0.615)

-1.830*
(0.787)

-3.187**
(0.741)

-3.345**
(0.619)

-0.162**
(0.048)

-0.120**
(0.044)

-0.240**
(0.066)

-0.225**
(0.047)

-2.899**
(0.670)

-1.899*
(0.777)

-3.498**
(0.764)

-3.370**
(0.705)

-0.181*
(0.071)

-0.111+
(0.062)

-0.247**
(0.076)

-0.217**
(0.061)

Distance Tercile 2
(102-272 miles)

-2.125**
(0.710)

-2.134*
(1.008)

-2.899**
(1.060)

-3.696**
(0.716)

-0.155**
(0.048)

-0.129*
(0.050)

-0.227*
(0.090)

-0.246**
(0.054)

Distance Tercile 3
(>272 miles)
Mean Dep. Variable
Observations

-1.876**
(0.616)
11.9
1,114

-1.320
(0.855)
15.4
492

-2.713**
(0.767)
10.9
386

-2.894**
(0.718)
15.4
386

-0.151**
(0.052)
11.9
1,114

-0.122*
(0.049)
15.4
492

-0.237**
(0.071)
10.9
386

-0.224**
(0.055)
15.4
386

Model D
Distance Tercile 1
(0-101 miles)

Source: CDC Abortion Surveillance Reports 1985-2013 and Guttmacher Institute estimates of number of abortions by state residents for years 1985, 1988, 1992, 1996, 2000, 2005,
2008, 2010, 2011, 2013. Model A includes: state and year fixed effects, state unemployment rate, state median wage, state share of women 15-19 black, non-Hispanic, and state
share of women 15-19 white, Hispanic. Model B adds interactions between covariates and year fixed effects to Model A. Model C adds state-specific linear time trend to Model A.
Model D is Model C, but with the effect of PI law allowed to differ by distance to nearest state without a PI law. Distance is measured between the most populous city in each state.
Regressions weighted by female population aged 15-17. Mean of dependent variable is average across sample period. Standard errors clustered at the state level.
+ p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01

43

Table 3: Effect of Parental Involvement Laws on Abortions Among Women Ages 15-17 by Time Periods

Estimated Effect of
PI Laws by Period

CDC
Occurrence

Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
CDC
GI
Occurrence
Residence
GI Years

GI Residence
CDC StateYears

Log of Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
CDC
GI Residence
CDC
GI
Occurrence
CDC StateOccurrence
Residence
GI Years
Years

1985 to 1996

-2.533**
(0.912)

-3.995*
(1.568)

-2.909*
(1.132)

-2.731**
(0.963)

-0.185**
(0.057)

-0.186**
(0.059)

-0.236**
(0.075)

-0.193**
(0.051)

1988 to 2000

-3.000**
(0.831)

-1.677
(1.843)

-3.208**
(0.937)

-1.949*
(0.798)

-0.212**
(0.067)

-0.161**
(0.055)

-0.268**
(0.093)

-0.192**
(0.050)

1992 to 2005

-2.656**
(0.848)

-0.341
(1.722)

-2.900*
(1.095)

-1.975*
(0.898)

-0.240**
(0.069)

-0.114
(0.072)

-0.303**
(0.089)

-0.191**
(0.051)

1996 to 2008

-0.278
(0.634)

0.475
(0.836)

-0.537
(0.904)

-1.054
(0.887)

-0.075
(0.066)

0.013
(0.065)

-0.172+
(0.086)

-0.153*
(0.063)

2000 to 2013

1.006
(0.770)

-0.887
(1.127)

-0.131
(0.783)

-2.051**
(0.676)

0.053
(0.081)

0.037
(0.064)

-0.007
(0.081)

-0.139*
(0.068)

18.2
15.2
11.9
10.0
7.8

25.7
21.4
16.6
13.6
9.6

18.3
15.2
12
10.1
7.2

25.7
21.4
16.6
13.6
9.6

18.2
15.2
11.9
10.0
7.8

25.7
21.4
16.6
13.6
9.6

18.3
15.2
12
10.1
7.2

25.7
21.4
16.6
13.6
9.6

425
494
559
527
570

192
196
198
199
300

140
152
160
163
246

140
152
160
163
246

425
494
559
527
570

192
196
198
199
300

140
152
160
163
246

140
152
160
163
246

Mean Dep. Variable
1985 to 1996
1988 to 2000
1992 to 2005
1996 to 2008
2000 to 2013
Observations
1985 to 1996
1988 to 2000
1992 to 2005
1996 to 2008
2000 to 2013

Source: CDC Abortion Surveillance Reports 1985-2013 and Guttmacher Institute Estimates of number of abortions by state residents for years 1985, 1988, 1992, 1996, 2000, 2005,
2008, 2010, 2011, 2013. Model (“B” in text) includes: state and year fixed effects, state unemployment rate, state median wage, state share of women 15-19 black, non-Hispanic,
and state share of women 15-19 white, Hispanic, and interactions between these covariates and year fixed effects. Regressions weighted by female population aged 15-17. Means of
dependent variables are averaged across the indicated period. Standard errors clustered at the state level. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01

44

Appendix Figure 1: Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of PI Laws on Abortion Among Women 18 to 19 –
Arizona
Panel A: Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Panel B: Log of Abortion Rate per 1000 Women

See notes to Figure 5.

Appendix Figure 2: Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of PI Laws on Abortion Among Women 18 to 19 –
Georgia
Panel A: Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Panel B: Log of Abortion Rate per 1000 Women

See notes to Figure 5.

Appendix Figure 3: Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of PI Laws on Abortion Among Women 18 to 19 –
Maryland
Panel A: Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Panel B: Log of Abortion Rate per 1000 Women

See notes to Figure 5.

45

Appendix Figure 4: Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of PI Laws on Abortion Among Women 18 to 19 –
Minnesota
Panel A: Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Panel B: Log of Abortion Rate per 1000 Women

See notes to Figure 5. Note MN limited to 4 pre-period years.

Appendix Figure 5: Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of PI Laws on Abortion Among Women 18 to 19 –
Mississippi
Panel A: Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Panel B: Log of Abortion Rate per 1000 Women

See notes to Figure 5.

Appendix Figure 6: Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of PI Laws on Abortion Among Women 18 to 19 –
Nebraska
Panel A: Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Panel B: Log of Abortion Rate per 1000 Women

See notes to Figure 5.

46

Appendix Figure 7: Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of PI Laws on Abortion Among Women 18 to 19 – North
Carolina
Panel A: Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Panel B: Log of Abortion Rate per 1000 Women

See notes to Figure 5.

Appendix Figure 8: Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of PI Laws on Abortion Among Women 18 to 19 –
Pennsylvania
Panel A: Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Panel B: Log of Abortion Rate per 1000 Women

See notes to Figure 5.

Appendix Figure 9: Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of PI Laws on Abortion Among Women 18 to 19 – South
Carolina
Panel A: Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Panel B: Log of Abortion Rate per 1000 Women

See notes to Figure 5.

47

Appendix Figure 10: Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of PI Laws on Abortion Among Women 18 to 19 –
Tennessee
Panel A: Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Panel B: Log of Abortion Rate per 1000 Women

See notes to Figure 5.

Appendix Figure 11: Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of PI Laws on Abortion Among Women 18 to 19 –
Texas
Panel A: Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Panel B: Log of Abortion Rate per 1000 Women

See notes to Figure 5.

Appendix Figure 12: Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of PI Laws on Abortion Among Women 18 to 19 –
Virginia
Panel A: Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Panel B: Log of Abortion Rate per 1000 Women

See notes to Figure 5.

48

Appendix Table 1
Number of States with Valid Observations in CDC and Guttmacher Institute Data by Year
Year
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013

Number of States
CDC Data
GI Data
30
51
30
32
33
51
34
35
37
38
51
39
39
39
39
51
39
40
40
42
51
41
42
41
39
41
51
41
41
41
51
38
41
51
40
51
41
41
51

Source: Authors’ calculations from CDC and GI data.

49

Appendix Table 2: Unweighted Estimates of the Effect of Parental Involvement Laws on Abortions Among Women Ages 15-17, 1985 to 2013

1985 to 2013

CDC
Occurrence

Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
CDC
GI
Occurrence
Residence
GI Years

GI Residence
CDC StateYears

Log of Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
CDC
GI Residence
CDC
GI
Occurrence
CDC StateOccurrence
Residence
GI Years
Years

Model A

-1.205
(0.939)

0.034
(1.136)

-1.000
(1.104)

-1.195
(1.174)

-0.206**
(0.059)

-0.144**
(0.053)

-0.285**
(0.078)

-0.202**
(0.056)

Model B

-1.205
(0.939)

0.034
(1.136)

-1.000
(1.104)

-1.195
(1.174)

-0.206**
(0.059)

-0.144**
(0.053)

-0.285**
(0.078)

-0.202**
(0.056)

Model C

-2.162**
(0.507)

-1.087
(0.774)

-2.739**
(0.692)

-3.450**
(0.747)

-0.088
(0.066)

-0.058
(0.055)

-0.103
(0.121)

-0.200**
(0.064)

-2.467**
(0.473)

-1.113
(0.887)

-3.019**
(0.726)

-3.407**
(0.819)

-0.084
(0.076)

-0.032
(0.066)

-0.111
(0.119)

-0.183*
(0.070)

Distance Tercile 2
(102-272 miles)

-2.013**
(0.589)

-1.726
(1.066)

-2.226*
(0.921)

-3.729**
(0.921)

-0.097
(0.066)

-0.109
(0.074)

-0.092
(0.143)

-0.245**
(0.078)

Distance Tercile 3
(>272 miles)
Mean Dep Var
Observations

-1.729**
(0.610)
11.4
1,073

0.218
(0.920)
15.5
442

-2.071*
(0.937)
11
345

-2.500*
(1.064)
15.5
345

-0.061
(0.081)
11.4
1,073

-0.050
(0.071)
15.5
442

-0.068
(0.144)
11
345

-0.199*
(0.085)
15.5
345

Model D
Distance Tercile 1
(0-101 miles)

Source: CDC Abortion Surveillance Reports 1985-2013 and Guttmacher Institute estimates of number of abortions by state residents for years 1985, 1988, 1992, 1996, 2000, 2005,
2008, 2010, 2011, 2013. Model A includes: state and year fixed effects, state unemployment rate, state median wage, state share of women 15-19 black, non-Hispanic, and state
share of women 15-19 white, Hispanic. Model B adds interactions between covariates and year fixed effects to Model A. Model C adds state-specific linear time trend to Model A.
Model D is Model C, but with the effect of PI law allowed to differ by distance to nearest state without a PI law. Distance is measured between the most populous city in each state.
Standard errors clustered at the state level. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01

50

Appendix Table 3: Estimates of the Effect of Parental Involvement Laws on Abortions Among Women Ages 18-19, 1985 to 2013

1985 to 2013

CDC
Occurrence

Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
CDC
GI
Occurrence
Residence
GI Years

GI Residence
CDC StateYears

Log of Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
CDC
GI Residence
CDC
GI
Occurrence
CDC StateOccurrence
Residence
GI Years
Years

Model A

-0.423
(1.302)

5.508+
(3.046)

-0.455
(1.477)

2.950+
(1.676)

-0.067
(0.059)

-0.019
(0.045)

-0.122
(0.074)

-0.055
(0.055)

Model B

-0.197
(1.253)

0.417
(2.191)

-0.078
(1.249)

0.471
(1.500)

-0.007
(0.046)

0.006
(0.035)

-0.026
(0.051)

-0.017
(0.048)

Model C

-0.945
(1.104)

-1.057
(1.674)

-2.417
(1.747)

-1.239
(1.572)

-0.006
(0.042)

-0.013
(0.041)

-0.059
(0.064)

-0.024
(0.045)

-0.695
(1.268)

-0.691
(1.489)

-2.829+
(1.555)

-1.248
(1.639)

0.019
(0.053)

0.003
(0.042)

-0.060
(0.061)

-0.017
(0.050)

Distance Tercile 2
(102-272 miles)

-1.156
(1.339)

-1.096
(1.936)

-1.387
(2.273)

-1.459
(1.971)

-0.024
(0.046)

-0.019
(0.047)

-0.042
(0.085)

-0.037
(0.055)

Distance Tercile 3
(>272 miles)
Mean Dep Var
Observations

-0.855
(1.325)
28.8
1,115

-1.636
(2.120)
37.3
492

-2.483
(2.001)
26.7
385

-0.960
(1.753)
37.3
386

-0.002
(0.052)
28.8
1,115

-0.033
(0.052)
37.3
492

-0.076
(0.070)
26.7
385

-0.030
(0.048)
37.3
386

Model D
Distance Tercile 1
(0-101 miles)

Source: CDC Abortion Surveillance Reports 1985-2013 and Guttmacher Institute estimates of number of abortions by state residents for years 1985, 1988, 1992, 1996, 2000, 2005,
2008, 2010, 2011, 2013. We add fixed effects for DC (post-2004), DE (post-1999), and KS (post-1992) to adjust for large changes to overall reported abortions rates associated either
implicitly or explicitly with changes in reporting/accounting methods. Model A includes: state and year fixed effects, state unemployment rate, state median wage, state share of
women 15-19 black, non-Hispanic, and state share of women 15-19 white, Hispanic. Model B adds interactions between covariates and year fixed effects to Model A. Model C adds
state-specific linear time trend to Model A. Model D is Model C, but with the effect of PI law allowed to differ by distance to nearest state without a PI law. Distance is measured
between the most populous city in each state. Regressions weighted by female population aged 18-19. Standard errors clustered at the state level. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01

51

Appendix Table 4: Effect of Parental Involvement Laws on Abortions Among Women Ages 18-19 by Time Periods

Estimated Effect of
PI Laws by Period

CDC
Occurrence

Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
CDC
GI
Occurrence
Residence
GI Years

GI Residence
CDC StateYears

Log of Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
CDC
GI Residence
CDC
GI
Occurrence
CDC StateOccurrence
Residence
GI Years
Years

1985 to 1996

-1.247
(1.396)

-3.047
(2.131)

-2.002
(1.911)

-0.329
(1.875)

-0.035
(0.046)

-0.042
(0.041)

-0.071
(0.060)

-0.015
(0.045)

1988 to 2000

-1.438
(1.353)

0.933
(2.410)

-2.492
(1.688)

0.596
(1.264)

-0.033
(0.051)

-0.000
(0.036)

-0.079
(0.073)

-0.004
(0.031)

1992 to 2005

-2.097
(1.335)

3.657
(2.563)

-2.390
(1.934)

0.615
(1.396)

-0.067
(0.057)

0.062
(0.048)

-0.111
(0.074)

0.006
(0.038)

1996 to 2008

0.282
(1.844)

1.089
(2.588)

0.262
(2.564)

0.129
(2.008)

0.020
(0.073)

0.063
(0.060)

-0.030
(0.085)

-0.005
(0.065)

2000 to 2013

4.567+
(2.406)

-0.838
(3.619)

2.752
(2.372)

-1.017
(1.834)

0.175+
(0.098)

0.058
(0.056)

0.152
(0.097)

0.019
(0.044)

39.9
35.3
29.2
25.9
21.4

56.1
49.3
40.9
34.9
26.6

40.2
35.3
29.9
25.9
20

56.1
49.3
40.9
34.9
26.6

39.9
35.3
29.2
25.9
21.4

56.1
49.3
40.9
34.9
26.6

40.2
35.3
29.9
25.9
20

56.1
49.3
40.9
34.9
26.6

425
494
559
527
570

192
196
198
199
300

140
151
159
163
245

140
152
160
163
246

425
494
559
527
570

192
196
198
199
300

140
151
159
163
245

140
152
160
163
246

Mean Dep. Variable
1985 to 1996
1988 to 2000
1992 to 2005
1996 to 2008
2000 to 2013
Observations
1985 to 1996
1988 to 2000
1992 to 2005
1996 to 2008
2000 to 2013

Source: CDC Abortion Surveillance Reports 1985-2013 and Guttmacher Institute estimates of number of abortions by state residents for years 1985, 1988, 1992, 1996, 2000, 2005,
2008, 2010, 2011, 2013. Model (“B” in text) includes: state and year fixed effects, state unemployment rate, state median wage, state share of women 15-19 black, non-Hispanic,
and state share of women 15-19 white, Hispanic, and interactions between these covariates and year fixed effects. Regressions weighted by female population aged 18-19. Means of
dependent variables are averaged across the indicated period. Standard errors clustered at the state level. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01

52

Appendix Table 5
Effect of PI Laws on Abortions Among Women Ages 15-17 Using Restricted CDC State Panel from 1991-2013
Abortion Rate per
1000 Women

Log Abortion Rate
per 1000 Women

Model A

-1.533+
(0.892)

-0.244**
(0.049)

Model B

-2.474*
(0.974)

-0.240**
(0.066)

Model C

-3.313**
(0.778)
10.3
792

-0.253**
(0.061)
10.3
792

Mean of Dependent Var.
Observations

Source: CDC Abortion Surveillance Reports 1991-2013. These estimates exclude states with more
than two missing observations over specified period. These are AK, CA, CO, DC, DE, FL, HI, IL,
IA, LA, MD, NH, OK, SD, VT, and WY. Models A, B, and C described in detail in Table 2 and
elsewhere. Regressions weighted by female population aged 15-17. Standard errors clustered at the
state level. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01

Appendix Table 6
Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of PI Law in Arizona (2003) on Abortions Among Women 15-17
Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Match
Match
Match
Method 1
Method 2
Method 3

Log Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Match
Match
Match
Method 1
Method 2
Method 3

Average Diff. Post Law

-0.75
[0.52]

-1.66
[0.11]

-1.64
[0.22]

-0.11
[0.48]

-0.21
[0.04]

-0.21
[0.07]

Difference in t=0

-1.06
[0.41]

-1.74
[0.11]

-1.72
[0.19]

-0.14
[0.26]

-0.22
[0.04]

-0.21
[0.07]

Difference in t=1

-0.17
[0.89]

-1.10
[0.22]

-1.07
[0.30]

-0.01
[0.96]

-0.10
[0.41]

-0.10
[0.41]

Difference in t=2

-1.03
[0.44]

-2.15
[0.11]

-2.12
[0.15]

-0.18
[0.26]

-0.31
[0.11]

-0.31
[0.07]

Mean Dep. Var. in t=-1
Avg. Difference % Change
Potential Control States
States with Positive Weight

6.4
-11.7
27
2

6.4
-25.8
27
2

6.4
-25.4
27
3

1.9

1.9

1.9

27
2

27
4

27
4

Method 1 uses values of the dependent variable in the five pre-period years to match and derive weights for control states. Method
2 uses the average of the dependent variable over the five pre-period years and all pre-period values of controls for state
unemployment rate, state median wage, state share of 15-19 year-olds black, non-Hispanic, and state share of 15-19 year-olds
white, Hispanic to match and derive weights for control states. Method 3 uses the inputs for method 2 along with the value of the
dependent variable in year t-1 to match and derive weights for control states. P-values [in brackets] are constructed using
randomization inference as described in text.

53

Appendix Table 7
Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of PI Law in Georgia (1992) on Abortions Among Women 15-17
Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Match
Match
Match
Method 1
Method 2
Method 3

Log Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Match
Match
Match
Method 1
Method 2
Method 3

Average Diff. Post Law

2.17
[0.40]

1.23
[0.53]

1.23
[0.60]

0.02
[0.80]

0.07
[0.67]

0.06
[0.73]

Difference in t=0

2.46
[0.40]

1.09
[0.60]

1.13
[0.67]

0.04
[0.67]

0.06
[0.73]

0.05
[0.80]

Difference in t=1

2.09
[0.53]

1.61
[0.67]

1.63
[0.53]

0.01
[0.87]

0.09
[0.80]

0.08
[0.60]

Difference in t=2

1.97
[0.60]

0.98
[0.87]

0.94
[0.87]

0.01
[0.93]

0.06
[0.93]

0.05
[0.73]

22.1
9.8
15
5

22.1
5.6
15
4

22.1
5.6
15
5

3.1

3.1

3.1

15
5

15
4

15
5

Mean Dep. Var. in t=-1
Avg. Difference % Change
Potential Control States
States with Positive Weight

See notes to Appendix Table 6.

Appendix Table 8
Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of PI Law in Maryland (1993) on Abortions Among Women 15-17
Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Match
Match
Match
Method 1
Method 2
Method 3

Log Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Match
Match
Match
Method 1
Method 2
Method 3

Average Diff. Post Law

-0.67
[0.65]

1.00
[0.88]

-0.83
[0.76]

0.00
[1.00]

0.01
[0.94]

-0.04
[0.82]

Difference in t=0

0.33
[0.82]

1.88
[0.47]

-0.11
[1.00]

0.03
[0.82]

0.07
[0.76]

0.01
[0.88]

Difference in t=1

-0.93
[0.71]

0.96
[0.82]

-1.07
[0.65]

-0.01
[1.00]

0.01
[1.00]

-0.05
[0.65]

Difference in t=2

-1.42
[0.35]

0.16
[1.00]

-1.30
[0.41]

-0.01
[1.00]

-0.04
[0.76]

-0.09
[0.41]

18.4
-3.7
17
4

18.4
5.4
17
3

18.4
-4.5
17
5

2.9

2.9

2.9

17
4

17
4

17
4

Mean Dep. Var. in t=-1
Avg. Difference % Change
Potential Control States
States with Positive Weight

See notes to Appendix Table 6.

54

Appendix Table 9
Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of PI Law in Minnesota (1991) on Abortions Among Women 15-17
Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Match
Match
Match
Method 1
Method 2
Method 3

Log Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Match
Match
Match
Method 1
Method 2
Method 3

Average Diff. Post Law

-1.61
[0.53]

-1.51
[0.60]

-1.37
[0.53]

-0.09
[0.47]

-0.19
[0.33]

-0.14
[0.40]

Difference in t=0

-1.27
[0.73]

-0.90
[0.93]

-1.12
[0.60]

-0.06
[0.60]

-0.13
[0.40]

-0.11
[0.53]

Difference in t=1

-1.48
[0.73]

-1.30
[0.67]

-1.12
[0.73]

-0.06
[0.73]

-0.17
[0.40]

-0.12
[0.73]

Difference in t=2

-2.07
[0.67]

-2.32
[0.53]

-1.89
[0.73]

-0.13
[0.60]

-0.26
[0.27]

-0.20
[0.40]

Mean Dep. Var. in t=-1
Avg. Difference % Change
Potential Control States
States with Positive Weight

15.8
-10.2
15
15

15.8
-9.6
15
4

15.8
-8.7
15
5

2.8

2.8

2.8

15
15

15
4

15
6

See notes to Appendix Table 6. Note MN estimates limited to 4 pre-period years.

Appendix Table 10
Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of PI Law in Mississippi (1993) on Abortions Among Women 15-17
Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Match
Match
Match
Method 1
Method 2
Method 3

Log Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Match
Match
Match
Method 1
Method 2
Method 3

Average Diff. Post Law

-4.81
[0.06]

-4.77
[0.06]

-5.03
[0.06]

-0.66
[0.00]

-0.64
[0.00]

-0.58
[0.00]

Difference in t=0

-2.47
[0.24]

-2.78
[0.29]

-3.06
[0.12]

-0.27
[0.12]

-0.28
[0.12]

-0.23
[0.18]

Difference in t=1

-5.91
[0.06]

-6.10
[0.06]

-6.37
[0.06]

-0.84
[0.00]

-0.86
[0.00]

-0.79
[0.00]

Difference in t=2

-6.04
[0.06]

-5.42
[0.06]

-5.66
[0.06]

-0.86
[0.00]

-0.79
[0.00]

-0.72
[0.06]

Mean Dep. Var. in t=-1
Avg. Difference % Change
Potential Control States
States with Positive Weight

11.9
-40.3
17
3

11.9
-40.0
17
2

11.9
-42.2
17
2

2.5

2.5

2.5

17
2

17
2

17
2

See notes to Appendix Table 6.

55

Appendix Table 11
Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of PI Law in Nebraska (1992) on Abortions Among Women 15-17
Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Match
Match
Match
Method 1
Method 2
Method 3

Log Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Match
Match
Match
Method 1
Method 2
Method 3

Average Diff. Post Law

-3.24
[0.27]

-2.99
[0.40]

-2.52
[0.33]

-0.23
[0.20]

-0.24
[0.27]

-0.19
[0.20]

Difference in t=0

-2.76
[0.27]

-3.06
[0.40]

-2.25
[0.40]

-0.19
[0.27]

-0.23
[0.27]

-0.16
[0.20]

Difference in t=1

-3.81
[0.20]

-3.45
[0.33]

-3.02
[0.27]

-0.28
[0.20]

-0.28
[0.20]

-0.23
[0.20]

Difference in t=2

-3.14
[0.33]

-2.47
[0.80]

-2.30
[0.47]

-0.22
[0.27]

-0.21
[0.47]

-0.17
[0.33]

Mean Dep. Var. in t=-1
Avg. Difference % Change
Potential Control States
States with Positive Weight

17.3
-18.7
15
4

17.3
-17.3
15
3

17.3
-14.6
15
4

2.9

2.9

2.9

15
5

15
3

15
4

See notes to Appendix Table 6.

Appendix Table 12
Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of PI Law in North Carolina (1996) on Abortions Among Women 15-17
Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Match
Match
Match
Method 1
Method 2
Method 3

Log Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Match
Match
Match
Method 1
Method 2
Method 3

Average Diff. Post Law

-5.57
[0.05]

-4.89
[0.05]

-4.93
[0.05]

-0.29
[0.10]

-0.24
[0.20]

-0.26
[0.10]

Difference in t=0

-4.74
[0.05]

-4.97
[0.05]

-5.01
[0.05]

-0.24
[0.10]

-0.22
[0.20]

-0.24
[0.10]

Difference in t=1

-6.69
[0.05]

-5.35
[0.05]

-5.39
[0.10]

-0.34
[0.10]

-0.27
[0.20]

-0.30
[0.15]

Difference in t=2

-5.27
[0.05]

-4.35
[0.05]

-4.39
[0.15]

-0.30
[0.10]

-0.22
[0.25]

-0.24
[0.20]

Mean Dep. Var. in t=-1
Avg. Difference % Change
Potential Control States
States with Positive Weight

22.2
-25.1
20
5

22.2
-22.1
20
2

22.2
-22.3
20
2

3.1

3.1

3.1

20
5

20
3

20
2

See notes to Appendix Table 6.

56

Appendix Table 13
Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of PI Law in Pennsylvania (1994) on Abortions Among Women 15-17
Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Match
Match
Match
Method 1
Method 2
Method 3

Log Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Match
Match
Match
Method 1
Method 2
Method 3

Average Diff. Post Law

-5.56
[0.06]

-2.93
[0.12]

-4.63
[0.06]

-0.39
[0.12]

-0.27
[0.12]

-0.33
[0.12]

Difference in t=0

-4.56
[0.06]

-1.74
[0.59]

-3.69
[0.06]

-0.29
[0.12]

-0.17
[0.35]

-0.23
[0.12]

Difference in t=1

-5.66
[0.06]

-3.81
[0.12]

-4.62
[0.06]

-0.40
[0.12]

-0.32
[0.24]

-0.33
[0.18]

Difference in t=2

-6.46
[0.06]

-3.25
[0.18]

-5.58
[0.06]

-0.49
[0.06]

-0.32
[0.24]

-0.43
[0.12]

Mean Dep. Var. in t=-1
Avg. Difference % Change
Potential Control States
States with Positive Weight

17.9
-31.1
17
5

17.9
-16.4
17
5

17.9
-25.9
17
6

2.9

2.9

2.9

17
5

17
5

17
6

See notes to Appendix Table 6.

Appendix Table 14
Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of PI Law in South Carolina (1990) on Abortions Among Women 15-17
Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Match
Match
Match
Method 1
Method 2
Method 3

Log Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Match
Match
Match
Method 1
Method 2
Method 3

Average Diff. Post Law

-2.07
[0.47]

-2.06
[0.53]

-1.95
[0.40]

-0.12
[0.47]

-0.12
[0.27]

-0.10
[0.40]

Difference in t=0

-1.81
[0.47]

-1.69
[0.67]

-1.64
[0.47]

-0.10
[0.47]

-0.10
[0.40]

-0.09
[0.40]

Difference in t=1

-2.56
[0.40]

-1.99
[0.60]

-1.86
[0.60]

-0.15
[0.40]

-0.11
[0.47]

-0.08
[0.67]

Difference in t=2

-1.84
[0.67]

-2.49
[0.47]

-2.34
[0.60]

-0.11
[0.60]

-0.15
[0.53]

-0.12
[0.67]

Mean Dep. Var. in t=-1
Avg. Difference % Change
Potential Control States
States with Positive Weight

19.0
-10.9
15
5

19.0
-10.9
15
3

19.0
-10.3
15
3

2.9

2.9

2.9

15
5

15
3

15
3

See notes to Appendix Table 6.

57

Appendix Table 15
Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of PI Law in Tennessee (1993) on Abortions Among Women 15-17
Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Match
Match
Match
Method 1
Method 2
Method 3

Log Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Match
Match
Match
Method 1
Method 2
Method 3

Average Diff. Post Law

-0.54
[0.71]

-1.50
[0.59]

-0.33
[0.82]

-0.10
[0.47]

-0.12
[0.41]

-0.02
[0.71]

Difference in t=0

-0.58
[0.71]

-1.70
[0.59]

-0.39
[0.82]

-0.11
[0.47]

-0.13
[0.41]

-0.03
[0.71]

Difference in t=1

-0.01
[1.00]

-1.39
[0.76]

0.16
[0.82]

-0.07
[0.82]

-0.11
[0.65]

0.02
[0.71]

Difference in t=2

-1.02
[0.59]

-1.39
[0.71]

-0.75
[0.76]

-0.13
[0.41]

-0.11
[0.65]

-0.07
[0.65]

14.1
-3.8
17
4

14.1
-10.6
17
3

14.1
-2.3
17
4

2.6

2.6

2.6

17
4

17
3

17
4

Mean Dep. Var. in t=-1
Avg. Difference % Change
Potential Control States
States with Positive Weight

See notes to Appendix Table 6.

Appendix Table 16
Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of PI Law in Texas (2000) on Abortions Among Women 15-17
Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Match
Match
Match
Method 1
Method 2
Method 3

Log Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Match
Match
Match
Method 1
Method 2
Method 3

Average Diff. Post Law

-1.55
[0.21]

-3.32
[0.11]

-3.36
[0.07]

-0.16
[0.14]

-0.36
[0.11]

-0.36
[0.11]

Difference in t=0

-1.24
[0.29]

-3.89
[0.07]

-2.66
[0.07]

-0.12
[0.32]

-0.40
[0.07]

-0.30
[0.11]

Difference in t=1

-1.71
[0.32]

-3.17
[0.11]

-3.91
[0.11]

-0.17
[0.32]

-0.35
[0.07]

-0.40
[0.00]

Difference in t=2

-1.71
[0.29]

-2.91
[0.07]

-3.52
[0.11]

-0.18
[0.32]

-0.33
[0.11]

-0.38
[0.00]

Mean Dep. Var. in t=-1
Avg. Difference % Change
Potential Control States
States with Positive Weight

9.8
-15.8
28
5

9.8
-33.9
28
5

9.8
-34.3
28
4

2.3

2.3

2.3

28
5

28
5

28
4

See notes to Appendix Table 6.

58

Appendix Table 17
Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of PI Law in Virginia (1997) on Abortions Among Women 15-17
Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Match
Match
Match
Method 1
Method 2
Method 3

Log Abortion Rate per 1000 Women
Match
Match
Match
Method 1
Method 2
Method 3

Average Diff. Post Law

-1.31
[0.55]

0.00
[1.00]

-0.54
[0.80]

-0.09
[0.65]

-0.01
[1.00]

-0.04
[0.90]

Difference in t=0

-0.25
[0.90]

0.81
[0.65]

-0.20
[0.90]

-0.01
[0.95]

0.10
[0.60]

0.00
[1.00]

Difference in t=1

-1.98
[0.20]

-0.62
[0.70]

-0.84
[0.50]

-0.14
[0.30]

-0.08
[0.65]

-0.06
[0.70]

Difference in t=2

-1.69
[0.30]

-0.19
[0.95]

-0.58
[0.70]

-0.13
[0.40]

-0.05
[0.95]

-0.05
[0.70]

15.0
-8.7
20
20

15.0
0.0
20
5

15.0
-3.6
20
5

2.7

2.7

2.7

20
20

20
4

20
5

Mean Dep. Var. in t=-1
Avg. Difference % Change
Potential Control States
States with Positive Weight

See notes to Appendix Table 6.

59

