                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   CAN THE MARKET MULTIPLY AND DIVIDE? NON-PROPORTIONAL THINKING
                       IN FINANCIAL MARKETS

                                           Kelly Shue
                                      Richard R. Townsend

                                      Working Paper 25751
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25751


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2019




We thank Gen Li, Huijun Sun, Kaushik Vasudevan, and Tianhao Wu for excellent research
assistance and the International Center for Finance at the Yale School of Management for their
support. We thank seminar audiences and discussants at the AFA, Arrowstreet Capital,
Behavioral Economics Annual Meeting, D.E. Shaw, Federal Reserve Board, Harvard Business
School, London Business School, London School of Economics, Lund University, Miami
Behavioral Conference, Microsoft Research, Minnesota Accounting Conference, NBER
Behavioral Finance, Penn State, Queen Mary University, Russell FTSE Conference, Russell Sage
Behavioral Summer Camp, SFI Lausanne, Society of Quantitative Analysts, TCU Kneeley,
Temple University, University of Oregon, UT Austin, Washington University St. Louis, Wharton,
and Yale. We thank Nick Barberis, Justin Birru, John Campbell, James Choi, Stefano Giglio,
Sam Hartzmark, Bryan Kelly, Toby Moskowitz, Matthew Rabin, and Andrei Shleifer for helpful
comments. We are especially grateful to Shimon Kogan for sharing data and analysis. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Kelly Shue and Richard R. Townsend. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Can the Market Multiply and Divide? Non-Proportional Thinking in Financial Markets
Kelly Shue and Richard R. Townsend
NBER Working Paper No. 25751
April 2019
JEL No. D03,D9,D91,G02,G12,G14,G4,G41

                                           ABSTRACT

Nominal stock prices are arbitrary. Therefore, when evaluating how a piece of news should affect
the price of a stock, rational investors should think in percentage rather than dollar terms.
However, dollar price changes are ubiquitously reported and discussed. This may both cause and
reflect a tendency of investors to think about the impact of news in dollar terms, leading to more
extreme return responses to news for lower-priced stocks. We find a number of results consistent
with such non-proportional thinking. First, lower-priced stocks have higher total volatility,
idiosyncratic volatility, and market betas, after controlling flexibly for size. To identify a causal
effect of price, we show that volatility increases sharply following pre-announced stock splits and
drops following reverse stock splits. The returns of lower-priced stocks also respond more
strongly to firm-specific news events, all else equal. The economic magnitudes are large: a
doubling in a stock's nominal price is associated with a 20-30% decline in its volatility, beta, and
return response to firm-specific news. These patterns are not exclusive to small, illiquid stocks;
they hold even among the largest stocks. Non-proportional thinking can explain a variety of asset
pricing anomalies such as long-run and short-run reversals, as well as the negative relation
between past returns and volatility (i.e., the leverage effect). Our analysis also shows that the
well-documented negative relation between risk (volatility or beta) and size is actually driven by
nominal prices rather than fundamentals.


Kelly Shue
Yale School of Management
165 Whitney Avenue
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
kelly.shue@yale.edu

Richard R. Townsend
University of California, San Diego
Rady School of Management
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093
rrtownsend@ucsd.edu
1       Introduction

When evaluating how a piece of news should aect stock prices, rational investors should think in


percentage terms rather than nominal dollar terms.              Holding the equity size of a stock constant,


the nominal share price has no real meaning, because the price depends on the arbitrary number


of shares a rm's equity is divided into.           However, dollar price changes in reaction to news are


ubiquitously reported and discussed. For decades, newspapers such as the Wall Street Journal only


published dollar price changes for stocks. More recently, popular stock-tracking applications, like


the one pre-installed on the iPhone, have shown dollar price changes by default. Also, television


networks such as CNBC routinely display tickers showing dollar price changes (see Figure 1 for


examples).       This emphasis on nominal price changes may both cause and reect a tendency of


investors to (at least partially) think that a given piece of news should correspond to a certain


dollar change in price rather than a certain percentage change in price. In other words, investors


may engage in non-proportional thinking.


    To x ideas, consider two otherwise         identical stocks of the same size, one trading at $20/share
and another trading at $30/share. Investors who think in dollar terms may believe that the same


piece of good news, such as the arrival of a highly skilled CEO, should correspond to a $1 increase


in price for both stocks.
                              1 Such non-proportional thinking would lead to a greater return response


for the lower-priced stock than for the higher-priced stock. Similarly, with the arrival of additional


news over time, non-proportional thinking would lead to greater return volatility for the lower-priced


stock than the higher-priced stock, even if the two stocks were subject to the same sequence of news.


These predictions apply broadly to all types of news, including news about cash ows as well as


news about discount rates (e.g., a risk aversion or sentiment shock). Similarly, the predictions apply


to news that is rm-specic as well as news that is aggregate in nature. To the extent that market


returns reect aggregate news, non-proportional thinking would also lead the returns of lower-priced


stocks to more more strongly with the market, leading them to have higher market betas.


    We begin by testing the volatility predictions from a simple model of non-proportional thinking.


    1
        For example, the investor may recall that, when a rm announced the arrival of a new skilled CEO, its share
price increased by $1. When a dierent rm announces similar news, the investor mistakenly reasons that the new
rm should also experience a $1 increase in share price.



                                                           1
We nd that lower nominal share price is associated with higher total return volatility, as well as


higher idiosyncratic volatility and market beta.    The economic magnitudes are large: a doubling


in share price corresponds to a 2030 percent reduction in these three measures of volatility. Of


course, the negative relation between volatility and price could be attributable to other factors. In


particular, small-cap stocks are known to have higher total volatility, idiosyncratic volatility, and


market beta, possibly because small-cap stocks are fundamentally more risky.           Small-cap stocks


also tend to have lower nominal share prices, so the price-volatility relation in the data could


be driven by size.     However, we nd that the negative price-volatility relation remains equally


strong after introducing exible controls for size. Moreover, the negative relation between size and


volatility attens by more than 80% after we introduce a single control variable for nominal share


price. Similarly, the well-known negative beta-size relation in the data attens toward zero after


controlling for price. Thus, non-proportional thinking may explain the size-volatility and size-beta


relations rather than the reverse. In addition, we show that non-proportional thinking can explain


the leverage eect puzzle in which volatility is negatively related to past returns (e.g., Black, 1976;


Glosten, Ravi, and Runkle, 1993). As prices decline, volatility increases because investors react to


news in dollar units and thereby more strongly in percentage units.


    Overall, we nd that price has extremely high explanatory power for volatility in a manner


that matches the predictions of a non-proportional thinking model. The negative volatility-price


relation remains stable in magnitude after controlling for other potential determinants of volatility


such as volume turnover, bid-ask spread percentage, market-to-book ratio, leverage ratio, and sales


volatility.   The results hold in the cross-section as well as in panel regressions that control for


time-invariant stock characteristics. The results also hold in the recent time period and within a


subsample limited to large-cap stocks. We also show that the results cannot be explained by tick-size


limitations that constrain absolute dollar price changes to be above some minimum. In addition, we


nd that the magnitude of the volatility-price relation declines with institutional ownership and size,


suggesting that the volatility-price relation represents a form of mispricing that is weaker among


stocks that are easier to arbitrage.


    While this collection of facts is consistent with non-proportional thinking, it remains possible




                                                   2
that an omitted factor may drive the negative relation between price and volatility.       To better


account for potential omitted factors, we study how volatility changes around stock splits. Following


a standard 2-for-1 stock split, the share price falls by 50%.    While the occurrence of a split in a


given quarter is unlikely to be random (e.g., rms often choose to split their stock following good


performance), the fundamentals that drive the split decision are likely to be slow-moving since


all splits are pre-announced, usually by one month ahead of the split execution date.       Our tests


only require that rm fundamentals do not change on the split execution date. We nd a sharp


discontinuity around stock splits: total return volatility, idiosyncratic volatility, and market beta


increase by approximately 30 percent immediately after a 2-for-1 split. Further, the volatility does


not return to pre-split levels, even after six months. We also nd that the magnitude of the jump


in volatility can be cleanly sorted by the type of the split: 2-for-1 (in which price falls by 50%) or


3-for-2 (in which price falls by 33%). Moreover, volatility decreases sharply when prices rise in the


case of reverse splits (e.g., when 2 shares become 1).


   We also show that our results cannot be explained by changes in investor bases or media coverage.


Previous research has argued that lower prices, and splits in particular, may attract speculative


retail investors, who could drive up volatility. Along the same lines, media coverage of rms usually


increases around splits, which could contribute to volatility.   We show that these factors cannot


generate the sharp, large, and persistent change in volatility observed in the data. First, we observe


an immediate large jump in volatility after a split, even though we nd that retail and institutional


trading activity does not change dramatically on the split execution date.      Second, the jump in


volatility persists for many months, so it is unlikely to be caused by a temporary increase in media


coverage. Third, simple models of speculative investors (e.g., Brandt et al., 2009) predict higher


idiosyncratic volatility, but not necessarily higher market beta, which we also observe.     In other


words, stocks not only become more volatile after splits, but they also become more responsive to


market news. Fourth, speculation and increased media coverage should lead to increased volume


turnover following a split. Instead, we observe a sharp and persistent decline in volume following


splits and the opposite pattern for reverse splits. This change in volume is instead consistent with


a model in which some investors naively trade a xed number of shares for each stock. Following




                                                  3
a split, the share oat doubles, so the number of shares traded relative to the oat declines after


splits and rises after reverse splits.
                                          2


    In the remainder of the paper, we directly explore how return responses to news events vary


with share price. We identify news events in three dierent ways. First, we identify news events


through textual analysis using data from Boudoukh et al. (2018). On days where Boudoukh et al.


(2018) identify value-relevant news events for stocks, we nd that lower-priced stocks experience


more extreme returns, consistent with non-proportional thinking.                   Of course, it is possible that


lower-priced stocks simply tend to have more extreme news events. However, our analysis in this


case is limited to S&P 500 stocks due to data coverage.                Among this set of large rms, it seems


plausible that the distribution of news events would be similar across levels of nominal price.


    Next, we study how return responses to quarterly earnings announcements vary with share price.


On earnings announcement days, we nd that lower-priced stocks experience more extreme returns.


Again, it is possible that lower-priced stocks tend to have more extreme earnings news. However,


in this case, we can control for the extremity of the news using the standardized earnings surprise


relative to analyst forecasts.       We nd that the absolute magnitude of the return response to the


same earnings surprise monotonically decreases with a stock's price prior to the announcement.


Thus, the returns of lower-priced stocks respond more strongly to the same news, consistent with


non-proportional thinking.


    Finally, we show that non-proportional thinking is an important determinant of return reversals.


If investors overreact to news for lower-priced stocks, then we would expect these stocks to experience


stronger subsequent reversals as prices return to fundamentals. Consistent with non-proportional


thinking, we nd that both the long-run reversal anomaly documented by De Bondt and Thaler


(1985) and the short-run reversal anomaly documented by Jegadeesh (1990) are stronger for lower


priced stocks. Further, the magnitude of return reversals can be better sorted by price than by size.


    Our results contribute to the literature in four ways. First, we document a new way in which


thinking about changes in value in the wrong units can aect nancial markets. Svedsäter, Gamble,


and Gärling (2007) show that laboratory subjects report what amounts to a higher expected per-


   2
       One might be concerned that the drop in volume turnover may reduce liquidity, which could contribute to higher
volatility. However, we nd similar results after controlling for changes in liquidity measures.



                                                           4
centage change in price in reaction to news for hypothetical rms with lower nominal share prices.


In this paper, we test whether these predictions hold in real nancial markets and explore how


non-proportional thinking can aect volatility and reversal patterns.                    In related work, Shue and


Townsend (2017) show that the tendency to think about executive option grants in terms of the


number of options granted rather than the Black-Scholes value contributed to the dramatic rise in
CEO pay starting in the late 1990s. Birru and Wang (2015, 2016) show that nominal price illusion


causes investors to mistakenly believe that lower-priced stocks have more room to grow. Roger,


Roger, and Schatt (2018) show that sell-side analysts issue more extreme forecasts for lower-priced


stocks.
          3 Finally, our research is related to Baker and Wurgler(2004a,b), Baker, Nagel, and Wurgler


(2007), and Hartzmark and Solomon (2017, 2018), which show that investors fail to incorporate


dividend payouts when evaluating total returns.
                                                            4


    Second, we contribute to the literature on proportional (or relative) thinking (e.g., Thaler, 1980;


Tversky and Kahneman, 1981; Pratt, Wise, and Zeckhauser, 1979; Azar, 2007; Bushong, Rabin,


and Schwartzstein, 2015; and Lian, Ma, and Wang (2018)). This literature has largely focused on


instances in which individuals think partly in percentage terms when they should think entirely


in dollar terms. For example, consumers may be willing to travel to a dierent store to get a $10


discount on a cheap product, but not for the same $10 discount on an expensive product. These


consumers incorrectly focus on the $10 discount as a proportion of the good's retail price instead of


comparing the dollar level of the discount to the cost of traveling to a dierent store. In contrast,


we explore a nancial markets setting in which investors think partly in dollar terms when they


should think entirely in percentage terms.
                                                    5 While the bias that we document may appear to be the


opposite of that documented in the prior literature, the dierence may in large part be due to the



   3
       Roger, Roger, and Schatt (2018) interpret their results as consistent with analysts thinking about small numbers
in a linear scale and large numbers in a logarithmic scale. However, we believe their evidence may also be consistent
with a simple model of non-proportional thinking in which analysts make predictions for dollar changes in earnings
per share, without fully scaling by share price.
   4
       Our research is similar in spirit to the money illusion literature, which shows that households confuse the nominal
and real value of money (e.g., Fisher, 1928; Benartzi and Thaler, 1995; Modigliani and Cohn, 1979; Ritter and Warr,
2002).    In this paper, we show that investors focus on dollar units instead of percentage units.       Our research is
also related to the broader literature on behavioral nance, particularly Lamont and Thaler (2003), which asks the
question of whether investors can add and subtract, and is the inspiration for the title of this paper.
   5
       There are other nancial market settings that resemble a consumer choice problem, where investors should think
in levels. For example, Lian, Ma, and Wang (2018) show that investors should think in levels when comparing the
returns of risk-free versus risky assets, but may mistakenly think in proportions.



                                                             5
type of thinking called for under the rational benchmark in each setting. People may think partially


in percentages and partially in dollars, leading to mistakes in settings in which they should think


entirely in dollars (consumer choice problems) or in percentages (when pricing nancial assets).


   Third, our ndings shed light on the potential origins of volatility in nancial markets. Since


Shiller (1981), academics have explored the question of what factors determine volatility and risk.


Our results suggest that non-proportional thinking may be an important part of the explanation.


Moreover, we show that several stylized facts in asset pricing, such as the leverage eect as well


as the size-volatility and size-beta relations in the data can be reinterpreted through the lens of


non-proportional thinking.


   Fourth, we oer a new explanation of over and underreaction to news and subsequent drift


patterns in asset prices. The existing literature in behavioral nance has mainly viewed over and


underreaction to news through the lens of limited attention (e.g.,        Hirshleifer and Teoh, 2003),


incorrect weighting of news relative to one's priors (e.g.,    Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1998),


or mistaken beliefs regarding extrapolation and reversals (e.g.,       Greenwood and Shleifer, 2014;


Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1994; Hong and Stein, 1999). Non-proportional thinking oers


a complementary explanation:      over and underreaction to news can also be caused by investors


thinking about news in the wrong units.


   Finally, we note that some of the basic empirical facts collected in this paper have been indi-


vidually shown in previous research.     However, the previous literature has often presented these


facts as puzzles in the data. For example, an increase in volatility following splits was discussed


in early work by Ohlson and Penman (1985), and the general negative relation between price and


volatility is well-known in the asset pricing literature (e.g., Black, 1976). Our contribution is to oer


a new explanation that unies a large number of facts and puzzles, and to cast doubt on supposedly


robust facts, such as the view that size is a fundamental determinant of risk.        With a model of


non-proportional thinking in mind, we can also present a more targeted set of empirical tests to


distinguish our hypothesis from potential alternative explanations.




                                                   6
2       A Simple Model

Consider a stock with current share price           P , just before news is released.          Suppose news       Z   is released


that contains information relevant for the valuation of the stock. We assume that if markets are


fully ecient and rational, the release of news              Z   should imply a     δ   percentage change in the price of


the stock. In other words,        δ   is the rational return response to the news. However, non-proportional


thinking may lead investors to apply a heuristic and think that news                     Z   should move prices by a dollar

                                                                                    X
amount    X.   In this case, the return response to news would be
                                                                                    P rather than      δ.   A return response

     X
of
     P would represent the most extreme form of non-proportional thinking. However, investors may

only engage in partial non-proportional thinking. To capture this, we consider a return response


function that nests proportional and non-proportional thinking:



                                                                          θ
                                                                     η0
                                                                 
                                                        r=δ                    ,                                               (1)
                                                                     P

                                                                X
where the parameter         η0   is a constant equal to
                                                                δ and the parameter          θ ∈ [0, 1]   captures the extent


to which investors engage in non-proportional thinking. When                         θ = 0,    investors are fully rational

                                                                                                          X
and the return response is            r = δ.   When     θ = 1,       the return response is      r =      P.   In the presence


of non-proportional thinking (0            < θ ≤ 1),        Equation 1 implies that the magnitude of the return


response to news,    |r|,   will be greater, the lower the stock's price,               P.   One interpretation of      η0    is as


the price level such that the dollar response               X   corresponds to the rational return response              δ,   even


when investors engage fully in non-proportional thinking (i.e.,                    θ = 1).

     To move closer to an estimating equation, Equation 1 can also be expressed linearly by taking


logs:




                                      log (|r|) = log (|δ|) + θlog (η0 ) − θlog (P ) .                                         (2)



Of course, we cannot typically observe              δ   and     η0   in the data.   However, to the extent that they


are orthogonal to   P,   we can still estimate          θ   from Equation 2, omitting these variables. Given that


nominal share prices are fairly arbitrary, it may be plausible that                 P   would be orthogonal to         δ and η0 ,

especially after conditioning on other observable stock characteristics (e.g., size), or by comparing



                                                                 7
the same stock immediately before and after a stock split. In some tests, we also explicitly control


for the magnitude of the news shock or restrict to a sample of S&P 500 rms for which is it more


plausible that       δ   is orthogonal to   P .6

      The model also delivers predictions for a stock's return volatility. If we allow for a sequence of


iid   news arriving over time corresponding to volatility                       σδ ,     Equation 1 implies that:



                                                                                θ
                                                                           η0
                                                                       
                                                       σr = σδ ·                     .                                            (3)
                                                                           P

In the presence of non-proportional thinking (0                    < θ ≤ 1),             this means that a stock's volatility will


be greater, the lower the stock's price. This can be also be expressed in log form as:




                                     log (σr ) = log (σδ ) + θlog (η0 ) − θlog (P ) .                                             (4)



The prediction that lower-priced stocks should have higher volatility applies to dierent measures


of volatility, including total return volatility, idiosyncratic volatility, and absolute market beta.


Lower-priced stocks would have higher idiosyncratic volatility due to their greater responsiveness


to rm-specic news.            They would also have higher absolute market beta due to their greater


responsiveness to aggregate news. Note that non-proportional thinking amplies the                                    absolute value
of market beta. For example, if a stock's true beta is negative and aggregate news is positive, the


stock's share price should drop and the share price should drop by more if investors overreact to


the news. Together, greater idiosyncratic volatility and absolute market beta would lead to greater


total volatility.


      This simple model applies to reactions to news where news is dened broadly. In addition to


cash ow news, non-proportional thinking may also bias investor reactions to discount rate news,


such as shocks to risk aversion or sentiment. For example, investors may reduce their valuation of


stocks following a risk aversion shock. If investors react to the risk aversion news in dollar units,


then the magnitude of the return reaction will be larger for lower-priced stocks, all else equal.




      6
          We also acknowledge that assuming that   δ   and   η0   are orthogonal to          P   may be an oversimplication of a more
complex model that actually drives investor behavior. Nevertheless, we show in Figure 2, Panel B, that a model with
these assumptions ts the data reasonably well.



                                                                   8
    Because news events are dicult to observe systematically, we begin our analysis of non-


proportional thinking by testing our predictions for the relation between nominal price and return


volatility, estimating variants of Equation 4. We then use several approaches to identify news events.


Using these identied news events, we test our predictions about the relation between nominal price


and return responses to news, estimating variants of Equation 2.




3    Data

The sample period for our baseline analysis runs from 19262016. However, the beginning of the


sample period for each empirical test varies depending on when coverage begins for supplementary


data sources used in the analysis. We also show that our results are robust across dierent time


periods. Summary statistics for our key variables can be found in Table 1.




Stock Market Data

We obtain stock market data from CRSP, which contains information relating to returns, nominal


share prices, stock splits, daily high and low, volume, bid-ask spread, and market capitalization.


Data on factor returns and size category cutos come from the Ken French Data Library.                   We


restrict the sample to stocks that are publicly traded on the NYSE, American Stock Exchange, or


NASDAQ. We also restrict the sample to assets that are classied as common equity (CRSP share


codes 10 and 11).


    In our baseline tests, we measure stock    i's   total return volatility in month   t   as the annualized


standard deviation of its daily returns within that month. We measure stock             i 's market beta in
month   t   by regressing its daily excess returns within that month on market excess returns. Because


non-synchronous prices have been shown to have a big impact on short-horizon betas, we follow


Dimson (1979) and include both current and lagged market excess returns in the regressions, esti-


mating beta as the sum of the slopes on all lags. Specically, we include four lags of market returns,


imposing the constraint that lags 24 have the same slope to reduce the number of parameters,


as in Lewellen and Nagel (2006). We measure idiosyncratic volatility as the annualized standard


deviation of the residuals from these regressions.



                                                      9
    To classify stocks by nominal share price, past returns, etc., we always use lagged information


so as to avoid look-ahead bias. To reduce the inuence of outliers, we restrict our baseline analysis


to stock-months where (1) there are at least 15 trading days with non-missing return data in CRSP


and (2) there is variation in the stock's price (i.e., the stock price is not the same on all trading


days within the month) and (3) the nominal stock price at the end of the previous month was not


in the top or bottom 1% of stock prices that month. We also examine changes in volatility at a


daily frequency.      In this case, we measure volatility as a stock's intraday price range percentage

           High−Low
(100   ×     High   ).


Firm Accounting Data

We use accounting data to control for rm characteristics. These data come from the COMPUSTAT


Quarterly Fundamentals le. Coverage begins in 1961. The primary control variables we construct


are sales volatility, market-to-book ratio, and leverage. We dene sales volatility as the standard


deviation of year-over-year quarterly sales growth during the previous four quarters.
                                                                                                 7 In cases where


data are missing for some of the previous four quarters, we compute the standard deviation based


on the non-missing quarters, conditional on there being more than one non-missing quarter. We


dene the market-to-book ratio as market capitalization (csho*prcc_f ) plus the book value of assets


(at) less shareholder equity (seq), all divided by the book value of assets (at). We dene leverage


as the ratio of short-term and long-term debt (dlc+dltt) to the book value of assets (at).




Institutional and Retail Ownership

Data on institutional ownership come from the Thomson Institutional Manager Holdings le, which


is based on quarterly 13f lings. Coverage begins in 1980. Each quarter, we sum up the number of


shares of each stock held by 13f lers and divide by shares outstanding to get institutional ownership


percentages. Data on the characteristics of a rm's retail shareholders come from Odean's (1998)


Large Discount Broker database.




   7
       For each quarter, we compute the growth of sales (sale) over the year-ago quarter. We consider year-over-year
sales growth to be undened if sales are reported to be negative in one of the two quarters.



                                                         10
Option-Implied Volatility

Data on option-implied volatility and option prices come from OptionMetrics, which computes


implied volatility over dierent horizons based on traded options of varying maturities. Coverage


begins in 1996.




News Events

To identify news events, we use data from Boudoukh et al. (2018), which identies value-relevant


events by applying a machine learning algorithm to the text of articles from                  Dow Jones Newswire.
News events are divided into two groups: events that the algorithm can place into a particular


category and events that it is unable to categorize. The Boudoukh et al. (2018) data are limited to


S&P 500 stocks, with coverage beginning in 2000.




Earnings Announcements

Data on quarterly earnings announcements come from the I/B/E/S detail le. Coverage begins in


1983.    These data provide information on analyst forecasts of earnings per share, along with the


actual announced earnings per share. Following the literature (e.g., Mendenhall 2004; Jegadeesh


and Livnat 2006), we dene standardized unexpected earnings (SUE) as:




                                                            (AEi,t − F Ei,t )
                                                SU Ei,t =
                                                                  σi,t


where for rm      i   in quarter t,   AEi,t   represents the actual earnings,   F Ei,t   represents mean forecasted


earnings, and     σit   represents the standard deviation of analyst forecasts. Thus,           SU Ei,t   is a measure


of how surprising an earnings announcement was, given the distribution of analyst forecasts. It is


only dened for earnings announcements with multiple forecasts. We compute the variables                        F Ei,t

and   σi,t   using only the most recent forecast of each analyst prior to the earning announcement. To


avoid using stale information in our measure of analyst expectations, we exclude analyst's forecasts


that are made more than 60 days prior to the announcement.                       Our results remain similar if we


exclude forecasts made more than 30 days prior to the announcement.




                                                             11
4    Results: Volatility

4.1 Prices, Total Volatility, Idiosyncratic Volatility, and Market Beta

We begin by exploring how return volatility varies with share price. Using data at the stock-month


level, we estimate the following regression:




                      log (voli,t ) = β0 + β1 log (pricei,t−1 ) + controls + τt + it .                  (5)




We regress each stock   i's   volatility in month   t   on the stock's nominal share price at the end of the


previous month, calendar-year-month xed eects, and additional control variables. Volatility can


represent total volatility, idiosyncratic volatility, or market beta. We measure volatility and nominal


share price in logarithm form because a simple model of non-proportional thinking implies that


volatility should change proportionately with the share price, leading to a linear log-log relation.


Control variables can include the log of the rm's size (measured as total market equity) in the


previous month or indicator variables for 20 size categories based on the market capitalization of


the stock relative to the size breakpoints for each year-month from the Ken French Data Library.


The sample excludes observations with extreme lagged prices (the bottom and top 1% of prices


each month). To account for correlated observations, we double-cluster standard errors by stock


and year-month.


    We present our baseline results in Table 2. Consistent with the predictions from a simple non-


proportional thinking model, we nd that higher nominal share price is associated with lower total


return volatility. The negative coecient on price remains highly signicant and stable in magnitude


as we introduce control variables for size (either as the log of lagged market capitalization or with


20 size category indicators based on lagged market capitalization). The results hold in the cross


section (with time xed eects and without stock xed eects) and in the time-series (with both


time and stock xed eects), as shown in Panels A and B, respectively. The economic magnitudes


are also quite large. With the full set of control variables in column (4), a doubling in share price is


associated with a 34% decline in volatility in the cross section and a 27% decline in volatility in the


time-series (i.e., within stock over time). While our illustrative model is not intended to oer an



                                                         12
exact match to the data, we can interpret these coecient estimates as implying that    θ   in Equation


4 is approximately 0.3. In other words, investors display an intermediate level of non-proportional


thinking.


   In Table 3, we nd similar empirical patterns after replacing the dependent variable with id-


iosyncratic volatility and market beta.   The economic magnitudes are again large.      With the full


set of control variables in column (4), a doubling in share price is associated with a 35% decline


in idiosyncratic volatility and a 31% decline in market beta. As discussed previously, we use the


absolute value of market beta as our dependent variable because non-proportional thinking should


lead to stronger reactions to market news for lower-priced stocks, resulting in more positive betas


for positive-beta stocks and more negative betas for negative-beta stocks.     However, one may be


concerned that stocks with measured betas in the negative range may simply be stocks where beta


is measured with error. To show that this does not drive our results, Appendix Table A1 restricts


the sample to observations with positive estimated market betas. We continue to nd similar results


in this subsample.


   In Figure 2, we explore the shape of the price-volatility relation, without imposing a linear log-


log structure. In Panel A, we plot the coecients of a regression of volatility on 20 lagged share


price bin indicators, with each bin containing the same number of observations, controlling for 20


size category bins and year-month xed eects. All plotted coecients measure the dierence in


volatility within each share price bin relative to the omitted bin of 20 (the largest share price). In


Panel B, we plot the coecients of a regression of volatility on 20 lagged share price bin indicators,


this time with each bin representing an equal range of logged prices, again controlling for size and


time xed eects. The omitted category represents log lagged share price in the range of 5.0 to 5.25.


In both exible specications, we observe a strong monotonic negative relation between volatility


and share price. These gures show that our ndings of a negative relation between volatility and


nominal share price are unlikely to be driven by a few outlier observations. Rather, the negative


relation holds between any two adjacent nominal price bins, and holds even in the range of high


nominal share prices. Panel B also shows that the relation between the logarithm of volatility and


the logarithm of share price is approximately linear, with a slight decrease in the absolute slope for




                                                 13
very high-priced stocks. Thus, Panel B supports our use of a simple log-linear model as a reasonable


way to represent the data in a parsimonious manner.


      Our baseline analysis uses panel data at the stock-year-month level and exploits both cross-


sectional and time-series variation.     To show that our ndings are not caused by biases in the


potential misspecication of time series or panel regressions, we can alternatively estimate the pure


cross-sectional relation between volatility and lagged price within each month in our sample, i.e., a


Fama-MacBeth style analysis. We estimate Equation 5, controlling for size category xed eects,


separately for each of the 1085 calendar year-months in our sample. Figure 3 plots the histogram


of   β1 ,   as estimated from 1085 cross-sectional regressions. The mean of the estimated coecients


is -0.31, with a standard deviation of 0.10, and almost all estimates are negative. Thus, we nd a


similarly-sized and robust negative volatility-price relation using only cross-sectional variation.




4.1.1 Size Doesn't Matter (Much)

The empirical patterns shown so far are consistent with non-proportional thinking. However, an


omitted factor could determine both price and volatility.      Our results can already reject one key


alternative explanation involving size: It is well-known in the asset pricing literature that small-cap


stocks (i.e., stocks with low market capitalization) tend to have higher return volatility, idiosyncratic


volatility, and market beta. Since small-cap stocks also tend to have low nominal share prices (see


Appendix Table A2 for correlations), size may simultaneously determine share price and volatility.


      However, we showed in Tables 2 and 3 that the coecient on lagged share price remains stable


in magnitude and signicant after controlling for the logarithm of lagged market capitalization or


after controlling exibly for size with 20 size category indicators. We also see in columns (2) and


(3) of each table that, while size negatively predicts volatility if we do not control for price, the


size-volatility relation attens toward zero once we control for lagged nominal share price.


      As an alternative way of illustrating these results, we note that size is equal to the product


of price and shares outstanding.      Therefore, we can examine whether the negative volatility-size


relation is driven by price or shares outstanding, by regressing volatility on lagged price and lagged


shares. Appendix Table A3 shows that the negative volatility-size relation is driven by price rather




                                                   14
than shares outstanding.


    We explore the relation between size and volatility in more detail in Figure 4. Panel A shows


the coecients from a regression of log total volatility (left) or log market beta (right) on 20 size


category indicators (the largest size category is the omitted one), after controlling for year-month


xed eects.       As expected, we nd a strong negative relation between size and volatility and a


strong negative relation between size and beta. In Panel B, we report the same set of coecients


for the 20 size indicators, after adding a single control variable for the log of the lagged nominal


share price to the regression. We see that the relation between size and volatility, and size and beta,


attens dramatically. In the range between size categories 4 and 20, size continues to negatively


predict volatility and beta. However, the magnitude of the slope shrinks by more than 80 percent.
                                                                                                                      8


These results cast doubt on the notion that size is a fundamental determinant of risk, as measured


by volatility or market beta.          Rather, a signicant portion of the well-known size-volatility and


size-beta empirical relations is driven by share price, in a manner consistent with non-proportional


thinking.




4.1.2 The Leverage Eect Puzzle

A large body of research in asset pricing has explored the leverage eect puzzle, which refers to


the strong negative relation between volatility and past returns in stock market data (e.g., Black,


1976). The phenomenon is named after a potential explanation involving leverage: holding debt


levels constant, negative returns imply that the equity is more levered, leading to increased equity


volatility (e.g., Christie, 1982). However, some have pointed out that the leverage-based explanation


may be incomplete because the negative volatility-return relation is equally strong for rms with


zero book leverage (e.g., Hasanhodzic and Lo, 2011), and others have oered non-leverage-based


explanations (e.g., Campbell and Hentschel, 1992).


    In this paper, we do not seek to reject any of the existing explanations of the leverage eect


puzzle. Instead, we propose a model of non-proportional thinking as a new and potentially com-


plementary explanation. Negative past returns imply a drop in share price, and a lower share price


   8
       In the range of size categories 1 through 4, the relation between beta and size is positive after controlling for
price. However, beta may be measured with more error for these micro-cap stocks.



                                                           15
causes an increase in volatility if investors engage in non-proportional thinking.


    In Table 4, Panel A, we present regressions of volatility in the current month on past returns and


share price, controlling for rm size categories and year-month xed eects. First, in column (1) we


repeat our baseline specication, limiting the sample to stock-year-months where returns over the


previous 12 months are non-missing. In column (2), we replace lagged price with returns over the


previous 12 months. We nd that volatility is indeed strongly negatively related to past returns,


with a coecient of -0.24 on the measure of past returns. However, when we add a control for the


lagged share price at the end of the previous month in column (3), the coecient on past returns


falls in absolute magnitude to -0.03. Further, the coecient on lagged price (after controlling for


past returns) remains stable in magnitude at approximately -0.33. In other words, the coecient on


past returns falls by 87% in absolute magnitude once we add an additional control variable for price.


Conversely, the coecient on lagged price falls by a negligible 2% once we add a control variable for


past returns. These results show that a large portion of the negative volatility-return relation may


actually be driven by the correlation between past returns and share price. We also nd similar


patterns if we control for past returns separately for each the previous 12 months as in column (4).


Altogether, these results show that, while price is correlated with past returns (see Appendix Table


A2 for correlations), the price level is a stronger determinant of volatility. Controlling for the price


level, it matters less how the stock arrived at that level, either through negative past returns or


positive past returns.


    One may still be concerned that our ndings are driven by a negative relation between price and


leverage, and a positive eect of leverage on equity volatility. To further rule out this possibility,


in Table 4, Panel B, we limit the sample to stocks associated with rms with zero debt (current


liabilities + long term debt) reported in their most recent quarterly nancial statements.                        We


continue to nd similar results in this subsample.
                                                           9




   9
       We acknowledge that rms with zero debt may still have operating leverage, which may increase the risk of
equity. It is not the goal of this paper to show that leverage cannot contribute to a leverage eect. Rather, we argue
that a substantial portion of the leverage eect can be explained by non-proportional thinking.



                                                         16
4.1.3 Robustness and Heterogeneity

Additional Controls

In Table 5, we repeat our baseline analysis including additional control variables that could aect


volatility. In column (1), we begin by including minimal controls, as in column (1) of Table 2 Panel


A. In column (2), we control for size even more thoroughly and exibly than before by controlling for


both the logarithm of lagged market capitalization as well as the 20 size category indicator variables


and all interactions between the two. Using these exible size controls, we continue to estimate a


similar coecient on price. In column (3), we add an additional control for lagged sales volatility


which is a proxy for the fundamental volatility of each rm.            This is measured as the standard


deviation of year-over-year quarterly sales growth in the four most recently completed quarters. In


column (4), we include a control for the stock's market-to-book ratio. In column (5) we control for

                      Share V olume                                           Ask−Bid
volume turnover (
                    Shares Outstanding ) and bid-ask spread percentage (100 ×   Ask ). In column (6),
                            Current Liabilities+Long T erm Debt
we control for leverage (                                       ). In all columns, we only include observations
                                       Book Assets

where all controls are non-missing so as to keep the sample consistent. While we estimate signicant


coecients on many of these control variables, suggesting that they are indeed related to volatility,


their inclusion has little eect on the estimated price coecient. Therefore, our results do not, for


example, appear to be driven by lower-priced stocks having higher fundamental sales volatility or


lower liquidity.




Tick Size

A tick is the minimum unit for the price movement for a nancial security. Tick size as a fraction


of share price is larger for stocks with lower nominal share price, which may articially inate the


measured volatility of lower-priced stocks.


   In Figure 2, described previously, we found that the negative price-volatility relation holds even


in the range of very high nominal share price bins, when tick size limits should have minimal impact.


We will also show in Appendix Table A5 that the absolute magnitude of the price-volatility relation


does not display a downward trend over time, even though tick sizes have fallen dramatically in




                                                       17
recent decades.
                    10


    To further ensure that our results are not driven by tick sizes being large relative to prices for


lower-priced stocks, in Table 6 we check that our results are robust to linear measures of volatility,


which have been shown to be insensitive to tick sizes (Hau, 2006). Intuitively, with linear measures,


rounding errors leading to articially large price movements are canceled out by rounding errors


leading to articially small price movements on average. We nd similar results when using such


linear measures. Specically, we measure volatility as (1) the mean intraday price range percentage

          High−Low
(100×
            High   ) over all trading days in a stock-month, (2) the mean absolute deviation (|Ret−Ret|)

over all trading days in stock-month, and (3) the mean absolute return (|Ret|) over all trading days in


a stock-month. We continue to estimate similar coecients using these three measures of volatility.


Therefore, our results do not appear to be driven by tick sizes being large relative to stock prices


for low-priced stocks.




Institutional Ownership

Institutional investors may be more sophisticated than non-institutional investors and thus less


likely to suer from non-proportional thinking. If so, the price-volatility relation should be weaker


for stocks with higher institutional ownership.              To test whether this is the case, we repeat our


baseline analysis, allowing the eect of price to interact with institutional ownership.
                                                                                                       11 The results


are shown in Table 7. Consistent with the idea that institutional investors are more sophisticated,


we estimate that volatility declines with price less when a stock has higher institutional ownership.


A linear extrapolation implies that, as a stock moves from 0% institutional ownership to 100%, the


eect of price on volatility is reduced by approximately 44%.


    This analysis also partially addresses another potential alternative explanation, which is that


lower-priced stocks may be held by unsophisticated noise traders or speculators who generate high


volatility for reasons unrelated to non-proportional thinking. Table 7 shows that, indeed, stocks are


   10
        Tick sizes moved from 1/8 to 1/16 in 1997 and from 1/16 to 0.01 in 2001.
   11
        As is standard in the literature, we dene institutional ownership as the percent of outstanding shares reported
to be held by institutions in quarterly 13f lings. The institutional ownership variable is updated quarterly, while
our observations are at the monthly level.     As before, we double-cluster standard errors by stock as well as year-
month. The stock clustering should address the mechanical serial correlation in institutional ownership induced by
the quarterly updating (as well as any other source of serial correlation in the error term of a given stock over time).



                                                            18
more volatile when held by more unsophisticated investors. However, even among stocks with the


same institutional ownership, lower-priced stocks are still more volatile.




Size Subsamples

While we have controlled for size to ensure that the estimated relation between price and volatility


is not actually a size-volatility relation, we have not examined how the price-volatility relation varies


with size. In Appendix Table A4, we repeat our baseline analysis in each of 20 size categories. As


before, these size category bins come from Ken French's ME Breakpoints le. The breakpoints for


a given month are based on the size distribution of stocks traded on the New York Stock Exchange


in that month, with a breakpoint for every fth percentile. Because our sample includes all stocks


traded on the NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ exchanges, observations in our data are not equally


distributed across the size categories.


   As can be seen, our main nding is not a micro-cap phenomenon or even a small-cap phe-


nomenon. The negative relation between price and volatility continues to hold even among stocks


in the top 5th percentile of the NYSE size distribution. Not surprisingly though, the magnitude of


the volatility-price relation does decline with size, consistent with mispricing being less prevalent


for large-cap stocks which may suer less from limits to arbitrage.




Time Period Subsamples

In Appendix Table A5, we explore how the price-volatility relation has changed over time by repeat-


ing our baseline analysis in separate subsamples for each decade from the 1920s to the end of our


sample period in 2016. We nd that the coecient is relatively stable across these dierent time


periods and there are no secular trends. Thus, it does not seem that the relation has disappeared


in recent years or is weakening over time.     This also serves as additional evidence that tick size


limitations do not drive our results, because tick sizes have declined over time.




                                                   19
Upside and Downside Volatility

Non-proportional thinking predicts that higher share price leads to less extreme return responses


to both positive and negative news. In Appendix Table A6, we show that share price is negatively


related to both upside and downside volatility. Therefore, our results cannot be explained by other


factors or anomalies that only aect one tail of returns. We measure upside (downside) volatility


as the log of mean daily squared returns in each month conditional on the returns being positive


(negative). We nd that a doubling in share prices is associated with a greater than 30% decline


in both upside and downside volatility.          We can also measure upside (downside) market beta as


the beta estimated using only days when the market return is positive (negative). We nd that a


doubling in share prices is associated with a greater than 30% decline in both upside and downside


beta.




4.2 Stock Splits

Although we have controlled for many observable factors that could aect volatility, it remains


possible that omitted variables may drive the negative relation between price and volatility.                   To


better account for potential omitted factors, we study periods immediately surrounding stock splits.


While stock splits are not completely randomly assigned across rms, the fundamentals of each rm


are unlikely to change exactly on pre-announced stock split execution dates.
                                                                                          12 Therefore, we can


credibly attribute changes in volatility immediately after the split execution date to the change in


share price.




4.2.1 Daily Analysis

We begin with granular daily stock return data to estimate a regression discontinuity around the


date of the stock split. For the regression discontinuity, we change our measure of volatility from


the standard deviation of daily returns within each calendar month to the intraday price range

                        High−Low 13
percentage (100     ×     High  ). We omit the actual day of the split from the analysis, as it is not
  12
       For a discussion of factors that may aect split decisions, see Weld et al. (2009) and Baker, Greenwood, and
Wurgler (2009).
  13
       In principle, one could also use intraday trading data from TAQ to address this question, but those data are
only available for more recent years, and we see no reason that using such data would lead to dierent conclusions.



                                                         20
clear whether the split takes place at the beginning of the trading day or the end. We begin by


considering only 2-for-1 stock splits, in which one old share is converted to two new shares, as this


is the most common type of split in the data.


    In Figure 5, we non-parametrically estimate the intraday price range percentage in the 45 days


before and after a split using local linear regression (with a triangular kernel and rule-of-thumb


optimal bandwidth).
                           14 We nd that the intraday price range percentage increases by 1.4 immedi-


ately after the split. The jump in intraday price range percentage persists with a small decay over


the next 40 trading days. Corresponding regression results are shown in Appendix Table A7. The


magnitudes are very similar regardless of the kernel or bandwidth used.




4.2.2 Monthly Analysis

We also conduct event studies examining changes in total volatility, idiosyncratic volatility, and


market beta around stock splits using monthly data. To explore how these measures of volatility


change after splits, we estimate the following regression:



                                              6
                                                     βk 1(EventM onthi,t = k) + τt + νi + i,t ,
                                              X
                        log (voli,t ) = α +                                                                         (6)
                                              k=−5


where     1(EventM onthi,t = k) are indicator variables equal to one if month t is k                months before or


after a split month for stock i,      τt   are calendar year-month xed eects, and        νi   are stock xed eects.


Observations are at the stock-month level, and the sample is limited to the six months before and


after a split. The coecients          βk   measure the dierence in volatility in event month           k   relative to


month      t − 6,   the omitted category.
                                              15 We again consider 2-for-1 splits in which one old share is


converted into two new shares.


    We nd that volatility (total volatility, idiosyncratic volatility, and market beta) rises signi-


cantly after stock splits. These patterns for total volatility and market beta are shown graphically



   14
        We limit the sample to splits that are neither preceded by another split (for the same stock) in the previous 90
days, nor followed by another split in the subsequent 90 days, so that our estimation windows do not overlap with
other splits.
   15
        We limit the sample to splits that are neither preceded by another split (for the same stock) in the previous 12
months, nor followed by another split in the subsequent 12 months, so that our estimation windows do not overlap
with other splits.



                                                             21
in Figure 6. We plot the coecients for each month in event time, relative to the omitted category


of 6 months prior to the split. We omit the split month from these gures, as split months contain


both pre-split and post-split days. We nd that there is a slight pre-trend in that volatility rises in


the six months leading up to the split, consistent with the view that splits are not entirely random.


Firms choose to engage in stock splits following periods of good performance, which may coincide


with a gradual increase in volatility. However, the direction and magnitude of the pre-trend cannot


explain the sudden large and persistent jump in volatility after the split. In Appendix Table A8, we


show the results in tabular format. The table also shows that we nd similar jumps in idiosyncratic


volatility after stock splits.


   The estimated magnitude of the change in volatility following splits approximately matches the


magnitudes from our baseline regressions using the full sample in Table 2. In our baseline analysis,


we estimated that a doubling or halving of share price corresponds to an approximate 30% change


in volatility. This is similar to the change in volatility following a 2-for-1 split, in which the share


price falls by half.




4.2.3 Heterogeneity by Type of Split

In Figure 7, we compare the magnitude of the upward jump in volatility following stock splits by the


type of split. The two most common types of splits in the data are 2-for-1 stock splits (in which the
share price drops by 50%) and 3-for-2 stock splits (in which the share price drops by 33%). Since


2-for-1 stock splits correspond to a bigger drop in share price, non-proportional thinking predicts


a larger increase in volatility following a 2-for-1 split relative to a 3-for-2 split.   This prediction


matches the pattern in the data.      In Panel A, we show that the pre-trends in volatility in the


six months preceding the split are similar for the two types of stocks. After a 2-for-1split, stocks


exhibit a signicantly larger upward jump in volatility than after a 3-for-2 split. The fact that the


magnitude of the jump in volatility can be cleanly ranked by the type of split also goes against a


story in which a similar unobserved fundamental shock drives all splits.


   In Figure 7, Panel B, we explore jumps in volatility following reverse stock splits, in which the


number of shares drops sharply and the share price increases. Because reverse splits are relatively




                                                  22
uncommon, we pool them all together in this case, regardless of how many shares are converted


to one. Non-proportional thinking predicts that volatility will decline following reverse stock splits


because the nominal share price increases. Consistent with this prediction, we nd that volatility


drops by more than 20 percent in the month following a reverse splits and the drop remains persistent


over the next 6 months. As with regular splits, we observe a positive pre-trend in volatility in the


months leading up to the split, suggesting that reverse splits follow periods of increasing volatility.


However, the direction and small absolute magnitude of the pre-trend in volatility cannot explain


the sudden and persistent drop in volatility following the reverse split.


   Note that there is a gradual decrease in volatility in the months after a regular split (when share


prices drop). At rst, this may seem to suggest that investors eventually adjust to the new price


level and volatility moves back down toward its pre-split level. However, we also nd that volatility


gradually decreases in the months after a reverse split (when share prices rise). If investors were


adjusting to the new price level, volatility should gradually increase after a reverse split. The fact


that volatility seems to gradually increase before and gradually decrease after both types of splits


instead suggests that splits tend to occur after a period of rising volatility, which is then followed


by a period of declining volatility, all else equal. Regardless, these gradual trends are small relative


to the large discontinuous jump in volatility immediately following the split execution date.




4.2.4 Addressing Remaining Alternative Explanations

A potential alternative explanation for our results is that splits, and lower share prices in general,


may draw a less sophisticated investor base, which may directly increase volatility (Dhar, Goetz-


mann, and Zhu, 2004).     A change to the investor base is unlikely to explain our results for four


reasons. First, simple models of noise traders predict higher volatility (e.g., Brandt et al. (2009)


and Foucault, Sraer, and Thesmar (2011)), but not necessarily greater sensitivity to market news.


However, we nd a large increase in market beta following splits in Appendix Table A8, which


is consistent with non-proportional thinking leading to greater sensitivity to aggregate news for


lower-priced stocks.

                                                                           Share V olume
   Second, speculation should lead to increased volume turnover (
                                                                         Shares Outstanding ) following a




                                                  23
split. Instead, we nd in Figure 8 that there is a sharp and persistent decline in volume turnover


following splits, with the opposite pattern for reverse splits.                    This change in volume is instead


consistent with the view that some investors naively trade a xed number of shares for each stock,


e.g., 100 shares. Following a split, the share oat doubles, so the number of shares traded relative


to the oat will decline after splits, and vice versa for reverse splits.


    Third, we can directly check for changes in the investor base after 2-for-1 splits. We nd that


splits do indeed correspond to a small shift toward a less sophisticated investor base, but the change


is much too small to account for the large jump in volatility that we document.                             In Table 8, we


compare institutional ownership before a split (based on the last observed 13f ling leading up


to the split) and after a split (based on the rst observed 13f ling following the split). We nd


that institutional ownership declines very slightly (from 47.3% to 46.3%) and the decline is not


statistically signicant. In Figure 9, we use data from Odean (1998) and Barber and Odean (2000),


to examine changes in the characteristics of stocks' retail investors around splits. We nd that the


average annual income of retail investors holding a stock around a split event falls by less than $1000


after the split, a dierence that is statistically insignicant and economically small relative to the


mean income level of $76.6K prior to the split. Panel B shows that the number of retail investors


who own a stock does jump slightly around the split execution data, but the jump is very small


relative to overall upward time trend in retail ownership that begins well before the split execution


date. Moreover, it is implausible that a 1% decline in institutional ownership and a small shift in


retail ownership would account for a 30% jump in volatility. For comparison, Foucault, Sraer, and


Thesmar (2011) exploit a natural experiment in France, to estimate changes in volatility caused by


a much larger shock to retail investor trading activity. They nd that an approximate 50% drop in


retail trading activity caused only an 8.3% decline in a stock's volatility.
                                                                                              16


    Fourth, a speculative investor explanation is harder to square with the results in Figure 7, which


show that the magnitude of the jump in volatility following splits can be cleanly sorted by the type


of the split, 2-for-1 or 3-for-2.



   16
        Foucault, Sraer, and Thesmar (2011) estimate that the reform led to an approximate 50% decline in the number
of retail trades, and a 20 basis point decline in their measure of volatility (   Volatility2 ) relative to a mean of 241 basis
points (corresponding to an 8.3% decline).



                                                            24
   Another potential alternative explanation is that splits draw increased media attention, which


may lead to increased volatility. However, the change in volatility after a split persists for many


months, so it is unlikely to be caused by a temporary increase in media coverage. Further, investor


attention should also increase following reverse splits which also receive signicant media coverage.


However, we nd in Figure 7, Panel B, that volatility declines following these reverse stock splits,


consistent with a non-proportional thinking model.


   One may also be concerned that splits are timed in a way that coincides with fundamental


changes in rm volatility.   We believe that it is unlikely that rm fundamentals would change


exactly on the pre-announced split execution date. We also directly check for changes in fundamental


volatility. In Table 8, we compare mean sales volatility before a split (based on the last four quarters


leading up to the split) and after a split (based on the rst four quarters following the split), and


nd no signicant dierences.


   Another potential explanation relates to changes in liquidity after a split which may aect


volatility. As just discussed, we nd that volume turnover declines after a split, which is inconsistent


with a rise in speculative activity.   However, a decline in volume turnover may indicate reduced


liquidity. In the Appendix Table A9, we show again that volume turnover declines after splits and


also bid-ask spread percentages increase. However, when we control for these measures of liquidity,


we continue to observe a large increase in volatility around splits.


   Finally, one may be concerned that the results relating to splits are driven by a handful of


small-cap stocks. In Appendix Figures A1 and A2, we show that similar empirical patterns exist


for intraday price range, total volatility, idiosyncratic volatility, market beta, and volume turnover


for a subsample restricted to large-cap stocks in size categories 11 through 20 according to Ken


French's market equity breakpoints.




4.2.5 Option-Implied Volatility and a Trading Strategy

We are also interested in the extent to which option traders anticipate the change in volatility


following splits and how quickly they update their beliefs about volatility after the split. If option


traders are very sophisticated, we expect that implied volatility (which reects option traders'




                                                  25
expectations of volatility over some future period) should increase prior to a split execution date,


as splits are announced in advance, typically by one month. While many of the splits in our sample


either pre-date the OptionMetrics data or are associated with stocks with few traded options, we are


able to obtain option data for 921 split events. Panel A of Figure 10 plots 30-day implied volatility


and 30-day realized volatility around splits.
                                                    17 Implied volatility is calculated as a linear combination


of implied volatilities from call options with approximate 30-day maturities, and realized volatility


represents the realized volatility over the      same subsequent 30-day window. In unreported results, we
nd similar results using implied volatility estimated from data on put options. The gure shows


that option traders partially anticipate an increase in volatility but undershoot by a substantial


margin. After the split, the 30-day implied volatility remains below the 30-day realized volatility,


and does not converge until approximately 100 trading days after the split execution date. This


shows that option traders do not fully anticipate the change in volatility around splits, and they do


not immediately change their beliefs after the split.


    The dierence in implied volatility and realized volatility following split events suggests a prof-


itable trading strategy that would involve going long option straddles (equivalent to buying both a


call and put option) prior to pre-announced split execution dates. Option straddles pay o when


realized volatility exceeds implied volatility, which is what we observe in the data following stock


splits. Panel B of Figure 10 plots the returns to a straddle trading strategy. Details of the trading


strategy are described in the gure notes. We nd that this simple strategy of going long strad-


dles around split execution dates leads to an average 15 percent return (not annualized) over the


subsequent 40 trading days.


    Because OptionMetrics data is only available for larger and more liquid stocks, these results also


show that our ndings related to splits are not a small-cap phenomenon. Even for large-cap stocks


with options data, realized volatility jumps up signicantly around splits, and implied volatility also


increases, albeit with a lag consistent with option traders reacting with a delay.




  17
       The gure displays a cyclical pattern that repeats approximately every three months. We believe this pattern is
driven by quarterly earnings announcements, which cause an increase in volatility and implied volatility. Splits are
often pre-announced around the time of the earnings announcement and executed one month later. The gure also
shows that, on average, implied volatility exceeds realized volatility. This is a general feature of options data and
may be explained by investors demanding compensation for risk.



                                                          26
5         Results: Return Responses to News Events

5.1 News Events Identied through Textual Analysis

So far, we have focused on testing the volatility predictions from a simple model of non-proportional


thinking.       The model also predicts that stock returns will be more responsive to news for lower-


priced rms. Our previous results showing a large jump in market beta after splits already shows


that the returns of lower-priced rms are more responsive to aggregate news. In this section, we


directly examine return responses to rm-specic news events.


     We begin by analyzing data from Boudoukh et al. (2018), which identies value-relevant news


events for S&P 500 rms by applying a machine learning algorithm to the text of articles from                   Dow
Jones Newswire. Using these data, we estimate equations of the form:

                                           
                    log |CARi,[t−1,t+1] | = β0 + β1 log (pricei,t−2 ) + controls + τm(t) + i,t ,                 (7)



where       CARi,[t−1,t+1]       represents the cumulative abnormal returns for stock      i   around a news event


on date       t, pricei,t−2      represents the stock price immediately prior to the event window, and          τm(t)

represents year-month xed eects.
                                                18 Note that Equation 7 is analogous to Equation 2, derived


from the simple model in Section 2.


     The results are shown in Table 9.              Consistent with non-proportional thinking, we nd that


cumulative abnormal returns around days with rm-specic news events are signicantly more


extreme for lower-priced stocks. A doubling in share price is associated with a 20 to 30% decline


in the absolute magnitude of the return response.                The pattern is similar for news that can be


categorized (the rst two columns) and for other types of rm-specic news (the last two columns).
                                                                                                                   19


     Of course, it is possible that lower-priced stocks simply have more extreme news events. However,


it is worth emphasizing that the sample used in this analysis only includes S&P 500 rms, which


represent the largest rms in the US economy.                Among these rms, it seems plausible that the



    18
         Abnormal returns are computed relative to the market model, where market betas are estimated based on returns
from dates     t − 150   to   t − 50.
    19
                                                                  Business Trends, CSR Brand, Capital Returns,
         Categories of news dened by Boudoukh et al. (2018) include
Deals, Earnings Factors, Employment, Facility, Financial, Financing, Forecast, General, Investment, Legal, Mergers
& Acquisitions, Product, Ratings, Stock, and Stock Holdings.

                                                           27
distribution of news events would be similar across levels of nominal price. This analysis using S&P


500 rms again shows that our model predictions apply to the largest stocks in the US economy.




5.2 Earnings Announcements

Another important and easily identiable source of rm-specic news comes from pre-scheduled


quarterly earnings announcements. Therefore, we also estimate Equation 7 using earning announce-


ments as the news events. The results are shown in Table 10, Panel A. We nd that cumulative


abnormal returns around days with earning announcements are also signicantly more extreme for


lower-priced stocks. The magnitudes are similar to those in Table 9 which focused on news identied


through textual analysis. Of course, it is again possible that lower-priced stocks have more extreme


newsin this case about earnings. For example, there may be less information available to forecast


earnings for lower-priced stocks and earnings announcements may convey more new information as


a result. However, as shown in Table 10, we nd similar results after controlling for rm size and


analyst coverage, which suggests that the forecastability of earnings does not drive the results.


    Moreover, unlike for news identied through textual analysis, we observe the extremity of earn-


ings news.      Specically, as described in Section 3, we compute standardized unexpected earnings


(SUE) as a measure of the magnitude of an earnings surprise, given the distribution of analyst


forecasts prior to the announcement.
                                             20 Because our measure of earnings surprises requires multi-


ple recent analysts forecasts, it is only available for a subset of the earnings announcements from


Panel A of Table 10. Within this sample, we test whether the return response to the same earnings


surprise is greater for lower-priced stocks. Following the literature, we sort earning announcements


each year into deciles based on their SUE. We also sort them each year into quintiles based on their


pre-announcement prices (on         t = −2).   We continue to measure the return response to an earnings


announcement using cumulative abnormal returns from the day before the announcement to the


day after the announcement.

   20
        We focus on earnings surprises rather than earnings levels as our measure of news because whether a given
level of earnings is good or bad news depends on investor expectations prior to the announcement.         Moreover,
the nancial press typically reports earnings announcement news in terms of how much earnings beat or missed
expectations. Therefore, the earnings surprise is likely to be the measure of earnings news that is most salient to
investors.   Analysts are professionals who are paid to forecast future earnings.   While there is some debate about
how unbiased analysts are (e.g., Hong and Kubik, 2003 and So, 2013), our tests only require that such a bias is not
correlated with the earnings surprise.



                                                          28
   In the rst two columns of Table 10, Panel B, we regress the return response to an announcement


on the SUE decile rank, its lagged price quintile, and all interactions.      Instead of including 10


SUE decile indicators, we use a single decile rank variable for SUE in the regressions.         This is


in keeping with the literature and is primarily done for expositional clarity (we nd qualitatively


similar patterns using decile indicators).   In column (1), we estimate a positive and statistically


signicant coecient on the uninteracted SUE decile rank variable. The magnitude of the coecient


is approximately 0.01. This means that for stocks in the lowest price quintile, each increase in SUE


decile rank is associated with a 1% greater return response to an earnings announcement.           The


estimated coecients on the interactions with the price quintile indicators are all negative and get


increasingly negative with each price quintile.    Summing coecients, we see that an increase in


SUE decile rank is still associated with a positive return response in each price quintile, but the


return response is monotonically less positive the greater the stock's pre-announcement price. In


the highest price quintile, the return response to an increase in SUE decile rank is roughly half that


in the lowest price quintile. The results remain similar after controlling for size and analyst coverage


in column (2). We also nd similar patterns in the nal two columns, where we examine how price


interacts with the return response for top SUE decile announcements relative to bottom SUE decile


announcements. Overall, these results indicate that return response to the same earnings surprise


is greater for lower-priced stocks, which is what we would expect under non-proportional thinking.




5.3 Reversals

If investors overreact to news for low-priced stocks, we would expect these stocks to experience


stronger subsequent reversals as prices return to fundamentals. Before proceeding to empirical tests


of reversals, we rst discuss two caveats. First, non-proportional thinking does not necessarily imply


that low-priced stocks overreact to news in an    absolute   sense. Rather, non-proportional thinking


only implies that low-priced stocks react more strongly to news relative to high-priced stocks. For


example, it could be that, for unrelated reasons, all stocks underreact to news. In this case, low-


priced stocks would underreact less, and we would expect weaker subsequent drift for low-priced


stocks relative to high-priced stocks. A second important caveat is that the existence of a return




                                                  29
correction does not imply that the non-proportional thinking bias goes to zero in future periods.


Even as the misreaction to previous news is corrected, investors can again under- or overreact to


future news due to non-proportional thinking.


    With these caveats in mind, we proceed to our empirical tests. De Bondt and Thaler (1985)


show that stocks that experience extreme returns tend to experience subsequent reversals, suggesting


that the market overreacts to news. We follow their methodology to examine whether the market


is more likely to overreact to news for lower-priced stocks. Specically, we rst sort stocks in each


year-month        t   by past cumulative abnormal returns over the interval        [t − 36, t − 1].    Our winners


portfolio consists of all stocks in the top decile of past performance, and our losers portfolio consists


of all stocks in the bottom decile of past performance.
                                                                 21 Like De Bondt and Thaler, we interpret


stocks in these portfolios to have experienced extreme news. We then partition the winner and loser


portfolios into quintiles in terms of lagged share price as of month          t − 37,   which precedes the period


used to categorize winners and losers.
                                             22


    The cumulative abnormal returns to holding equal-weighted winner and loser portfolios in each


lagged share price quintile are presented in Figure 11. We are able to replicate the original De Bondt


and Thaler long-run reversal result with our updated data: the past winners portfolio experiences


subsequent negative abnormal returns and the past losers portfolio experiences subsequent positive


abnormal returns. More interestingly, we can sort the magnitude of the long-run reversal by lagged


share price.          We nd that the lowest quintile of stocks in terms of lagged nominal share price


corresponds to the most extreme outperformance among the past losers portfolio.                       Similarly, the


lowest quintile of stocks by share price also corresponds to the most extreme underperformance


among the past winners portfolio. Further, the magnitude of the long-run reversal within the past


winners and past losers portfolios can almost perfectly be ordered by lagged share price (the only


exception being price quintiles 3 and 5 in the winners portfolio, which are crossed). In general, as


price increases, the absolute magnitude of the reversal decreases. These results are consistent with




  21
       This sorting is more inclusive than the original De Bondt and Thaler (1985) which only focused on the extreme
top 35 winner and loser stocks.
  22
       We sort by price before the start of the past return evaluation window, so we do not induce an automatic
correlation between our past performance sort and lagged price, which could occur if we instead used lagged price in
month    t − 1.


                                                         30
the idea that the market is more likely to overreact to news for lower-priced stocks, as we would


expect under non-proportional thinking.


     Finally, we show that the magnitude of the long-run reversal varies signicantly with lagged


price and substantially less so with lagged size.                   Table 11, columns (1)(3), show regressions of


future abnormal returns on past abnormal returns and the interaction between past abnormal


returns and lagged price and/or size. The regressions also control for the direct eects of lagged


price and size. To account for time variation in the level of returns, as well as time variation in the


overall magnitude of the reversal phenomenon, we estimate this regression using the standard Fama-


MacBeth methodology in asset pricing.
                                                   23 Lagged price and size are measured as of the end of month


t − 37.      We nd that the direct eect of past returns on future returns is negative, consistent with


a long-run reversal. The interaction term in column (1) shows that the absolute magnitude of the


reversal decreases signicantly with lagged price. Column 2 shows that the reversal also decreases


with lagged size. Most interestingly, column (3) shows that, when we allow the magnitude of the


return reversal to vary with both price and size, we nd that it is strongly related to price, and


almost unrelated to size.


     In columns (4)(6), we nd similar results when examining the reversal pattern in a shorter


window, following the methods in Jegadeesh (1990). We continue to nd in columns (4)(6) that


the magnitude of the short-run reversal is strongest for lower-priced stocks, and is more strongly


related to lagged price than lagged size.




6         Conclusion

We hypothesize that investors in nancial markets engage in non-proportional thinkingthey think


that news should correspond to a dollar change in price rather than a percentage change in price,


leading to more extreme return responses to news for lower-priced stocks. Consistent with a simple


model of non-proportional thinking, we nd that total volatility, idiosyncratic volatility, and market


beta are signicantly higher for stocks with lower share prices. To identify a causal eect of price,


    23
         This is equivalent to estimating a cross-sectional regression for each time period, and reporting the simple average
of the coecients across time periods. This approach is similar to allowing for a time period xed eect and time
xed eects interacted with all explanatory variables, and reporting the average coecients across time.



                                                               31
we show that volatility increases sharply following stock splits and drops following reverse stock


splits.   Further, non-proportional thinking leads to more extreme return responses to news iden-


tied through textual analysis or earnings announcements for lower-priced stocks. The economic


magnitudes are large: a doubling in a stock's nominal price is associated with a 20-30% decline in


its volatility, beta, and return response to rm-specic news.


    Our analysis sheds light on the determinants of volatility in nancial markets. We show that


non-proportional thinking is an important determinant of cross-sectional variation in volatility.


Well-known asset pricing patterns such as the leverage eect and the negative relation between size


and risk (volatility or beta) can be reinterpreted through the lens of non-proportional thinking.


Our analysis also oers a new explanation of over- and underreaction to news and subsequent


reversals/drift. The existing behavioral nance literature has mainly focused on limited attention


or belief errors regarding the persistence of news shocks to explain these patterns. Non-proportional


thinking oers a complementary explanation:      over and under-reaction to news and consequent


reversals/drift can also be caused by investors thinking in the wrong units.


    Our ndings also oer a new perspective on the evidence in psychology documenting proportional


thinking.    This literature has focused on cases in which consumers should think in levels, but


mistakenly think in proportions. By examining behavior in a nancial setting, we show that investors


also suer from non-proportional thinking. Our results are suggestive of a broader view that people


may think partially in proportions and partially in levels, leading to potentially costly mistakes in


settings in which they should think entirely in one frame or the other.




                                                 32
References
Azar, Ofer H, 2007, Relative thinking theory,    Journal of Socio-Economics 36, 114.
Baker, Malcolm, Robin Greenwood, and Jerey Wurgler, 2009, Catering through nominal share
  prices,   Journal of Finance 64, 25592590.
Baker, Malcolm, Stefan Nagel, and Jerey Wurgler, 2007, The eect of dividends on consumption,
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2007, 231291.
Baker, Malcolm and Jerey Wurgler, 2004a, Appearing and disappearing dividends: The link to
  catering incentives,    Journal of Financial Economics 73, 271288.
Baker, Malcolm and Jerey Wurgler, 2004b, A catering theory of dividends,     Journal of Finance 59,
  11251165.


Barber, Brad M and Terrance Odean, 2000, Trading is hazardous to your wealth: The common
  stock investment performance of individual investors,    Journal of Finance 55, 773806.
Barber, Brad M and Terrance Odean, 2001, Boys will be boys: Gender, overcondence, and common
  stock investment,   Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 261292.
Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1998, A model of investor sentiment,   Journal
  of Financial Economics 49, 307343.
Benartzi, Shlomo and Richard H. Thaler, 1995, Myopic loss aversion and the equity premium puzzle,
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, 7392.
Birru, Justin and Baolian Wang, 2015, The nominal price premium,          Working Paper   (Ohio State
  University).


Birru, Justin and Baolian Wang, 2016, Nominal price illusion,   Journal of Financial Economics 119,
  578598.


Black, Fischer, 1976, Studies of stock price volatility changes,    Proceedings of the Business and
  Economics Section of the American Statistical Association 177181.
Boudoukh, Jacob, Ronen Feldman, Shimon Kogan, and Matthew Richardson, 2018, Information,
  trading, and volatility: Evidence from rm-specic news,     Review of Financial Studies   32, 992
  1033.


Brandt, Michael W, Alon Brav, John R Graham, and Alok Kumar, 2009, The idiosyncratic volatility
  puzzle: Time trend or speculative episodes?,    Review of Financial Studies 23, 863899.
Bushong, Benjamin, Matthew Rabin, and Joshua Schwartzstein, 2015, A model of relative thinking,
  Working Paper (Michigan State University).
Campbell, John Y. and Ludger Hentschel, 1992, No news is good news: An asymmetric model of
  changing volatility in stock returns,   Journal of Financial Economics 31, 281  318.
Christie, Andrew A., 1982, The stochastic behavior of common stock variances: Value, leverage and
  interest rate eects,   Journal of Financial Economics 10, 407  432.


                                                   33
De Bondt, Werner FM and Richard Thaler, 1985, Does the stock market overreact?,          Journal of
  Finance 40, 793805.
Dhar, Ravi, William N Goetzmann, and Ning Zhu, 2004, The impact of clientele changes: Evidence
  from stock splits,   Working Paper (Yale University).
Dimson, Elroy, 1979, Risk measurement when shares are subject to infrequent trading,      Journal of
  Financial Economics 7, 197226.
Fisher, Irving, 1928, The money illusion (Adelphi Company, New York, NY).


Foucault, Thierry, David Sraer, and David J Thesmar, 2011, Individual investors and volatility,
  Journal of Finance 66, 13691406.
Glosten, Lawrence R., Jagannathan Ravi, and David E. Runkle, 1993, On the relation between the
  expected value and the volatility of the nominal excess return on stocks,   Journal of Finance 48,
  17791801.


Greenwood, Robin and Andrei Shleifer, 2014, Expectations of returns and expected returns,    Review
  of Financial Studies 27, 714746.
Hartzmark, Samuel M and David H Solomon, 2017, The dividend disconnect,        Working Paper (Uni-
  versity of Chicago).


Hartzmark, Samuel M and David H Solomon, 2018, Reconsidering returns,          Working Paper   (Uni-
  versity of Chicago).


Hasanhodzic, Jasmina and Andrew W. Lo, 2011, Black's leverage eect is not due to leverage,
  Working Paper (Babson College).
Hau, Harald, 2006, The role of transaction costs for nancial volatility: Evidence from the Paris
  Bourse,   Journal of the European Economic Association 4, 862890.
Hirshleifer, David and Siew Hong Teoh, 2003, Limited attention, information disclosure, and nan-
  cial reporting,   Journal of Accounting and Economics 36, 337386.
Hong, Harrison and Jerey D Kubik, 2003, Analyzing the analysts: Career concerns and biased
  earnings forecasts,   Journal of Finance 313351.
Hong, Harrison and Jeremy C Stein, 1999, A unied theory of underreaction, momentum trading,
  and overreaction in asset markets,   Journal of Finance 54, 21432184.
Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, 1990, Evidence of predictable behavior of security returns,       Journal of
  Finance 45, 881898.
Jegadeesh, Narasimhan and Joshua Livnat, 2006, Post-earnings-announcement drift: The role of
  revenue surprises,    Financial Analysts Journal 2234.
Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W Vishny, 1994, Contrarian investment, extrapola-
  tion, and risk,   Journal of Finance 49, 15411578.
Lamont, Owen A and Richard H Thaler, 2003, Can the market add and subtract? Mispricing in
  tech stock carve-outs,   Journal of Political Economy 111, 227268.

                                                  34
Lewellen, Jonathan and Stefan Nagel, 2006, The conditional CAPM does not explain asset-pricing
  anomalies,   Journal of Financial Economics 82, 289314.
Lian, Chen, Yueran Ma, and Carmen Wang, 2018, Low interest rates and risk taking: Evidence
  from individual investment decisions,   Review of Financial Studies .
Mendenhall, Richard R, 2004, Arbitrage risk and post-earnings-announcement drift,           Journal of
  Business 77, 875894.
Modigliani, Franco and Richard A. Cohn, 1979, Ination, rational valuation and the market,          Fi-
  nancial Analysts Journal 35, 2444.
Odean, Terrance, 1998, Are investors reluctant to realize their losses?,   Journal of Finance 53, 1775
  1798.


Ohlson, James A and Stephen H Penman, 1985, Volatility increases subsequent to stock splits: An
  empirical aberration,   Journal of Financial Economics 14, 251266.
Pratt, John W, David A Wise, and Richard Zeckhauser, 1979, Price dierences in almost competitive
  markets,   The Quarterly Journal of Economics 93, 189211.
Ritter, Jay R and Richard S Warr, 2002, The decline of ination and the bull market of 19821999,
  Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 37, 2961.
Roger, Tristan, Patrick Roger, and Alain Schatt, 2018, Behavioral bias in number processing: Evi-
  dence from analysts' expectations, Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 149, 315331.
Shiller, Robert J., 1981, The use of volatility measures in assessing market eciency, Journal of
  Finance 36, 291304.
Shue, Kelly and Richard R. Townsend, 2017, Growth through rigidity: An explanation for the rise
  in CEO pay,     Journal of Financial Economics 123, 1  21.
So, Eric C, 2013, A new approach to predicting analyst forecast errors: Do investors overweight
  analyst forecasts?,   Journal of Financial Economics 108, 615640.
Svedsäter, Henrik, Amelie Gamble, and Tommy Gärling, 2007, Money illusion in intuitive nancial
  judgments: Inuences of nominal representation of share prices,    Journal of Socio-Economics 36,
  698  712.


Thaler, Richard, 1980, Toward a positive theory of consumer choice,    Journal of Economic Behavior
  & Organization 1, 3960.
Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman, 1981, The framing of decisions and the psychology of choice,
  Science 211, 453458.
Weld, William C, Roni Michaely, Richard H Thaler, and Shlomo Benartzi, 2009, The nominal share
  price puzzle,   Journal of Economic Perspectives 23, 12142.




                                                  35
                       Figure 1
       Display of Changes in the Value of Stocks
          Panel A: Wall Street Journal, 1970




Panel B: Apple Stocks and Etrade Smartphone Apps, 2017




             Panel C: CNBC Ticker, 2016




                          36
                                                                                          Figure 2
                                  Shape of Volatility-Price Relation
Panel A of this gure shows the non-parametric shape of the volatility-price relation. It repeats the regression
from Panel A of Table 2 column (4) which controls for size categories and year-month xed eects, replacing
the continuous Log(Lagged Price) variable with 20 lagged share price bin indicators, with each bin containing
the same number of observations. The resulting coecients are plotted with vertical bars indicating 95%
condence intervals. Quantile 20 is omitted. Panel B repeats the analysis of Panel A, with the modication
that each bin represents an equal range of logged prices, again controlling for size and time xed eects.
The omitted category represents log lagged share price in the range of 5.0 to 5.25. Standard errors are
double-clustered by stock and year-month.

                                                                   Panel A: Equally-Spaced Price Bins, Controlling for Size
                                                                   1.5
                 Log Total Volatility (Relative to Price Cat 20)




                                                                    1




                                                                    .5




                                                                    0
                                                                         1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
                                                                                        Price Category


               Panel B: Log-Log Volatility and Price Relation, Controlling for Size
                                                              1.5
                 Log Total Volatility (Relative to Price Cat 20)
                 0             .5                1
                                                                            0
                                                                         0.25
                                                                          0.5
                                                                         0.75
                                                                            1
                                                                         1.25
                                                                          1.5
                                                                         1.75
                                                                            2
                                                                         2.25
                                                                          2.5
                                                                         2.75
                                                                            3
                                                                         3.25
                                                                          3.5
                                                                         3.75
                                                                            4
                                                                         4.25
                                                                          4.5
                                                                         4.75
                                                                            5




                                                                                           Log Lagged Price


                                                                                              37
                                                Figure 3
                                     Cross-Sectional Estimation
For each of the 1,085 calendar year-months in our data sample, we estimate a cross-sectional regression of
log volatility on lagged log price, controlling for 20 size categories. This gure plots a histogram of the
estimated coecients on lagged log price from the 1,085 regressions. The mean of the coecients is -0.31,
and the standard deviation is 0.10.


    5


    4


    3


    2


    1


    0
        -0.8             -0.6            -0.4        -0.2           0.0                             0.2
                          Coefficient in Each Year-Month Cross-Section




                                                    38
                                                                                                      Figure 4
                 How Price Aects the Size-Volatility and Size-Beta Relations
This gure explores the extent to which nominal price dierences explain the negative volatility-size and
beta-size relations. Panel A shows the coecients from a regression of log volatility or log absolute beta
on 20 size category indicators (dened using the Fama French size category cutos in the corresponding
year-month, with the largest size bin as the omitted category) as of the end of the previous month, after
controlling for year-month xed eects. Panel B shows the same set of coecients after adding in a single
additional control variable for the log of the lagged nominal share price. The dots represent the coecient
estimates and the vertical lines represent 95% condence intervals. Standard errors are double-clustered by
stock and year-month.

                                                        Panel A: Size-Volatility and Size-Beta Relations, Without Controlling for Price
                                                   1                                                                                                            .6
 Log Total Volatility (Relative to Size Cat 20)




                                                                                                                  Log Absolute Beta (Relative to Size Cat 20)
                                                  .8
                                                                                                                                                                .4
                                                  .6


                                                  .4                                                                                                            .2


                                                  .2
                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                   0


                                                  -.2                                                                                                           -.2
                                                        1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20                                                            1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
                                                                        Size Category                                                                                                 Size Category



                                                              Panel B: Size-Volatility and Size-Beta Relations, Controlling for Price
                                                   1                                                                                                            .6
 Log Total Volatility (Relative to Size Cat 20)




                                                                                                                  Log Absolute Beta (Relative to Size Cat 20)




                                                  .8                                                                                                            .4

                                                  .6
                                                                                                                                                                .2

                                                  .4
                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                  .2
                                                                                                                                                                -.2
                                                   0


                                                  -.2
                                                        1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20                                                            1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
                                                                        Size Category                                                                                                 Size Category




                                                                                                             39
                                                            Figure 5
             Regression Discontinuity: Intraday Price Range Around Stock Splits
This gure shows changes in volatility around 2-for-1 stock splits. It examines 45 days before and after the
pre-announced split execution date. Volatility is proxied for by the intraday price range percentage, dened
as 100× High−Low
           High   . The day of the split execution event is excluded. The thick lines represent non-parametric
estimates of the mean on a given day, estimated using a local linear regression with a triangular kernel and
MSE-optimal bandwidth. The thin lines represent 95% condence intervals. The dots show raw means for
each event day.



                                      4.5
  Intraday Price Range (Percentage)




                                       4



                                      3.5



                                       3



                                      2.5
                                            -40   -20               0             20              40
                                                        Event Time (Trading Days)




                                                               40
                                                                                         Figure 6
                     Event Study: Volatility and Beta Around Stock Splits
This gure show changes in total volatility (Panel A) and market beta (Panel B) in each event-month around
2-for-1 stock splits. We estimate equations of the form:
                                                                             6
                                                                                   βk 1(EventM onthi,t = k) + τt + νi + i,t ,
                                                                             X
                         log (voli,t ) = α +
                                                                            k=−5

where 1(EventM onthi,t = k) are indicator variables equal to one if month t is k months before or after a
split month for stock i, τt are year-month xed eects, and νi are stock xed eects. Observations are at
the stock-month level, and the sample is limited to the six months before and after a split. Event month −6
is the omitted category. The dots represent the point estimates for the βk coecients and the vertical lines
represent 95% condence intervals. The coecient on β0 is not shown, since event month k = 0 contains
both pre-split and post-split days. Standard errors are double-clustered by stock and year-month.

                                                                            Panel A: Total Volatility
                                                             .3
                     Log Total Volatility (Relative to t=-6)
                               .1        0    .2




                                                                  -6   -5   -4     -3    -2 -1 1       2    3    4    5    6
                                                                                        Event Time (Months)


                                                                                 Panel B: Market Beta
                                         .3
                     Log |Beta| (Relative to t=-6)
                        0         .1     -.1 .2




                                                                  -6   -5   -4     -3    -2 -1 1       2    3    4    5    6
                                                                                        Event Time (Months)


                                                                                             41
                                                                                     Figure 7
                                    Comparison by Type of Split
Panel A of this gure shows volatility patterns around 3-for-2 stock splits alongside those around 2-for-1
stock splits. Panel B shows volatility patterns around reverse stock splits. Both panels are generated as
described in Figure 6.

                                                              Panel A: Volatility, 2-for-1 Versus 3-for-2 Splits
                                                        .3
                Log Total Volatility (Relative to t=-6)
                           .1       0     .2




                                                             -6   -5     -4   -3   -2    -1    1    2      3     4   5   6
                                                                                   Event Time (Months)

                                                                               2-for-1 Splits   3-for-2 Splits


                                                                       Panel B: Volatility, Reverse Splits
                                    .1
                Log Total Volatility (Relative to t=-6)
                      -.2          -.1
                                    -.3         0




                                                             -6   -5     -4   -3   -2    -1    1    2      3     4   5   6
                                                                                   Event Time (Months)




                                                                                          42
                                                                               Figure 8
             Event Study: Volume Around Stock Splits and Reverse Stock Splits
Panel A shows the pattern of volume around 2-for-1 stock splits. Panel B shows the pattern of volume around
reverse stock splits. Volume turnover is dened as the number of shares traded in each month divided by
the total number of shares outstanding. Both panels are generated as described in Figure 6.

                                                               Panel A: Volume, Positive Stock Splits
                                   .2
                 Log Volume Turnover (Relative to t=-6)
                          0        -.1   .1




                                                          -6   -5   -4   -3   -2    -1    1    2    3   4   5   6
                                                                              Event Time (Months)


                                                               Panel B: Volume, Reverse Stock Splits
                                   .4
                 Log Volume Turnover (Relative to t=-6)
                     0       .1    -.1.2        .3




                                                          -6   -5   -4   -3   -2    -1    1    2    3   4   5   6
                                                                              Event Time (Months)




                                                                                   43
                                                                      Figure 9
                                    Retail Ownership Around Splits
This gure shows changes in retail ownership around 2-for-1 stock splits. The data comes from Odean (1998)
and covers all retail trades for a large discount broker (LDB). The dots in Panel A show the mean income of
associated LDB accounts that hold the stock around the split event. The inner lines in Panel A come from
local linear regressions estimated with a 10-day bandwidth and triangular kernel. The outer lines represent
95% condence intervals. The raw data provide income ranges rather than exact income. Following Barber
and Odean (2001), we assign income according to the midpoint of an individual's income range. We classify
individuals in the top income range (>$125,000) as having an income of $137,500. The dots in Panel B show
the mean number of LDB accounts that hold a stock around a split.

                                              Panel A: Income of Large Discount Broker Shareholders
                                              80000


                                              79000
                 Income of LDB Shareholders




                                              78000


                                              77000


                                              76000


                                              75000


                                              74000
                                                      -100     -50               0             50     100
                                                                     Event Time (Trading Days)

                                              Panel B: Number of Large Discount Broker Shareholders
                                              80


                                              70
                 Number of LDB Shareholders




                                              60


                                              50


                                              40


                                              30


                                              20
                                                   -100      -50               0               50     100
                                                                   Event Time (Trading Days)



                                                                          44
                                                                              Figure 10
                                           Option-Implied Volatility Around Splits and Trading Strategy
     Panel A of this gure plots implied volatility and realized volatility around stock splits. Implied volatility is calculated by OptionMetrics as a linear
     combination of implied volatilities from call options with approximately 30-day maturities. Realized volatility represents the realized volatility over
     the matching subsequent 30-day period. The sample is limited to 2-for-1 stock splits or greater, and includes 921 rm-split events from 1995-2015
     where data are available from OptionMetrics. Panel B plots the returns to a straddle trading strategy. We identify all call and put options on a given
     stock of matching time-to-maturities that satisfy basic ltering criteria. These lters are: (1) the option prices are at least $0.125; (2) the underlying
     stock prices are at least $5; (3) options have positive open interest; (4) basic no arbitrage bounds, e.g., (bid>0, bid <oer, strike price≥bid and
     oer≥max(0, strike price  stock price) for put options; (5) time to maturities between 10 to 60 days; and (6) at the time of straddle formation,
     options must have an absolute delta between 0.375 and 0.625. For each pair of puts and calls with matching maturities and strike prices, we construct
     a delta-neutral straddle. A delta-neutral straddle involves purchasing a put and a call; the weights of the put and call in the portfolio are given by
     -(δp )/(δc -δp ) and (δc )/(δc -δp ), respectively, where δc and δp are the delta of the call and put option, respectively. For splits with multiple straddles
     available, we weight each straddle using the minimum open interest of the call or put side of the straddle. For each split event, we construct the
     straddle portfolio on the split execution date (and reconstruct it every fth day for the next 35 days) and measure the returns to holding the portfolio
     for ve days, using the median of end-of-day bid and ask quotes to construct returns. There are 819 split events in this sample. The gure plots the
     average daily compounded return of the straddle strategy, with vertical lines representing 95% condence intervals.


                   Panel A: Implied and Realized Volatility                                                      Panel B: Straddle Trading Strategy Return




45
            .5                                                                                              .2



                                                                                                           .15
           .45



                                                                                                            .1
            .4
                                                                                         Strategy Return




                                                                                                           .05

           .35
                     -200        -100            0        100           200
                                             Event Time                                                     0
                                                                                                                 0         10           20        30         40
                                    Implied Volatility     Volatility                                                               Event Time
                                                  Figure 11
                           Long-Run Reversal, Sorted by Lagged Price
This gure plots cumulative abnormal returns to holding equal-weighted winner and loser portfolios in each
lagged share price quintile. Stocks are rst sorted in each year-month t by past cumulative abnormal returns
over the interval [t−36, t−1]. The winners portfolio consists of all stocks in the top decile of past performance,
and the losers portfolio consists of all stocks in the bottom decile of past performance. The winner and loser
portfolios are then partitioned into quintiles in terms of lagged share price as of month t − 37, which precedes
the period used to categorize winners and losers. Past performance and subsequent cumulative abnormal
returns are measured using market-adjusted returns as in De Bondt and Thaler (1985).


               .4


                                                                                           Losers
                                                                                                     Price Quintile 1
                                                                                                     Price Quintile 2
               .2                                                                                    Price Quintile 3
  Log(1+CAR)




                                                                                                     Price Quintile 4
                                                                                                     Price Quintile 5
                                                                                           Winners
                                                                                                     Price Quintile 5
                                                                                                     Price Quintile 4
                0                                                                                    Price Quintile 3
                                                                                                     Price Quintile 2
                                                                                                     Price Quintile 1




               -.2
                     0      10                 20                  30                 40
                                           Event Month




                                                         46
                                                   Table 1
                                          Summary Statistics
This table summarizes the variables used in our analyses. Observations are at the stock-month level. Total
volatility is the annualized standard deviation of daily returns within a month. A stock's market beta in
a month is estimated by regressing its daily excess returns on market excess returns. To account for non-
synchronous prices we include both current and 4 lagged market excess returns in the regressions, estimating
beta as the sum of the slopes on all lags, imposing the constraint that lags 24 have the same slope (Lewellen
and Nagel, 2006). Idiosyncratic volatility is the annualized standard deviation of the residuals from these
regressions. Price is the stock's nominal price on the last day of the month. Market capitalization is the
product of price and shares outstanding. Institutional ownership is the sum of the number of shares of each
stock held by 13f lers, divide by its shares outstanding, as of the end of the most recently completed quarter.
Sales volatility is the standard deviation of year-over-year quarterly sales growth during the previous four
quarters. Volume turnover is the number of shares traded in each month divided by the total number of
shares outstanding. The market-to-book ratio is market capitalization (csho*prcc_f) plus the book value
of assets (at) less shareholder equity (seq), all divided by the book value of assets (at). Book leverage is
short-term and long-term debt (dlc+dltt) divided by the book value of assets (at). The bid-ask spread
percentage is 100 × Ask−Bid
                        Ask   . The intraday price range percentage is 100 × High−Low
                                                                                  High    .


                                                      Obs             Mean          Median           Std Dev

 Total Volatility (Annualized)                     3,254,302          0.510           0.390           0.450
 Idiosyncratic Volatility (Annualized)             3,254,302          0.448           0.334           0.415
 Market Beta                                       3,254,302          0.941           0.809           3.069
 Price                                             3,254,302          18.85           13.50           19.13
 Market Capitalization (Millions)                  3,254,302         1179.9           64.47           8800.6
 Insitutional Ownership                            2,165,251          0.346           0.272           0.292
 Sales Volatility                                  2,316,178          0.273          0.0966           0.691
 Volume Turnover                                   2,996,292         0.0882          0.0382           0.204
 Market-to-Book Ratio                              2,240,583          1.977           1.252           18.19
 Book Leverage                                     2,130,604          0.232           0.191           0.278
 Bid Ask Spread (Percentage)                       2,246,545          4.840           2.525           17.63
 Intraday Price Range (Percentage)                 2,555,175          3.586           2.826           2.726




                                                      47
                                                      Table 2
                                Baseline Results: Total Volatility
This table explores how return volatility varies with share price. Using data at the stock-month level,
regressions of the following form are estimated:

                           log (voli,t ) = β0 + β1 log (pricei,t−1 ) + controls + τt + it ,

where voli,t represents the volatility of stock i in month t, pricei,t−1 represents the stock's price at the end of
month t − 1, and τt represents year-month xed eects. Total volatility is the annualized standard deviation
of daily returns within a month. Control variables can include the log of the rm's size (measured as total
market equity) at end of the previous month or indicator variables for 20 size categories based on the market
capitalization of the stock relative to the size breakpoints for each year-month from the Ken French Data
Library. The sample excludes observations with extreme lagged prices (the bottom and top 1% of prices
each month). Standard errors are double-clustered by stock and year-month. *,**, and *** denote statistical
signicance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                              Panel A: Cross-Section
                                                                Log(Total Volatility)

                                       (1)                      (2)                    (3)                (4)

 Log(Lagged Price)                 -0.326
                                             ∗∗∗                                    -0.332
                                                                                             ∗∗∗       -0.339
                                                                                                                ∗∗∗

                                   (0.00339)                                       (0.00446)          (0.00405)

 Log(Lagged Size)                                          -0.146
                                                                      ∗∗∗           0.00431
                                                           (0.00235)               (0.00311)

 YearMonth FE                        Yes                      Yes                     Yes                Yes

 Size Category FE                      No                       No                     No                 Yes

 R-squared                           0.442                     0.328                  0.442              0.445
 Observations                      3,254,302               3,254,302               3,254,302          3,254,302


                                               Panel B: Time Series
                                                                Log(Total Volatility)

                                       (1)                      (2)                    (3)                (4)

 Log(Lagged Price)                 -0.260
                                             ∗∗∗                                    -0.261
                                                                                             ∗∗∗       -0.274
                                                                                                                ∗∗∗

                                   (0.00395)                                       (0.00477)          (0.00403)

 Log(Lagged Size)                                          -0.160
                                                                      ∗∗∗           0.000476
                                                           (0.00334)               (0.00383)

 Stock FE                             Yes                      Yes                     Yes                Yes

 YearMonth FE                        Yes                      Yes                     Yes                Yes

 Size Category FE                      No                       No                     No                 Yes

 R-squared                           0.588                     0.565                  0.588              0.588
 Observations                      3,254,302               3,254,302               3,254,302          3,254,302




                                                          48
                                                  Table 3
                    Baseline Results: Idiosyncratic Volatility and Market Beta
This table repeats the analysis of Table 2, Panel A, using idiosyncratic volatility and absolute market beta
as the outcome variable. Variables are as dened in Table 1 and 2. Standard errors are double-clustered by
stock and year-month. *,**, and *** denote statistical signicance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                   Panel A: Idiosyncratic Volatility
                                                       Log(Idiosyncratic Volatility)

                                    (1)                    (2)                    (3)                (4)

 Log(Lagged Price)               -0.360
                                          ∗∗∗                                -0.332
                                                                                        ∗∗∗       -0.346
                                                                                                           ∗∗∗

                                 (0.00320)                                   (0.00434)            (0.00399)

 Log(Lagged Size)                                     -0.173
                                                                 ∗∗∗        -0.0224
                                                                                        ∗∗∗

                                                      (0.00217)              (0.00308)

 YearMonth FE                      Yes                   Yes                    Yes                 Yes

 Size Category FE                   No                     No                     No                 Yes

 R-squared                         0.469                  0.363                  0.470              0.473
 Observations                    3,254,302            3,254,302              3,254,302            3,254,302


                                           Panel B: Market Beta
                                                                   Log(|Beta|)

                                    (1)                    (2)                    (3)                (4)

 Log(Lagged Price)               -0.228
                                          ∗∗∗                                -0.325
                                                                                        ∗∗∗       -0.319
                                                                                                           ∗∗∗

                                 (0.00395)                                   (0.00521)            (0.00465)

 Log(Lagged Size)                                     -0.0717
                                                                 ∗∗∗         0.0757
                                                                                        ∗∗∗

                                                      (0.00276)              (0.00375)

 YearMonth FE                      Yes                    Yes                    Yes                Yes

 Size Category FE                   No                     No                     No                 Yes

 R-squared                         0.097                  0.068                  0.102              0.103
 Observations                    3,254,302            3,254,302              3,254,302            3,254,302




                                                     49
                                                 Table 4
                     The Leverage Eect Puzzle: Past Returns versus Price
Panel A of this table repeats the analysis of Table 2, Panel A, controlling for a stock's return in the 12
months leading up to month t. The sample is limited to observations where the dependent variable and
independent variables in all columns are non-missing. In column 4 we control separately for past returns in
each the previous 12 months. Panel B restricts the sample to rms with zero book leverage (according to
COMPUSTAT data) in the quarter before month t. Variables are as dened in Table 1 and 2. Standard
errors are double-clustered by stock and year-month. *,**, and *** denote statistical signicance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                          Panel A: Full Sample
                                                                 Log(Total Volatility)

                                              (1)                 (2)             (3)               (4)

 Log(Lagged Price)                         -0.339
                                                    ∗∗∗                        -0.332
                                                                                        ∗∗∗      -0.331
                                                                                                          ∗∗∗

                                           (0.00412)                           (0.00465)         (0.00466)
 Log(1+Past 12-Month Return)                                   -0.240
                                                                      ∗∗∗     -0.0309
                                                                                     ∗∗∗

                                                               (0.0101)        (0.00902)
 YearMonth FE                                Yes                 Yes             Yes               Yes
 Size Category FE                             Yes                 Yes             Yes               Yes
 Past 12 Monthly Returns                      No                  No              No                Yes

 R-squared                                   0.458               0.346           0.458             0.459
 Observations                              2,966,196           2,966,196       2,966,196         2,966,196

                                  Panel B: Zero Leverage Subsample
                                                                 Log(Total Volatility)

                                               (1)                (2)             (3)               (4)

 Log(Lagged Price)                         -0.288
                                                     ∗∗∗                       -0.286
                                                                                        ∗∗∗      -0.285
                                                                                                          ∗∗∗

                                           (0.00800)                           (0.00851)         (0.00855)
 Log(1+Past 12-Month Return)                                   -0.160
                                                                        ∗∗∗    -0.00970
                                                               (0.0139)        (0.0122)
 YearMonth FE                                Yes                 Yes             Yes               Yes
 Size Category FE                             Yes                 Yes             Yes               Yes
 Past 12 Monthly Returns                       No                 No              No                Yes

 R-squared                                   0.357               0.246           0.357             0.358
 Observations                               201,509             201,509         201,509           201,509




                                                          50
                                                                           Table 5
                                                                     Additional Controls
     This table repeats the analysis of Table 2, Panel A, including additional controls. The sample is limited to observations where the dependent variable
     and independent variables in all columns are non-missing. Other variables are as dened in Table 1 and 2. Some of the variables only change on a
     quarterly basis. Standard errors are double-clustered by stock and year-month. *,**, and *** denote statistical signicance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
     level, respectively.

                                                                                             Log(Total Volatility)

                                                          (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)              (5)                (6)

      Log(Lagged Price)                                -0.306
                                                                ∗∗∗     -0.308
                                                                                 ∗∗∗     -0.285
                                                                                                   ∗∗∗    -0.282
                                                                                                                    ∗∗∗     -0.280
                                                                                                                                     ∗∗∗       -0.281
                                                                                                                                                        ∗∗∗

                                                       (0.00526)        (0.00655)        (0.00629)        (0.00625)         (0.00624)         (0.00639)

      Log(Lagged Sales Volatility)                                                       0.0606
                                                                                                ∗∗∗       0.0477
                                                                                                                ∗∗∗         0.0430
                                                                                                                                  ∗∗∗         0.0429
                                                                                                                                                        ∗∗∗

                                                                                         (0.00227)        (0.00182)         (0.00197)         (0.00196)

      Lagged Market-to-Book                                                                               0.0378
                                                                                                                    ∗∗∗     0.0351
                                                                                                                                     ∗∗∗      0.0349
                                                                                                                                                        ∗∗∗

                                                                                                          (0.00199)         (0.00192)         (0.00190)




51
      Lagged Volume Turnover                                                                                                0.0259
                                                                                                                                     ∗∗∗      0.0258
                                                                                                                                                        ∗∗∗

                                                                                                                            (0.00545)         (0.00544)

      Lagged Bid-Ask Spread Percentage                                                                                      0.000294           0.000295
                                                                                                                           (0.000190)         (0.000191)

      Lagged Leverage                                                                                                                         -0.0301
                                                                                                                                                        ∗∗∗

                                                                                                                                               (0.0107)

      Log(Lagged Size)                                    No               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes

      Size Category FE                                    No               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes

      Log(Lagged Size)    ×   Size Category FE            No               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes

      YearMonth FE                                       Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes

      R-squared                                          0.426            0.431            0.443            0.456             0.467              0.467
      Observations                                     1,209,015        1,209,015        1,209,015        1,209,015         1,209,015         1,209,015
                                                  Table 6
                                    Alternative Volatility Measures
This table repeats the analysis of Table 2, Panel A, but uses alternative linear measures of return volatility
that are robust to tick size distortions (Hau, 2006). In column (1), volatility is measured as the mean
intraday price range percentage (100 × High−Low
                                            High  ) over all trading days in a stock-month. In column (2),
volatility is measured as the mean absolute deviation (|Ret − Ret|) over all trading days in stock-month. In
column (3), volatility is measured as the mean absolute return (|Ret|) over all trading days in a stock-month.
Standard errors are double-clustered by stock and year-month. *,**, and *** denote statistical signicance
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                                          Log(Volatility Measure)

                                      (1)                                (2)                                 (3)
                               Intraday Range              Absolute Deviation                          Absolute Return

 Log(Lagged Price)                 -0.410
                                            ∗∗∗                     -0.325
                                                                               ∗∗∗                        -0.312
                                                                                                                   ∗∗∗

                                   (0.00513)                       (0.00472)                              (0.00542)

 YearMonth FE                        Yes                               Yes                                 Yes

 Size Category FE                     Yes                               Yes                                 Yes

 R-squared                           0.507                              0.397                               0.353
 Observations                      2,555,207                       3,254,302                              3,254,302




                                                  Table 7
                                         Institutional Ownership
This table repeats the analysis of Table 2 Panel A, with the addition of institutional ownership as a control
variable, as well as institutional ownership interacted with price. Institutional ownership is computed as
dened in Table 1, and is updated quarterly. Standard errors are double-clustered by stock and year-month.
*,**, and *** denote statistical signicance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                                            (1)                            (2)                 (3)
                                                  Log(Total Volatility)              Log(Idios. Vol.)      Log(|Beta|)

 Log(Lagged Price)                                      -0.384
                                                               ∗∗∗                      -0.381
                                                                                              ∗∗∗            -0.393
                                                                                                                         ∗∗∗

                                                       (0.00509)                        (0.00511)           (0.00582)
 Log(Lagged Price)    ×   Lagged Inst. Own.               0.169
                                                                  ∗∗∗                   0.137
                                                                                              ∗∗∗            0.174
                                                                                                                     ∗∗∗

                                                          (0.0108)                      (0.0107)             (0.0128)
 Lagged Inst. Own.                                      -0.311
                                                                  ∗∗∗                   -0.279
                                                                                                 ∗∗∗         -0.126
                                                                                                                         ∗∗∗

                                                          (0.0323)                      (0.0315)             (0.0405)
 YearMonth FE                                              Yes                            Yes                 Yes
 Size Category FE                                           Yes                            Yes                 Yes

 R-squared                                                 0.432                          0.462               0.112
 Observations                                          2,113,118                        2,113,118           2,113,118




                                                     52
                                                       Table 8
                                 Stock Characteristics Around Splits
This table shows mean institutional ownership and sales volatility before and after 2-for-1 stock splits, as well
as the dierence. Variables are as dened in Table 1 and 2. Before (after) split institutional ownership refers
to institutional ownership based on the last (rst) observed 13f ling for each stock prior to (following) the
split. Before (after) split sales volatility refers to sales volatility based on the most last (rst) four completed
quarters prior to (following) the split.

                               Before Split                     After Split                         Dierence

                        Obs     Mean      Std Dev       Obs      Mean       Std Dev       Obs       Mean    Std Dev

 Inst. Ownership       4,075    0.481          0.286    4,138    0.471        0.276      8,213      0.010       0.006
 Sales Volatility      4,042    0.203          1.646    4,215    0.192        1.585      8,257      0.011       0.036




                                                       Table 9
                 Response to News Events Identied Through Textual Analysis
This table shows the relation between the return response to a news event and the nominal price of a stock
prior to the event. Cumulative abnormal returns (CAR) are computed from trading day -1 to day +1 relative
to the event. Benchmark returns during the event window are based on the market model. Market betas are
estimated based on returns in days -150 to -100 relative to the event date. Lagged Price is the price of the
stock on trading day -2. News events come from Boudoukh et al. (2018). The rst two columns limit the
sample to categorized rm-specic news events, which are events which Boudoukh et al. (2018) are able to
categorize using an algorithm. The nal two columns limit the sample to non-categorized news events, which
are events that Boudoukh et al. (2018) are not able to categorize. Other variables are as dened in Table
1 and 2. Standard errors are double-clustered by stock and year-month. *,**, and *** denote statistical
signicance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                                                        Log(|CAR|)

                                          Categorized News                                      Other News

                                        (1)                     (2)                     (3)                      (4)

 Log(Lagged Price)                 -0.299
                                              ∗∗∗          -0.217
                                                                      ∗∗∗         -0.279
                                                                                              ∗∗∗           -0.208
                                                                                                                       ∗∗∗

                                    (0.0161)               (0.0161)                   (0.0156)              (0.0169)

 YearMonth FE                        Yes                       Yes                     Yes                     Yes

 Size Category FE                       No                      Yes                     No                      Yes

 R-squared                           0.105                    0.115                    0.106                    0.111
 Observations                       377,454                377,454                    375,123                375,123




                                                         53
                                               Table 10
                               Response to Earnings Announcements
Panel A of this table shows the relation between the return response to an earnings announcement and the
nominal price of a stock prior to the announcement. Cumulative abnormal returns (CAR) are computed
from trading day -1 to day +1 relative to the announcement. Benchmark returns during the event window
are based on the market model. Market betas are estimated based on returns in days -150 to -100 relative
to the announcement date. The variable Lagged Price is the price of the stock on trading day -2. Analyst
count xed eects are xed eects for the number of analysts that made an earnings forecast prior to the
announcement. The rst two columns of Panel B shows results from regressions of the return response to an
announcement on its standardized unexpected earnings (SUE) decile rank, its lagged price quintile, and all
interactions. The last two columns of Panel B limit the sample to announcements in the top and bottom SUE
decile and show results from regressions of the return response to an announcement on the top SUE decile
indicator, lagged price quintile, and all interactions. Standardized unexpected earnings are dened as the
dierence between announced earnings and mean analyst expectations, divided by the standard deviation of
analyst expectations. To avoid using stale information in our measure of analyst expectations, we exclude
analyst's forecasts that are made more than 60 days prior to the announcement. Therefore, SUE is only
dened for announcements with multiple recent analysts forecasts. Other variables are as dened in Table
1 and 2. Standard errors are double-clustered by stock and year-month. *,**, and *** denote statistical
signicance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                  Panel A: Return Response on Earnings Announcement Days
                                                                 Log(|CAR|)

                                   (1)                   (2)                   (3)                (4)

 Log(Lagged Price)              -0.223
                                         ∗∗∗         -0.232
                                                               ∗∗∗        -0.271
                                                                                     ∗∗∗      -0.210
                                                                                                        ∗∗∗

                                (0.00747)            (0.0102)             (0.00791)           (0.00944)

 YearMonth FE                     Yes                  Yes                   Yes                Yes

 Size Category FE                  No                   Yes                    No                Yes

 Analyst Count FE                  No                    No                   Yes                Yes

 R-squared                        0.067                 0.071                 0.072             0.082
 Observations                    339,736             339,736              339,736              339,736




                                                   54
                                               Table 10
                                         (Continued)
                        Panel B: Return Response to Earnings Surprises
                                                                         Log(1+CAR)

                                                        All SUE Deciles              Extreme SUE Deciles

                                                        (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)

SUE Decile Rank                                   0.00994
                                                              ∗∗∗    0.00995
                                                                              ∗∗∗

                                                  (0.000532)         (0.000533)
SUE Decile Rank    ×   Lagged Price Quintile 2    -0.000366          -0.000385
                                                  (0.000512)         (0.000514)
SUE Decile Rank    ×   Lagged Price Quintile 3    -0.00180
                                                               ∗∗∗   -0.00180
                                                                               ∗∗∗

                                                  (0.000550)         (0.000551)
SUE Decile Rank    ×   Lagged Price Quintile 4    -0.00360
                                                               ∗∗∗   -0.00359
                                                                               ∗∗∗

                                                  (0.000538)         (0.000539)
SUE Decile Rank    ×   Lagged Price Quintile 5    -0.00443
                                                          ∗∗∗        -0.00442
                                                                               ∗∗∗

                                                  (0.000548)         (0.000549)
SUE Top Decile                                                                       0.0973
                                                                                              ∗∗∗    0.0973
                                                                                                              ∗∗∗

                                                                                     (0.00668)       (0.00672)
SUE Top Decile   ×   Lagged Price Quintile 2                                         -0.00250        -0.00313
                                                                                     (0.00700)       (0.00705)
SUE Top Decile   ×   Lagged Price Quintile 3                                          -0.0141
                                                                                                ∗    -0.0143
                                                                                                               ∗

                                                                                     (0.00759)       (0.00760)
SUE Top Decile   ×   Lagged Price Quintile 4                                         -0.0324
                                                                                               ∗∗∗   -0.0319
                                                                                                              ∗∗∗

                                                                                     (0.00727)       (0.00730)
SUE Top Decile   ×   Lagged Price Quintile 5                                         -0.0436
                                                                                             ∗∗∗     -0.0430
                                                                                                              ∗∗∗

                                                                                     (0.00711)       (0.00714)
Lagged Price Quintile FE                                Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
YearMonth FE                                           Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
Size Category FE                                        No              Yes             No              Yes
Analyst Count FE                                        No              Yes             No              Yes

R-squared                                              0.081           0.082           0.162           0.165
Observations                                           89,279          89,279         17,650          17,650




                                                  55
                                                                           Table 11
                                                Return Reversal, Variation by Lagged Price and Size
     This table shows results from regressions of future abnormal returns on past abnormal returns and the interaction between past abnormal returns
     and lagged price and size. Abnormal returns are measured using market-adjusted returns as in De Bondt and Thaler (1985). The regression also
     controls for the direct eects of lagged price and size. All regressions are estimated following the Fama-MacBeth methodology. Columns 13 focus on
     long-run reversal. The sorting period is t − 36 to t − 1. Lagged price and size are measured as of the end of month t − 37 (which precedes the past
     return window covering months t − 36 to t − 1). Columns 46 focus on short-run reversal. The sorting period is month t − 1. Lagged price and size
     are measured as of the end of month t − 2 (which precedes the past return window covering month t − 1). Standard errors reect the Fama-Macbeth
     methodology. *,**, and *** denote statistical signicance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                                                      Log(1 + 36 Month CAR)                           Log(1 + 1 Month CAR)

                                                                   (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)

      Log(1 + Prev 36 Month CAR)                                -0.154
                                                                         ∗∗∗   -0.186
                                                                                        ∗∗∗   -0.158
                                                                                                       ∗∗∗

                                                               (0.00598)       (0.00982)      (0.00984)
      Log(1 + Prev 36 Month CAR)        ×   Log(Pricet−37 )    0.0311
                                                                         ∗∗∗                  0.0314
                                                                                                       ∗∗∗




56
                                                               (0.00183)                      (0.00216)
      Log(1 + Prev 36 Month CAR)        ×   Log(Sizet−37 )                     0.0112
                                                                                      ∗∗∗     0.000188
                                                                               (0.00106)      (0.00124)
      Log(1 + Prev 1 Month CAR)                                                                              -0.124
                                                                                                                      ∗∗∗   -0.205
                                                                                                                                     ∗∗∗    -0.152
                                                                                                                                                     ∗∗∗

                                                                                                             (0.00579)       (0.0108)       (0.0110)
      Log(1 + Prev 1 Month CAR)        ×   Log(Pricet−2 )                                                    0.0284
                                                                                                                      ∗∗∗                   0.0238
                                                                                                                                                     ∗∗∗

                                                                                                             (0.00187)                      (0.00226)
      Log(1 + Prev 1 Month CAR)        ×   Log(Sizet−2 )                                                                    0.0156
                                                                                                                                     ∗∗∗   0.00409
                                                                                                                                                     ∗∗∗

                                                                                                                            (0.00114)       (0.00136)
      Fama-MacBeth                                                 Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes

      Avg R-squared                                               0.073          0.069          0.084          0.048          0.039           0.056
      Observations                                             1,717,530       1,717,530      1,717,530      3,256,589      3,256,589       3,256,589
      Time Periods                                                1,014          1,014          1,014          1,084          1,084           1,084
A     Supplemental Figures and Tables

                                                                                             Figure A1
                                   Splits: Large-Cap Subsample
This gure shows that the patterns relating to splits discussed in Section 4.2 are not driven by small-cap
stocks. We re-estimate Figures 5 and 6 using data restricted to rms in Fama French size categories 11 to
20 as of the month prior to the split. The sample is restricted to 2-for-1 stock splits.

                                                                              Panel A: Intraday Price Range
                                                          4
                Intraday Price Range (Percentage)




                                                    3.5




                                                          3




                                                    2.5

                                                                   -40               -20               0             20           40
                                                                                           Event Time (Trading Days)


                                                                                   Panel B: Total Volatility
                                               .3
                Log Total Volatility (Relative to t=-6)
                          .1                .2 0




                                                              -6         -5   -4     -3      -2    -1    1    2     3     4   5        6
                                                                                             Event Time (Months)




                                                                                                   1
                                                               Figure A2
                                              Splits: Large-Cap Subsample (Continued)
                                                         Panel A: Market Beta

                  .3
Log |Beta| (Relative to t=-6)
  0          .1   -.1    .2




                                         -6     -5   -4   -3   -2    -1    1    2    3   4   5   6
                                                               Event Time (Months)


                                                     Panel B: Volume Turnover
                  .1
Log Volume Turnover (Relative to t=-6)
     -.05       0 -.1       .05




                                         -6     -5   -4   -3   -2    -1    1    2    3   4   5   6
                                                               Event Time (Months)




                                                                    2
                                                  Table A1
                            Baseline Results: Market BetaPositive Only
This table repeats the analysis of Table 3, Panel B, limiting the sample to observations with positive estimated
market betas. Standard errors are double-clustered by stock and year-month. *,**, and *** denote statistical
signicance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                                                    Log(Beta)

                                     (1)                    (2)                    (3)                 (4)

 Log(Lagged Price)                -0.202
                                           ∗∗∗                                  -0.297
                                                                                         ∗∗∗        -0.296
                                                                                                             ∗∗∗

                                 (0.00369)                                      (0.00550)           (0.00493)

 Log(Lagged Size)                                      -0.0592
                                                                  ∗∗∗           0.0720
                                                                                         ∗∗∗

                                                       (0.00244)                (0.00375)

 YearMonth FE                       Yes                   Yes                    Yes                  Yes

 Size Category FE                    No                     No                     No                  Yes

 R-squared                          0.090                  0.064                 0.095                0.097
 Observations                    2,315,198             2,315,198                2,315,198           2,315,198




                                                       3
                                                                        Table A2
                                                                       Correlations
    This table shows the correlations between price and other variables. All variables in this table are measured in the same way as they are measured in
    the regression analysis in the paper. The same set of variables are reported in rows and columns. Observations are at the stock-month level. Lagged
    refers to one month lag unless otherwise noted.



                                                Price      Vol     Mkt Cap      Sales Vol    Return      MTB       Volume     BA Spread      Leverage

     Log(Lagged Price)                            1


     Log(Total Volatility)                     -0.578       1


     Log(Lagged Market Capitalization)          0.656     -0.329       1




4
     Log(Lagged Sales Volatility)              -0.316     0.300      -0.258         1


     Log(1+Lagged 12-Month Return)              0.434     -0.317     0.219        -0.116        1


     Lagged Market-to-Book Ratio              0.00684    0.0143      0.0205       0.163      0.0212        1


     Lagged Volume Turnover                    0.0438     0.106      0.168       0.0624      0.0195     0.0150        1


     Lagged Bid-Ask Spread Percentage          -0.197     0.120      -0.200      0.0387      -0.234    -0.00275    -0.0419         1


     Lagged Book Leverage                      -0.0828   0.0322     -0.0289     -0.000293    -0.0799    0.00322    -0.0208      0.0198           1
                                                                         Table A3
                                               Baseline Results: Controlling for Shares Outstanding
    This table repeats the cross-sectional analysis of Tables 2 and 3 replacing the control for log(lagged size) with a control for log(lagged shares
    outstanding). Standard errors are double-clustered by stock and year-month. *,**, and *** denote statistical signicance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
    level, respectively.

                                                 Log(Total Volatility)              Log(Idiosyncratic Volatility)                 Log(|Beta|)

                                                  (1)              (2)               (3)                (4)                 (5)                 (6)

                                                        ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗               ∗∗∗                ∗∗∗                 ∗∗∗                 ∗∗∗




5
     Log(Lagged Price)                         -0.326           -0.327          -0.360                -0.354             -0.228           -0.250
                                               (0.00339)       (0.00327)        (0.00320)            (0.00301)           (0.00395)        (0.00380)

     Log(Lagged Shares Outstanding)                             0.00431                              -0.0224
                                                                                                            ∗∗∗                           0.0757
                                                                                                                                                      ∗∗∗

                                                               (0.00311)                             (0.00308)                            (0.00375)

     YearMonth FE                                Yes             Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes

     R-squared                                   0.442           0.442              0.469              0.470               0.097            0.102
     Observations                              3,254,302       3,254,302        3,254,302            3,254,302           3,254,302        3,254,302
                                                                              Table A4
                                                                   Size Subsamples
    This table repeats the analysis of Table 2, Panel A, on 20 subsamples corresponding to 20 dierent size categories based on market capitalization
    (prc×shrout). Size1 corresponds to the smallest size category, and Size20 the largest. The size categories are based on the monthly ME Breakpoints
    from Ken French's data library. The breakpoints for a given month use all NYSE stocks that have a CRSP share code of 10 or 11 and have good
    shares and price data, excluding closed-end funds and REITs. There are 20 groups corresponding to every fth percentile. Observations in our data
    are not equally distributed across the categories, because our sample includes all stocks on NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ with a share code of 10 or
    11, rather than only NYSE. Standard errors are double-clustered by stock and year-month. *,**, and *** denote statistical signicance at the 10%,
    5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                                                                         Log(Total Volatility)

                               (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)             (7)             (8)             (9)             (10)
                              Size1          Size2          Size3          Size4           Size5          Size6           Size7           Size8           Size9           Size10

     Log(Lagged Price)      -0.363
                                     ∗∗∗   -0.386
                                                    ∗∗∗   -0.370
                                                                   ∗∗∗   -0.364
                                                                                  ∗∗∗    -0.346
                                                                                                  ∗∗∗   -0.325
                                                                                                                 ∗∗∗    -0.310
                                                                                                                                 ∗∗∗    -0.298
                                                                                                                                                 ∗∗∗    -0.281
                                                                                                                                                                 ∗∗∗     -0.270
                                                                                                                                                                                 ∗∗∗

                           (0.00562)       (0.00659)      (0.00746)      (0.00771)      (0.00800)       (0.00816)      (0.00870)        (0.00870)       (0.00949)       (0.00996)




6
     YearMonth FE            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes

     R-squared                0.393         0.368          0.363           0.362           0.354          0.349           0.347           0.351           0.343           0.350
     Observations          1,111,769       333,979        226,006         173,581        146,796         128,577        117,145          107,699          99,812          92,354


                                                                                        Log(Total Volatility)

                               (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)            (7)             (8)             (9)             (10)
                             Size11         Size12         Size13         Size14         Size15          Size16         Size17          Size18          Size19          Size20

     Log(Lagged Price)      -0.248
                                     ∗∗∗   -0.227
                                                    ∗∗∗   -0.207
                                                                   ∗∗∗   -0.201
                                                                                 ∗∗∗    -0.184
                                                                                                 ∗∗∗    -0.168
                                                                                                                ∗∗∗    -0.166
                                                                                                                               ∗∗∗     -0.124
                                                                                                                                               ∗∗∗     -0.123
                                                                                                                                                               ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                                                       -0.139
                            (0.00969)      (0.0103)       (0.0118)       (0.0123)       (0.0135)        (0.0139)       (0.0179)        (0.0165)        (0.0206)        (0.0215)

     YearMonth FE             Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes

     R-squared                0.355          0.359         0.351          0.357           0.359          0.388          0.403           0.412           0.450           0.526
     Observations            85,267         81,440         78,053         75,213         72,894          70,567         67,662          65,314          62,743          57,431
                                                                                Table A5
                                                                Time Period Subsamples
    This table repeats the analysis of Table 2 Panel A, on subsamples from each decade from the 1920s through the 2010s. The sample ends in 2016, so
    column 10 corresponds to the years 2010-2016 only. Standard errors are double-clustered by stock and year-month. *,**, and *** denote statistical
    signicance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                                                                     Log(Total Volatility)

                              (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)           (10)
                             1920s         1930s         1940s          1950s         1960s         1970s          1980s          1990s          2000s          2010s




7
     Log(Lagged Price)     -0.227
                                    ∗∗∗   -0.275
                                                  ∗∗∗   -0.350
                                                                 ∗∗∗   -0.191
                                                                               ∗∗∗   -0.324
                                                                                             ∗∗∗   -0.462
                                                                                                            ∗∗∗   -0.317
                                                                                                                           ∗∗∗   -0.369
                                                                                                                                          ∗∗∗   -0.353
                                                                                                                                                         ∗∗∗   -0.251
                                                                                                                                                                     ∗∗∗

                           (0.0140)       (0.0108)      (0.00989)      (0.0147)      (0.0126)      (0.00862)      (0.00646)      (0.00768)      (0.00995)      (0.00554)

     YearMonth FE            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes

     Size Category FE         Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes

     R-squared               0.560         0.652         0.609          0.289         0.396         0.353          0.315          0.440          0.449          0.356
     Observations           22,843         82,661        97,620        118,906       209,217       452,864        624,639        751,051        586,932        307,569
                                                                          Table A6
                                                            Upside and Downside Volatility
    This table repeats the analysis of Table 2, Panel A, Column 4, with modications to the dependent variable to explore the relation between lagged
    price and measures of upside and downside volatility. Column 1 measures volatility as the log of the annualized square root of mean squared daily
    returns within each month. Columns 2 and 3 use a similar annualized volatility measure, but calculated using only daily returns that are positive or
    negative, respectively. Thus, Columns 2 and 3 use measures of upside and downside volatility, respectively. Column 4 uses the log of the absolute
    market beta (calculated using daily returns within each month, estimated with a Dimson (1979) correction), while Columns 5 and 6 use the log of
    the absolute beta calculated only on days in which the market return was positive or negative, respectively. Thus, Columns 5 and 6 use measures of
    upside and downside beta, respectively. Standard errors are double-clustered by stock and year-month. *,**, and *** denote statistical signicance
    at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                                   Log(Mean Squared Returns)                                         Log(|Beta|)




8
                                       (1)                    (2)                (3)               (4)                  (5)                    (6)
                                       All                 Reti > 0            Reti < 0            All              Retmkt > 0            Retmkt < 0
     Log(Lagged Price)             -0.337
                                             ∗∗∗           -0.397
                                                                    ∗∗∗        -0.365
                                                                                        ∗∗∗     -0.319
                                                                                                         ∗∗∗         -0.341
                                                                                                                              ∗∗∗          -0.336
                                                                                                                                                     ∗∗∗

                                   (0.00401)               (0.00374)        (0.00372)           (0.00465)            (0.00389)             (0.00410)

     YearMonth FE                    Yes                    Yes                 Yes               Yes                  Yes                   Yes

     Size Category FE                 Yes                    Yes                 Yes               Yes                  Yes                   Yes

     R-squared                       0.444                   0.521              0.543             0.103                0.180                 0.217
     Observations                  3,254,302               3,209,814        3,220,782           3,254,302            3,254,302             3,254,302
                                                 Table A7
              Regression Discontinuity: Intraday Price Range Around Stock Splits
This table explores the pattern of volatility around 2-for-1 stock splits. We examine 45 days before and after
the split. Variables are as dened in Table 1. Control functions on each side of the cuto are estimated non-
parametrically using local linear regression. The rst three columns use a triangular kernel. The last three
columns use a rectangular kernel. Bandwidths are selected using one common MSE-optimal bandwidth
selector in columns (1) and (4). Other bandwidths are shown in the remaining columns. The estimated
coecient represents the size of the discontinuity at the split date, as illustrated in Figure 5.

                                                     Intraday Price Range (Percentage)

                                      (1)            (2)           (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)

 Discontinuity at Split Date       1.361
                                         ∗∗∗      1.377
                                                       ∗∗∗      1.374
                                                                     ∗∗∗      1.368
                                                                                   ∗∗∗    1.350
                                                                                               ∗∗∗    1.352
                                                                                                              ∗∗∗

                                   (0.0475)       (0.0678)      (0.0408)      (0.0437)    (0.0545)    (0.0352)

 Degree Local Poly                     1              1             1            1           1           1
 Bandwidth                           7.933            5             10         7.933         5           10
 Kernel                           Triangular    Triangular     Triangular    Uniform     Uniform     Uniform
 Observations                       573,778       573,778        573,778      573,778     573,778     573,778




                                                      9
                                                    Table A8
                                    Volatility Around Stock Splits
The odd columns of this table show the results of Figure 6 in tabular format. The even columns also estimate
the coecient on a single P osti,t indicator, equal to one in event months in the 6 months following a split
and 0 in the 6 months preceding a split. Standard errors are double-clustered by stock and year-month.
*,**, and *** denote statistical signicance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                           Log(Total Volatility)       Log(Idiosyncratic Volatility)        Log(|Beta|)

                               (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)

 1(Event Month ≥ 0)                        0.216
                                                 ∗∗∗                     0.217
                                                                              ∗∗∗                     0.166
                                                                                                           ∗∗∗

                                           (0.00443)                     (0.00466)                    (0.00925)

 1(Event Month = -5)       0.0172
                                     ∗∗∗               0.0205
                                                                   ∗∗∗                  0.0231
                           (0.00565)                   (0.00590)                       (0.0204)

 1(Event Month = -4)       0.0244
                                     ∗∗∗               0.0262
                                                                   ∗∗∗                  0.0106
                           (0.00631)                   (0.00654)                       (0.0207)

 1(Event Month = -3)       0.0218
                                     ∗∗∗               0.0211
                                                                   ∗∗∗                  0.0200
                           (0.00620)                   (0.00621)                       (0.0203)

 1(Event Month = -2)       0.0406
                                     ∗∗∗               0.0445
                                                                   ∗∗∗                  0.0323
                           (0.00666)                   (0.00683)                       (0.0224)

 1(Event Month = -1)       0.0459
                                     ∗∗∗               0.0459
                                                                   ∗∗∗                 0.0633
                                                                                                ∗∗∗

                           (0.00675)                   (0.00698)                       (0.0206)

 1(Event Month = 0)         0.242
                                  ∗∗∗                   0.245
                                                             ∗∗∗                       0.239
                                                                                             ∗∗∗

                           (0.00694)                   (0.00706)                       (0.0217)

 1(Event Month = 1)         0.291
                                  ∗∗∗                   0.290
                                                             ∗∗∗                       0.229
                                                                                             ∗∗∗

                           (0.00706)                   (0.00721)                       (0.0216)

 1(Event Month = 2)         0.258
                                    ∗∗∗                 0.261
                                                               ∗∗∗                     0.197
                                                                                             ∗∗∗

                           (0.00741)                   (0.00754)                       (0.0201)

 1(Event Month = 3)         0.234
                                    ∗∗∗                 0.233
                                                               ∗∗∗                     0.176
                                                                                             ∗∗∗

                           (0.00766)                   (0.00779)                       (0.0210)

 1(Event Month = 4)         0.232
                                    ∗∗∗                 0.234
                                                               ∗∗∗                     0.172
                                                                                             ∗∗∗

                           (0.00721)                   (0.00739)                       (0.0212)

 1(Event Month = 5)         0.217
                                    ∗∗∗                 0.220
                                                               ∗∗∗                     0.178
                                                                                             ∗∗∗

                           (0.00721)                   (0.00744)                       (0.0201)

 1(Event Month = 6)         0.212
                                    ∗∗∗                 0.216
                                                               ∗∗∗                     0.139
                                                                                             ∗∗∗

                           (0.00720)                   (0.00738)                       (0.0217)

 YearMonth FE                Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes

 Stock FE                     Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes

 R-squared                   0.648          0.646           0.628         0.627          0.195         0.195
 Observations                76,976         76,976      76,976            76,976        76,976         76,976




                                                       10
                                                Table A9
                         Volatility and Liquidity Around Stock Splits
This table explores how measures of liquidity change after splits, and whether changes in liquidity can
explain the changes in volatility. All regressions follow the format in Table A8. The sample is restricted to
the subsample of stocks for which bid-ask spread and volume turnover data are available. Volume turnover
and bid-ask spread percentage are as dened in Table 1. Standard errors are double-clustered by stock and
year-month. *,**, and *** denote statistical signicance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                          Log(Volume Turn.)           Log(B-A Spread)                Log(Volatility)

                                   (1)                        (2)                  (3)              (4)

 Post Split                   -0.00818
                                      ∗∗∗                  0.310
                                                                ∗∗∗             0.200
                                                                                     ∗∗∗          0.196
                                                                                                       ∗∗∗

                               (0.000792)                  (0.0239)             (0.00604)        (0.00524)

 Volume Turn.                                                                                     2.576
                                                                                                       ∗∗∗

                                                                                                 (0.0565)

 B-A Spread                                                                                      0.0820
                                                                                                          ∗∗∗

                                                                                                 (0.00450)

 YearMonth FE                    Yes                        Yes                   Yes              Yes

 Stock FE                         Yes                        Yes                   Yes              Yes

 R-squared                       0.813                      0.846                 0.684            0.734
 Observations                    40,121                     40,121               40,121           40,121




                                                     11
