                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    WHAT HAPPENED TO U.S. BUSINESS DYNAMISM?

                                            Ufuk Akcigit
                                            Sina T. Ates

                                        Working Paper 25756
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w25756


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                              April 2019, Revised May 2019




We thank Richard Rogerson and John Haltiwanger for encouraging us to explore the decline in business
dynamism in the United States. In addition, we thank Chiara Criscuolo, Chad Syverson, seminar and
conference participants at the 7th CompNet Annual Conference, Boston College, Collège de France,
the University of Texas at Austin, the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, the OECD, the Central Bank
of Turkey, the Bank of Italy, and the Koc University Winter Workshop in Economics. Aakaash Rao
and Zhiyu Fu have provided excellent research assistance. Akcigit gratefully acknowledges financial
support from the National Science Foundation. The views in this paper are solely the responsibilities
of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the view of the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, nor or of any other person associated with the Federal Reserve System, nor
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Ufuk Akcigit and Sina T. Ates. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?
Ufuk Akcigit and Sina T. Ates
NBER Working Paper No. 25756
April 2019, Revised May 2019
JEL No. E22,L12,O31,O33

                                          ABSTRACT

In the past several decades, the U.S. economy has witnessed a number of striking trends that
indicate a rising market concentration and a slowdown in business dynamism. In this paper, we
make an attempt to understand potential common forces behind these empirical regularities
through the lens of a micro-founded general equilibrium model of endogenous firm dynamics.
Importantly, the theoretical model captures the strategic behavior between competing firms, its
effect on their innovation decisions, and the resulting “best versus the rest” dynamics. We focus
on multiple potential mechanisms that can potentially drive the observed changes and use the
calibrated model to assess the relative importance of these channels with particular attention to
the implied transitional dynamics. Our results highlight the dominant role of a decline in the
intensity of knowledge diffusion from the frontier firms to the laggard ones in explaining the
observed shifts. We conclude by presenting new evidence that corroborates a declining
knowledge diffusion in the economy. We document a higher concentration of patenting in the
hands of firms with the largest stock and a changing nature of patents, especially in the post-2000
period, which suggests a heavy use of intellectual property protection by market leaders to limit
the diffusion of knowledge. These findings present a potential avenue for future research on the
drivers of declining knowledge diffusion.


Ufuk Akcigit
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Saieh Hall, Office 403
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
uakcigit@uchicago.edu

Sina T. Ates
Federal Reserve Board of Governors
20th & C St.
Washington, DC 20551
sina.t.ates@frb.gov
                               What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


1    Introduction

Market economies are characterized by the so-called “creative destruction” where unproductive
incumbents are pushed out of the market by new entrants or other more productive incum-
bents or both. A byproduct of this up-or-out process is the creation of higher-paying jobs and
reallocation of workers from less to more productive firms. The U.S. economy has been losing
this business dynamism since the 1980s and, even more strikingly, since the 2000s. This shift
manifests itself in a number of empirical regularities: The entry rate of new businesses, the
job reallocation rate, and the labor share have all been decreasing, yet the profit share, market
concentration, and markups have all been rising. A growing literature has documented many
dramatic empirical trends such as these and initiated a heated debate around the possible rea-
sons behind the declining dynamism in the U.S. economy. We contribute to this important, and
predominantly empirical, debate by offering a new micro-founded macro model, conducting a
quantitative investigation of alternative mechanisms that could have led to these dynamics, and
presenting some new facts on the rise of patenting concentration.

     A central concern of our study is the identification of factors that could have driven these
observed trends in U.S. business dynamism.1 During the past 30 years, the U.S. economy has
experienced many fundamental changes that might have contributed to these trends shifting
the power balance among competing firms toward market leaders. Some of these changes in
primitives, which we review in more detail in Appendix A, include reduced effective corporate
taxes, increased research and development (R&D) subsidies, increased regulations, and heavier
use of intellectual property, which limits the technologies that can be used by competing firms
and lowers the effective knowledge diffusion. Incorporating these margins within a realistic
theoretical framework, we explore two main quantitative questions based on various thought
experiments in this study: First, how are the empirical trends observed since the 1980s linked
together? Second, could these trends be driven by changes discussed in this paragraph that
shifted the balance of market power?

     Our research approach starts by summarizing the observed trends in the data and various
changes in the economy that might have led to these trends. This initial discussion directs our
attention to a certain class of models. Accordingly, we build a theoretical model that accounts
for, in particular, endogenous market power and strategic competition among incumbents and
entrants. Next, we calibrate this model to the U.S. economy as if it was in a steady state in
1980 and hit the economy with four alternative shocks to make it enter into alternative transition
paths. We then compare the model-generated paths with the actual trends to identify the most
powerful shock in explaining all of the observed facts simultaneously. Finally, we calibrate the

    1 We focus on 10 specific trends: (i) market concentration has risen, (ii) average markups have increased, (iii) the

profit share of GDP has increased, (iv) he labor share of output has gone down, (v) the rise in market concentration
and the fall in labor share are positively associated, (vi) productivity dispersion of firms has risen, (vii) firm entry rate
has declined, (viii) the share of young firms in economic activity has declined, (ix) job reallocation has slowed down,
and (x) the dispersion of firm growth has decreased. We review them in more detail in Section 2.


                                                             1
                         What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


transition path of the model economy to reflect the changes that the U.S. economy has been
experiencing in the past several decades. We then decompose the contribution of each channel of
interest to the model-generated trends in order to quantify their potential importance in driving
the empirical regularities that the U.S. economy has been witnessing.

    A key advantage of studying 10 empirical trends jointly (as opposed to a smaller subset of
them) with the help of a general equilibrium model is to exploit the power of “overidentification.”
A single empirical fact can potentially be explained by multiple alternative mechanisms; however,
multiple empirical facts can (we hope) help us identify one single mechanism that might have
led to the observed trends in the United States.

    In a recent piece, Syverson (2019) emphasizes that the topic of “market power” has histori-
cally been studied mostly by micro industrial organization literature, which focused its attention
on specific industries. While he welcomes the paradigm shift in macroeconomics toward this
topic and its aggregate implications, he explains in detail why the macroeconomic discussion
should rely more on microeconomic foundations. In this regard, our goal is to pull the macro
and micro literatures closer by building a macro general equilibrium model that draws heavily
on an early industrial organization literature that investigated the competition dynamics among
incumbent firms in a winner-take-all race (e.g., Harris and Vickers, 1985, 1987; Budd et al., 1993).
In the typical framework, two players race for a prize, and players exert different efforts de-
pending on their own position relative to their competitors. A fruitful branch of endogenous
growth literature has introduced these partial equilibrium models into a macro general equi-
librium setting in order to study various aspects of product market competition with strategic
interaction between competing firms (e.g., Aghion et al., 1997, 2001, 2005; Acemoglu and Akcigit,
2012; Akcigit et al., 2018). In a recent review of declining business dynamism, we consider a
framework along these lines (Akcigit and Ates, 2019). The study presents a first-step discussion
of the theoretical predictions of the standard model in comparison with the empirical evidence.
In this paper, we extend the standard framework to have a richer setting suitable for quantitative
analysis, including transitional paths.

    Similar to these studies, our theoretical framework centers on an economy that consists of
many sectors. In each sector, two incumbent firms, which can also be interpreted as the best and
the rest, compete à la Bertrand for market leadership. This competitive structure forces market
leaders to post a limit price; hence, the mark-ups evolve endogenously as a function of the
technology gap between firms. Market leaders try to innovate in order to open up the lead and
increase their markups and profits. Follower firms try to innovate with the hope of eventually
leapfrogging the market leader and gaining market power. Likewise, new firms attempt to enter
the economy with the hope of becoming a market leader some day. A very important aspect of
the model is the strategic innovation investment by the firms: Intense competition among firms,
especially when the competitors are in a neck-and-neck position in terms of their productivity
levels, induces more aggressive innovation investment and more business dynamism. Yet when



                                                   2
                         What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


the leaders open up their technological lead, followers lose their hope of leapfrogging the leader
and lower their innovation effort. Likewise, entrants get discouraged when the markets are
overwhelmingly dominated by the market leader, and the entry rate decreases.

    Our structural model allows us to primarily analyze four important margins that shape
the competition dynamics. First, corporate taxes affect profits and the return to being the mar-
ket leader. Second, the government supports incumbents’ productivity-enhancing investments
through R&D subsidies. Third, the level of entry costs affect the incentives of potential new en-
trants. Finally, the amount of knowledge diffusion in the economy allows followers to copy the
market leaders and remain close to them. Incidentally, the U.S. economy has observed significant
changes along all of these margins in the past several decades. Changes in these four margins
have different implications as to how competition and business dynamism evolve over time in
our model. Thus, our model allows us to run a horse race between these important channels
and ascertain which one(s) among them has greater power in explaining the observed empirical
trends in the U.S. economy.

    We calibrate the model to pre-1980 moments in the data as if the U.S. economy was in a
steady state. We then conduct two sets of experiments. The first set of experiments focuses on
each of the four channels individually, illustrating the potential of each channel in generating ob-
served empirical trends. For instance, we implement a large drop in the effective corporate tax
rates between 1980 and 2010 and compare the model-simulated transition paths with all post-
1980 empirical trends. We repeat this analysis with all four channels described previously. The
second set of experiments matches the transition path of the model to the transitional dynamics
of the U.S. economy, allowing all four channels to move jointly, and then quantifies their indi-
vidual contributions. Both sets of exercises indicate that, even though each channel can have
some effect at different levels, reduction in knowledge diffusion between 1980 and 2010 is the most
powerful force in driving all of the observed trends simultaneously. For instance, while each of
the remaining channels can rarely account for more than 10 percent of the observed trends, the
knowledge diffusion channel accounts for more than 70 percent of most symptoms of declining
business dynamism and at least 50 percent of all considered trends.

    Reduction in knowledge diffusion is able to account for these trends as follows. When knowl-
edge diffusion slows down over time, as a direct effect, market leaders are shielded from being
copied, which helps them establish stronger market power. When market leaders have a bigger
lead over their rivals, the followers get discouraged; hence, they slow down. The productivity
gap between leaders and followers opens up. The first implication of this widening is that market
composition shifts to more concentrated sectors. Second, limit pricing allows stronger leaders
(leaders further ahead) to charge higher markups, which also increases the profit share and de-
creases the labor share of gross domestic product (GDP). Since entrants are forward looking,
they observe the strengthening of incumbents and get discouraged; therefore, entry goes down.
Discouraged followers and entrants lower the competitive pressure on the market leader: When



                                                 3
                         What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


they face less threat, market leaders relax and they experiment less. Hence, overall dynamism
and experimentation decrease in the economy.

    Although the main goal of this paper is positive rather than normative, we also discuss
briefly the welfare implications of market concentration within the framework of our model. An
interesting observation is that lower market concentration is not always welfare enhancing. In
cases when the knowledge diffusion is high and competition is too fierce, weighing on leader
firms’ innovation incentives, a lower level of knowledge diffusion can improve aggregate inno-
vation and welfare. However, our quantitative results indicate that in the calibrated baseline
economy, a higher rate of knowledge diffusion is unequivocally welfare improving, implying
that the baseline diffusion rate is inadequate from a welfare perspective.

    We conclude our quantitative analysis with various robustness exercises and discuss some
model extensions.    We also elaborate on three additional channels—a decline in the inter-
est rate, a fall in research productivity, and a decrease in workers’ market power relative to
employers/firms—whose potential links to some of the observed trends considered here have
recently drawn the attention of the literature. We assess the potential of these channels in jointly
accounting for the empirical trends under consideration and show that each one of them leads
to some counterfactual response in a number of margins.

    As a cautious remark, our results do not mean, and are far from implying, that the decline
in knowledge diffusion is the only driver of the observed trends. Indeed, each empirical trend
might have its own leading factors, and those factors may be different than the ones studied
here. However, our analysis instead shows that among the mechanisms we consider—changes
in corporate taxation, government support for incumbents, increased regulatory burden, and
reduced knowledge diffusion (potentially due to anticompetitive use of intellectual property)—
the last one stands out as a powerful force when 10 empirical facts are considered together.
Therefore, our results stress the importance of future research to understand the underlying
reasons for slower knowledge diffusion. To this end, we conclude our study by presenting
some brand-new, striking trends on the increased concentration of patents through both their
production and purchase by market leaders, as well as on the strategic use of patents, especially
since the early 2000s. We hope that these findings ignite a broader conversation in the literature.

    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the literature; it also re-
visits the empirical trends that the literature has interpreted as the signs of declining business
dynamism. After presenting the empirical evidence that motivates the theory, Section 3 intro-
duces the theoretical model, and Section 4 describes its calibration. Sections 5 and 6 present
the experiments that identify and quantify the importance of each margin using the calibrated
model. Section 7 discusses the welfare implications. Section 8 presents robustness exercises,
discusses model extensions, and investigates the implications of additional channels with regard
to observed empirical trends. Section 9 provides some new empirical facts on the distribution of
the use of intellectual property in the U.S. economy, which could shed some light on the reason


                                                 4
                              What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


why knowledge diffusion has slowed down over time. Section 10 concludes.



2     Empirical Regularities and Literature Review

While the contribution of our work is mainly quantitative, it draws heavily on empirical work
in the literature. Therefore, in this section, we first review the findings of this literature. To
summarize, we focus on the following empirical regularities:

     1. Market concentration has risen.
     2. Average markups have increased.
     3. The profit share of GDP has increased.
     4. The labor share of output has gone down.
     5. The rise in market concentration and the fall in labor share are positively associated.
     6. Productivity dispersion of firms has risen. Similarly, the labor productivity gap between
       frontier and laggard firms has widened.
     7. Firm entry rate has declined.
     8. The share of young firms in economic activity has declined.
     9. Job reallocation has slowed down.
    10. The dispersion of firm growth has decreased.

Next, we will briefly discuss the mechanisms the literature has proposed to explain these regu-
larities. We refer the interested reader to Akcigit and Ates (2019) for a more extensive review.

      To start, a set of recent papers document an increasing market concentration in the United
States (Fact 1; see Furman and Giuliano, 2016; Autor et al., 2017a,b; Barkai, 2017; Grullon et al.,
2017; and Gutiérrez and Philippon, 2016, 2017, among others).2 Second, several recent studies
show an increase in average markups (Fact 2; see Nekarda and Ramey, 2013; De Loecker and
Eeckhout, 2017; Gutiérrez and Philippon, 2017; Eggertsson et al., 2018; and Hall, 2018, among
others).3 Relatedly, a subset of these studies also highlight an increase in the aggregate profit
share (Fact 3). These findings drew considerable attention from both academic and policy circles,
as they likely indicate an increase in firms’ market power and a decline in industry competition.
For instance, Gutiérrez and Philippon (2016) argue that increased industry concentration drives
the weak investment performance of U.S. firms via a decline in competition. Eggertsson et al.
(2018) and Farhi and Gourio (2018) argue that increased market power can help explain several


    2 Bajgar et al. (2019) and Kalemli-Ozcan et al. (2019) document similar patterns for European countries as well,

focusing on consolidated firm accounts.
    3 Calligaris et al. (2018) and De Loecker and Eeckhout (2018) document similar patterns for various other countries

as well.


                                                          5
                              What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


macro-finance regularities, with Eggertsson et al. (2018) also emphasizing persistently low inter-
est rates. Liu et al. (2019) also focus on the role of low interest rates as a culprit of rising market
concentration and declining business dynamism.4 Barkai (2017) claims that higher concentration
is associated with lower competition and results in a declining factor income of labor. However, it
is worth noting that higher market concentration may not necessarily imply higher market power
of firms (Syverson, 2004a,b). In fact, Autor et al. (2017b) and Bessen (2017) contend that higher
market concentration is a result of higher market competition and the rise of more productive
firms.5 Bessen (2017) documents that sales concentration is strongly correlated with the use of
information and communication technologies at the industry level. In a similar vein, Crouzet
and Eberly (2018) observe that at the industry level, the firms with the largest size and highest
growth rate are the ones whose investment in intangible capital grows the fastest.6

     The fourth regularity that we include in our analysis is the secular decline in the aggregate
labor share of GDP in the United States (Fact 4; see Karabarbounis and Neiman, 2013; Elsby et al.,
2013; and Lawrence, 2015). The literature has proposed a variety of explanations for this decline,
including increased offshoring or foreign sourcing of inputs (Elsby et al., 2013, and Boehm et
al., 2017); a fall in corporate tax rates (Kaymak and Schott, 2018); a slowdown in population
growth (Hopenhayn et al., 2018); a slowdown in productivity growth (Grossman et al., 2017);
higher prevalence of robots in production and replacement of production workers by automated
machinery (Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2017); and declining competition due to increased market
concentration (Barkai, 2017). Autor et al. (2017b) also consider higher market concentration as
a driver of declining labor share but relate it to the emergence of winner-take-all dynamics in
many industries with a rise of “superstar” firms.7 They highlight the positive industry–level
relationship between the rise in concentration and the fall of labor share, another regularity
we consider in this paper (Fact 5). In a recent study, Aghion et al. (2019) also focus on this
relationship in an endogenous growth model à la Klette and Kortum (2004), extending the model
to zero in on the relocation of activity between incumbent firms (abstracting from firm entry)
across balanced growth paths.8

     We also consider some facts that suggest a decline in business dynamism. First, the produc-
tivity dispersion has increased in the United States, as shown by Decker et al. (2018). Similarly,
Andrews et al. (2015, 2016) establish that, across the OECD economies, the gap between the av-
    4 We discuss the effects of declining interest rates further in Section 8.1.
    5 While  most of these papers analyze industries at the national level, Rossi-Hansberg et al. (2018) find that, for
several industries, the increase in market concentration at the national level coincides with a decline in concentration
at the local level, raising the question of the “relevant” market. Some policymakers bring forward similar critiques
based on the definition of relevant markets (see OECD, 2018b, by the U.S. delegation and OECD, 2018a).
    6 Gutiérrez and Philippon (2019) also note that the two explanations—rising market power and decreasing com-

petition versus the rise of more efficient “superstar” firms—do not necessarily describe mutually exclusive stories in
that leaders can become more efficient while using this advantage to also become “more entrenched.”
    7 Diez et al. (2018) also find support for the superstar-firm argument in an international comparison using multi-

country firm-level data. However, recent work by Gutiérrez and Philippon (2019) argues that the superstar firms have
been losing their share in economic activity in the United States, especially in the post-2000 period.
    8 Using a similar setting, De Ridder (2019) shows that the effect of an increase in firms’ efficiency of technology

adoption can depress aggregate innovation in a balanced growth path while increasing market power of firms.


                                                           6
                         What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


erage productivity levels of frontier firms (top 5 percent of firms with the highest productivity)
and the laggard ones has been widening, suggesting the rise of “best versus the rest” dynamics,
a relationship captured by the market structure of our theoretical model (Fact 6). Second, there
has been a secular decline in firm (and establishment) entry rates in the United States in the past
several decades (Fact 7; see Decker et al., 2016b; Gourio et al., 2014; and Karahan et al., 2016).
Likewise, the employment share of young firms has also been declining steadily (Fact 8; see
Decker et al., 2016b, and Furman and Orszag, 2018), which is particularly worrying given the dis-
proportionate contribution of high-growth young firms to job creation (Bravo-Biosca et al., 2013,
and Haltiwanger et al., 2013). Decker et al. (2016a) also provide two additional regularities—
namely, the decline in the gross job reallocation rate (Fact 9) and the fall in the dispersion of firm
growth rates (Fact 10). The authors claim that these observations are driven by the shrinking
contribution of high-growth young firms to economic activity, which in turn they attribute to the
declining responsiveness of firms to idiosyncratic productivity shocks. Pugsley et al. (2018) ar-
gue that the fall in rapid-growth young firms (gazelles) is due to a structural shift in the ex-ante
heterogeneity of firms in the United States, with a decline in the prevalence of high-potential
firms. Emphasizing the effects of the Great Recession, Davis and Haltiwanger (2019) highlight
the role of housing market cycles and credit conditions in the decline of young firm activity.

    Our investigation finds that a decline in knowledge diffusion explains the large set of trends
in the data. The widening productivity gap between frontier and laggard firms, as illustrated by
Andrews et al. (2016), may be indicative of a distortion in the flow of knowledge between these
firms. The authors stress that digitalization and the increasing reliance of production processes
on tacit knowledge may disproportionately benefit frontier firms in ways that cannot be easily
incorporated by laggard firms. Thus, the changing nature of technologies and the increasing
importance of tacit knowledge in the form of big and proprietary data could limit spillovers from
frontier to laggard firms. For instance, data-dependent production processes could generate data-
network effects—more data helps an incumbent firm serve customers better, thus attracting more
customers, which in turn generates more data that improve services, which in turn entices more
customers—that put large and established firms that produce large databases in an advantageous
position (The Economist, 2017). Indeed, Calligaris et al. (2018) find that markup differences
between frontier and laggard firms are the highest in digitally-intensive sectors. These dynamics
resonate also with the findings of Grullon et al. (2017) that U.S. firms in the most concentrated
industries hold the largest and relatively more valuable patent portfolios.

    Regulations are another factor that could hamper technology diffusion between frontier and
laggard firms. In this regard, anticompetitive effects of weak antitrust laws and enforcement have
been raised as a concern (Grullon et al., 2017). Indeed, a strand in the law literature emphasizes
the paradigm shift in the application of antitrust laws in a direction that underlines product
market efficiency rather than size-based concentration in the interpretation of laws (Baker, 2012;
Khan, 2016; Lynn, 2010). Lower antitrust enforcement and increased consolidation could harm
the competitive dynamics of the market. For instance, Cunningham et al. (2018) underscore the


                                                  7
                          What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


“killer acquisitions” in the pharmaceutical industry, preemptive mergers to buy out a potential
future competitor. Such consolidation may cause large firms to focus on defending their stakes
rather than investing in productive activity, limiting the potential flow of knowledge to follower
firms and its productive use by them. Bessen (2016) observes that rent-seeking and lobbying
activity have gained traction in the United States in the post-2000 period. These arguments
resonate with the findings of Andrews et al. (2016), who claim that the lack of pro-competitive
product market reforms has contributed to the widening productivity gap between frontier and
laggard firms across the OECD countries.

    To sum up briefly, our study takes a holistic approach to account for all of the empirical
trends mentioned in this section. We analyze shifts in market power and business dynamics
jointly as endogenous market outcomes through the lens of a structural model instead of taking
them as “market primitives” as criticized by Syverson (2019). Moreover, our quantitative analy-
sis, carefully accounting for transitional dynamics, evaluates the strength of potential channels
that could have contributed to the observed changes and underscores the dominant role played
by the knowledge diffusion margin. Finally, we advance the debate on market concentration
and business dynamism by presenting new evidence from patent data that highlights changing
concentration patterns.



3   Model

This section presents a closed-economy endogenous growth model of strategic interaction and
innovation in which firms compete over the ownership of intermediate-good production. The
economy is composed of a continuum of intermediate goods that are inputs in the production
of the final good, which is in turn consumed by the representative households. In each interme-
diate product line, two active incumbent firms engage in Bertrand price competition to obtain a
monopoly of production. Intermediate firms produce using labor and are heterogeneous in their
productivity and thus in the marginal cost of production. Firms invest in cost-saving innovative
activity to improve their productivity in the spirit of step-by-step models, which allows for het-
erogeneous technological gaps between competitors. An appealing feature of the model is that,
combined with optimal limit pricing that stems from Bertrand competition, different relative pro-
ductivity levels generate a distribution over heterogeneous markup levels. In addition, there is
an outside pool of entrants that engage in research activity to enter the market by replacing the
technological follower in a particular line.

    Among several channels that affect firm incentives in our model, we include a probability of
exogenous technology spillovers that, once realized, allow a technological laggard firm to close
the gap with the frontier. This channel governs the knowledge diffusion between the techno-
logical frontier and the follower, one of the main channels that we consider in our quantitative
investigation as potential drivers of the declining business dynamism in the United States. In the


                                                8
                                                                                   What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


                                       model, the implications of these potential factors hinge on their effect on the distribution of firms
                                       across relative technology levels and the resulting transitional dynamics, whose law of motions
                                       we describe in this section.

                                               Before the details of the model are provided, a discussion of the empirical evidence that
                                       guides our modeling choice is in order. The top panels of Figure 1 show that the dispersion
                                       of productivity levels is rising, with Panel 1a illustrating the widening of productivity between
                                       frontier and laggard firms across OECD countries, while Panel 1b makes a similar case for the
                                       U.S. manufacturing industry. Perhaps puzzlingly, however, the dispersion of firm growth rates
                                       has been declining simultaneously, as shown in Panel 1c. The theoretical model we build here
                                       reflects this relationship through the endogenous strategic behavior of firms in response to their




                                                                                                                                                                                      .94
                .3
Normalized Average Productivity




                                                                                                                                                                                                  .9
                                                                                                                                                                          Productivity Dispersion
                    .2




                                                                                                                                                                                    .86
        .1




                                                                                                                                                                       .82
                0




                                    2002          2004            2006             2008            2010                         2012
                                                                                                                                                                                      .78




                                                                           Year
                                                                                                                                                                                                       1996                       2001                      2006                       2011
                                                          Frontier Firms                  Laggard Firms                                                                                                                                          year


                                           a) Productivity gap between frontier and laggard firms                                                                                                                    b) Labor productivity dispersion
                .55




                                                                                                                                                             .7




                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                   Standard Deviation of Establishment Growth




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             −0.04
Standard Deviation of Firm Growth




                                                                                                                                                  .65




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   −0.09        −0.09                −0.09
                                                                                                                                                                        −.1
                        .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −0.12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −0.13
                                                                                                                                       .6




                                                                                                                                                                        −.2
       .45




                                                                                                                           .55




                                                                                                                                                                                                       −0.27
                                                                                                                                                                        −.3
                .4




                                                                                                                 .5




                                    1980                 1990                     2000                    2010
                                                                                                                                                                        −.4




                                                                     Year

                                                          Firms                   Establishments                                                                                    Finance                    Services     Utils&Transport Manufacturing   Retail      Wholesale        All



                                                         c) Dispersion of firm growth                                                                                 d) Correlation between changes in concentration and labor share

                                                                              Figure 1: Empirical Trends That Inform the Theory
                                       Notes: Panel 1a is taken from Andrews et al. (2016), Panel 1b from Decker et al. (2018), Panel 1c from Decker et al. (2016b), and
                                       Panel 1d from Autor et al. (2017b).



                                                                                                                                                                  9
                         What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


technological position relative to their competitors. A widening of the gap (higher productivity
dispersion) results in lower innovation incentives (and a declining growth dispersion) through
two channels: (i) a discouragement effect on the follower that falls further behind and (ii) a
diminishing escape competition effect on the leader as it opens the technology gap. Moreover,
Panel 1d suggests a negative correlation between concentration and labor share at the industry
level. Our theoretical model reflects this relationship through the shift of production to more
productive frontier firms as the technology gap between them and the laggards opens up. In
sum, the endogenous competition structure of our framework helps us speak to salient features
of changing business dynamism in the United States. Now we present the model details.


3.1     Preferences

We consider the following continuous-time economy. In this environment, there is a representa-
tive consumer that derives logarithmic utility from consumption:
                                       Z ∞
                                Ut =         exp (−ρ (s − t)) ln Cs ds,
                                        t

where Ct represents consumption at time t and ρ > 0 is the discount rate. The budget constraint
of the representative consumer reads as

                                   Ct + Ȧt = wt Lt + rt At + Gt ,

where Lt denotes labor (supplied inelastically), At denotes total assets, and Gt denotes lump-
sum taxes levied or transfers distributed by the government. We normalize labor supply such
that Lt = 1. The relevant prices are the interest rate rt , the wage rate wt , and the price of the
consumption good Pt , which we take to be the numeraire. Because households own the firms in
the economy, the asset market clearing condition implies that the total assets At equal the sum
of firm values (denoted by Vf t ), i.e., At = F Vf t d f with F denoting the set of firms.
                                             R



3.2     Technology and Market Structure

3.2.1    Final Good

The final good, which is used for consumption, is produced in perfectly competitive markets
according to the following production technology:

                                                      Z 1
                                            ln Yt =         ln y jt dj,                         (1)
                                                       0

where y jt denotes the amount of intermediate variety j ∈ [0, 1] used at time t. Each variety is
produced by a monopolist, which we describe next.


                                                      10
                               What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


3.2.2   Intermediate Goods and Innovation

Incumbents.         In each product line j, two incumbent firms i = {1, 2} produce two perfectly
substitutable varieties of intermediate good j according to a linear production technology:

                                                    yijt = qijt lijt ,

where lijt denotes the labor employed and qijt is the associated labor productivity of firm i. The
total industry output is given by y jt = yijt + y−ijt , where −i denotes the competitor of firm i
with −i = {1, 2} and −i 6= i. The intermediate-good firms compete for market leadership à
la Bertrand. As a result, the firm that has a higher labor productivity obtains a cost advantage
and therefore captures the whole market to supply the intermediate good j. We call a firm i the
market leader (follower) in j if qij > q−ij (qij < q−ij ). Firms are neck-and-neck if qij = q−ij . We
normalize initial productivity levels to unity such that qij0 = 1.

    Firms’ productivity evolves through successive innovations. When a leader innovates be-
tween t and t + ∆t, its productivity level improves proportionally by a factor λ > 1 such that
qij(t+∆t) = λqijt . By contrast, an innovation by a follower may be an incremental or drastic one.
With probability (1 − φ), the follower’s innovation improves its productivity proportionally by
λ, as in the case of leader innovation—a process called slow catch-up (see Acemoglu and Akcigit,
2012). With probability φ, a follower can incidentally come up with an innovation that brings
about a drastic improvement in productivity, allowing the follower to close the gap with the
leader—a process called quick catch-up.

    Another source of quick catch-up is the flow of knowledge between competitors. In par-
ticular, we assume that quick catch-up can also occur at an exogenous Poisson flow rate δ. In
this case, the follower can replicate the frontier technology and catch up with the leader. In a
sense, this exogenous catch-up probability reflects the degree to which followers can learn from
the technology frontier, capturing, in essence, spillovers from the “best” to “rest” of the firms.
Therefore, we label δ as the “knowledge diffusion” parameter.

    In each product line, the leader and the follower are separated by a certain number of tech-
nology gaps, which reflect the difference between the total number of technology rungs these
firms’ productivities build on. Specifically, suppose that, in line j, firm i’s productivity level
reflects nijt past improvements. Then the relative productivity level is given by

                                         qijt   λnijt
                                              = n−ijt = λnijt −n−ijt ≡ λmijt ,
                                        q−ijt  λ

where mijt ∈ N defines the technology gap between firm i and the competitor −i. We assume that
there is a large but exogenously given upper limit in the technology gap, denoted by m̄.9 As will
be clear, mijt is a sufficient statistic to describe firm-specific payoffs independent of the product
   9 This   innocuous assumption renders the state space finite and enables the computation of the equilibrium.


                                                           11
                             What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


line j. Therefore, we will drop industry subscript j whenever mit ∈ {−m̄, ..., 0, ..., m̄} refers to a
firm-specific value. Accordingly, when we say the leader is m-steps ahead or, reciprocally, the
follower is m-steps behind, we mean that the follower needs to improve its productivity m steps
more than the leader to become neck-and-neck. Lastly, we will use the notation m jt ∈ {0, ..., m̄}
to denote the technology gap between competitors in sector j. We call sectors with positive gaps
(m jt > 0) “unleveled” and sectors with no gap (m jt = 0) neck-and-neck or “leveled.”

     Firms invest in R&D to obtain or retain market leadership by improving their productivity.
To conduct R&D, firms hire labor. When a firm employs hijt R&D workers, it generates an
innovation with the arrival rate of xijt . Let Rijt denote the R&D expenditures of firm i in product
line j at time t. We consider a convex cost of generating the arrival rate xijt in the form of

                                                                 γ
                                                               xijt
                                                  Rijt = α             wt ,
                                                                γ

where γ is the (inverse) elasticity of R&D with respect to R&D workers and wt denotes the
wage rate that prevails in the economy. As a result, the R&D production function is given by
              γ1
        h
      
xijt = γ αijt .


Entrants.    Every period, a new entrepreneur in each product line invests in R&D to enter the
business. If the entrepreneur generates a successful innovation, it replaces the follower in the
product line (or one of the two incumbents with the same probability if it enters a neck-and-neck
line).10 If the innovation attempt fails, the entrant disappears.

     Similar to the follower innovation, an entrant innovation may be drastic, with probability φ̃,
allowing it to catch up with the frontier technology.11 With probability (1 − φ̃), the innovation
is incremental, improving on the productivity level of the existing follower proportionally with
step size λ. If the entrant hires h̃ijt R&D workers, it generates an innovation arrival rate x̃ijt , and
the expenditures on R&D investment are given by

                                                                 γ̃
                                                               x̃ijt
                                                  R̃ijt = α̃           wt .
                                                                γ̃

     In Figure 2, we demonstrate how leadership positions in intermediate product lines evolve
as a result of incumbent and entrant innovations.

     The left panel has five product lines with heterogeneous technology gaps. Notice that in
line 1, firms are in a neck-and-neck position. The right panel shows the changes in leadership.
Line 5 illustrates the two cases associated with a follower innovation: an incremental produc-

  10 The process of entrants replacing the follower or neck-and-neck firms reflects the data where entrants enter the

market small and never as large conglomerates.
  11 In the remainder of the discussion, a “ ˜ ” sign will refer to values that pertain to an entrant.



                                                         12
                                                What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


quality, q                                                                     quality, q
                                                    Leader
                                                    Follower                             entrants
                                                    Neck&neck
                                                                                                          φ̃x̃



                                                                                            (1 − φ̃) x̃                      xi                         φx−i
                                                                                                                                           δ
                                                                                                                                                                     (1 − φ ) x−i




                                                                                                             exit
                                                                              product                                                                                      product
             line 1       line 2       line 3       line 4        line 5       line, j         line 1               line 2        line 3       line 4          line 5       line, j

                           a) Product lines                                                                         b) Entry, exit, and leadership

                                                      Figure 2: Evolution of product lines
             Notes: Panel A exhibits the positions of competing incumbent firms with heterogeneous quality gaps in a set of product lines. Panel
             B illustrates the effects of innovation by incumbents and entrants as well as knowledge diffusion and the resulting dynamics of
             entry, exit, and technological leadership. Empty squares or circles denote the previous position of firms that innovate or exit.


             tivity increase and a drastic one that takes the follower to the neck-and-neck level. Similarly,
             an entrant can have an incremental or drastic innovation, as shown in line 2, and the entrant
             drives the previous follower (or one of the neck-and-neck firms if entry is to a leveled sector) out
             of business. Line 4 illustrates the effect of knowledge diffusion, which enables the follower to
             close the technology gap. Finally, as shown in line 3, leaders can also innovate and improve their
             technology lead.


             3.3      Equilibrium

             In this section, we characterize the dynamic general equilibrium of the model, where a key ele-
             ment of equilibrium strategies is the payoff-relevant state variable mit . We start with the descrip-
             tion of the static equilibrium and then introduce the details of firm value functions, innovation
             decisions, and the resulting aggregate dynamics.


             Households.           Optimal household decisions determine the equilibrium interest rate of the econ-
             omy. The Euler equation implies
                                                                      rt = gt + ρ,                                                                             (2)

             where gt is the growth rate of output.




                                                                            13
                             What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


Final- and Intermediate- Good Production. The optimization of the representative final-good
producer generates the following demand schedule for the intermediate good j ∈ [0, 1]:

                                                                Yt
                                                    yijt =           ,                                         (3)
                                                                pijt

where pijt is the price of intermediate good j that the monopolist producer i charges. The unit-
elastic demand schedule implies that the final-good producer spends an equal amount Yt on each
intermediate good j.

       Given the linear production function, an intermediate producer’s marginal cost becomes

                                                                 wt
                                                    mcit =           ,                                         (4)
                                                                 qit

which increases in the wage rate and decreases in the firm’s labor productivity.12 Moreover,
Bertrand competition leads to limit pricing such that the intermediate producer sets its price to
the marginal cost of its competitor:
                                                              wt
                                                    pit =         .                                            (5)
                                                             q−it
Then the optimal equilibrium quantities of the intermediate varieties produced are given as

                                                   q−it
                                               
                                               
                                                    ωt     if      qit > q−it
                                       yit =                                    ,                              (6)
                                                0         if      qit < q−it

where ωt ≡ wt /Yt denotes the normalized wage level. We assume that in neck-and-neck sectors,
i.e., when qit = q−it , the production is assigned randomly to both firms. The optimal production
employment of the intermediate producer follows as

                                               yit      1
                                       lit =       =         for mit ≥ 0.                                      (7)
                                               qit   ωt λmit

       The operating profits of the intermediate-good producer exclusive of R&D expenditures
becomes
                                                                   1
                                                                        
                         π (mit ) = ( pit − mcit ) yit =        1− m         Yt for mit ≥ 0,                   (8)
                                                                  λ it
and π (mit ) = 0 otherwise. Similarly, the price–cost markup reads as

                                               pit
                               mk (mit ) =          − 1 = λmit − 1 for mit ≥ 0,                                (9)
                                               mcit

and mk (mit ) = 0 otherwise. Notice that markups, and thus profits, are positive only for market
leaders and depend on the technological difference between the leader and the follower. As such,

  12 We dropped the subscript j for brevity and will do so in the remainder fo the discussion unless it would cause
confusion.


                                                          14
                               What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


this structure provides a useful ground to analyze the markup dynamics in the economy, which
are determined by the distribution of industries across heterogeneous gap differences, which in
turn evolve based on firms’ endogenous innovation decisions.


3.3.1     Firm Values and Innovation

Incumbents.        We denote the stock market value of an incumbent firm in the payoff-relevant
state mit at time t by Vmt (dropping the subscripts on m for simplicity). Then the value function
of a leader that is m-steps ahead is given by
                                                                                γ
                                                1                               x
                                                         
            rt Vmt − V̇mt   = max (1 − τt ) 1 − m               Yt − (1 − st ) α mt wt + xmt [Vm+1t − Vmt ]
                              xmt              λ                                 γ
                                 + (φx−mt + φ̃ x̃−mt + δ) [V0t − Vmt ]
                                  + ((1 − φ) x−mt + (1 − φ̃) x̃−mt ) [Vm−1t − Vmt ]} .                         (10)

The first term on the right-hand side of the expression captures the operating profits, taxed at
the corporate income tax rate τt . The second term in the first line is the expenditures on R&D,
which is subsidized by the government at rate st . The last term captures the improvement in a
leader’s position as a result of successful innovation.13 As reflected in the second line, if there
is a drastic innovation by the follower (with probability φ) or by an entrant (with probability φ̃),
or if knowledge diffuses at rate δ, the leader finds itself in a neck-and-neck position. Finally, the
last line of the expression captures the case of nondrastic innovation by competitors (with 1 − φ
or 1 − φ̃), in which the position of the leader deteriorates by one step.

        Similarly, the value of an m-step follower is defined as

                                                                γ
                                          (
                                                               x−mt
               rt V−mt − V̇−mt = max          − (1 − s t ) α        wt + (1 − φ) x−mt [V−m+1t − V−mt ]
                                   x−mt                         γ
                                          + (φx−mt + δ) [V0t − V−mt ]
                                          + xmt [V−m−1t − V−mt ] + x̃−mt [0 − V−mt ]} .                        (11)

Notice that the follower does not produce and, therefore, does not generate any profits. Nev-
ertheless, forward-looking followers invest in R&D with the prospect of taking over the leader
through successive innovations and reaping potential profits. Moreover, a drastic innovation and
the exogenous catch-up shock can bring them directly to the frontier. When there is successful
entry to the product line, the follower exits the market, receiving a continuation value of zero.




   13When the m̄-step leader innovates, the gap does not increase because of the imposition of an upper limit on the
potential size of gaps. As a result, an m̄-step leader optimally chooses not to invest in R&D.


                                                               15
                                   What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


Finally, the value of a neck-and-neck incumbent is given by14
                                    γ
                                   x0t                                          1
                                                                                               
  rt V0t − V̇0t = max − (1 − st ) α wt + x0t [V1t − V0t ] + x−0t [V−1t − V0t ] + x̃0t [0 − V0t ] , (12)
                   x0t              γ                                           2

where x−0 denotes the innovation rate of the competitor. In equilibrium, both neck-and-neck
firms innovate at the same rate, i.e., x0 = x−0 .

     Before we compute optimal innovation efforts, the next lemma defines the normalized firm
values.

Lemma 1 Define the normalized value vmt such that Vmt = vmt Yt . Then, for m > 0, vmt is given by
                                                                                             γ
                                              1                                             xmt
                                                                  
            ρvmt − v̇mt   = max (1 − τt ) 1 − m                         Yt − (1 − st ) α        wt + xmt [vm+1t − vmt ]
                            xmt              λ                                               γ
                                      + (φx−mt + φ̃ x̃−mt + δ) [v0t − vmt ]
                                       + ((1 − φ) x−mt + (1 − φ̃) x̃−mt ) [vm−1t − vmt ]} .

Normalized values for m ≤ 0 are defined reciprocally.

     Proof. These normalized values follow directly from using the definition Vmt = vmt Yt and
substituting households’ Euler condition given in equation (2).

     The first order conditions of the problems defined earlier yield the following optimal inno-
vation decisions:
                                              h                                  i γ−1 1
                                                        1
                               
                               
                                                  αωt (1−st )   (vm+1t − vmt )                        if m ≥ 0
                    xmt =                                                                                         .       (13)
                                 h                                                           i γ−1 1
                                           1
                               
                                                    {(1 − φ) vm+1t + φv0t − vmt }                      if m < 0
                               
                               
                                      αωt (1−st )



Entrants.      Recall that entry is directed at particular product lines, and a successful entrant re-
places the follower (or one of the incumbents with an equal probability if entry is to a line in a
neck-and-neck state). The problem of an entrant that aims for a product line with an m-step gap
is given as
                                              γ̃
                                      (                                                                   )
                                             x̃
                          max             −α̃ −mt wt + x̃−mt [(1 − φ̃) V−m+1t + φ̃V0t − 0]                    ,           (14)
                              x̃−mt             γ̃

where m > 0.15 The resulting optimal innovation decisions of entrants are specified as follows:

   14 Notice that, when there is successful entry, the neck-and-neck incumbent exits with a 1/2 probability because, by
assumption, the entrant randomly replaces one of the two incumbents with the same technology.
   15 The problem of an entrant aiming for a line in a neck-and-neck state is defined similarly, except that any innova-

tion by the entrant improves on the follower only by one step:
                                                         γ̃
                                                 (                        )
                                                      x̃
                                           max −α̃ −mt wt + x̃0t [V1t − 0] .
                                            x̃0t          γ̃


                                                                     16
                              What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


                                 h                                            i γ̃−1 1
                                              −1
                                
                                
                                   ( α̃ω t )    {( 1 − φ̃ ) v m+1t + φ̃v 0t }                         if m < 0
                       x̃mt =                                                                                     .       (15)
                                                                              i γ̃−1 1
                                                                   −1
                                                    h
                                                         (α̃ωt )        v1t                            if m = 0
                                
                                


     We close the R model by specifying aggregate wage and output. To this end, we first de-
                     1
fine Qt ≡ exp 0 ln q jt dj as the aggregate productivity index of the economy and µmt ≡
R1 
    I | log qijt /q−ijt | = m dj as the measure of product lines, where the technological gap be-
                       
  0
tween the leader and follower is m steps (I {·} denotes the identity function). Then the final-good
production function in equation (1) yields the wage rate as a function of Qt and µmt :

                                                                               m̄
                                                     wt = Qt λ− ∑k=0 kµkt .                                               (16)

Notice that higher markups suppress the aggregate wage level.

     The labor market clearing condition holds at all times, i.e.,
                                           Z 1
                                      1=          lijt + l−ijt + hijt + h−ijt + h̃ jt dj,                                 (17)
                                                                                     
                                            0

and implies the following normalized wage ωt :

                                m̄
                                                !"
                                                             m̄                                             # −1
                                                                              α γ           α̃ γ̃
                                ∑ µkt λ−k                   ∑ µkt
                                                                                       γ 
                     ωt =                            1−                         xkt + x−kt + x̃−kt                    .   (18)
                              k =0                          k =0
                                                                              γ             γ̃

The last expression uses the optimal R&D labor demand schedules

                                                         α γ                                  α̃ γ̃
                                           hijt =         x         and             h̃ jt =     x̃ .                      (19)
                                                         γ ijt                                γ̃ jt

     Combining equations (16) and (18) gives the level of final output:

                                                                         m̄
                                                  Yt = Qt λ− ∑k=0 kµkt ω −1 .                                             (20)

Notice that the final output depends positively on the productivity index and negatively on
average markups. It is also inversely related to the labor share, which, in a static sense, depends
negatively on the average technology gaps—i.e., a shift in the technology gap distribution to
larger gaps decreases the labor share statically (see equation 18). In addition, the difference
between the government’s corporate tax income and subsidy expenditure is given by

                                     m̄                                    
                                                                 α γ   α γ
                         Gt =    ∑ kt t
                                      µ  τ  1 − λ −k
                                                       Yt − s t    x  +  x
                                                                  γ kt γ −kt
                                                                              wt ,                                        (21)
                                 k =0

Because there is no notion of a technology leader in a neck-and-neck state, there is no drastic entrant innovation that
allows it to catch up with the technology frontier.


                                                                    17
                                     What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


which is distributed back to (collected from) the households in a lump sum when Gt > 0 (Gt < 0).
The aggregate R&D expenditure is specified as
                                                                Z 1
                                                  R t = wt             hijt + h−ijt + h̃ jt dj.                                              (22)
                                                                                           
                                                                  0


     Finally, we define the evolution of aggregate productivity and the gap size distribution,
which jointly determine the dynamics of the model. The transition path of Qt is determined by
innovations of incumbent firms and entrants that enter neck-and-neck industries, which improve
the productivity of workers employed in intermediate-good production:

                                                                                               m̄
                                                              "                                              #
                       ln Qt+∆t − ln Qt = ln λ µ0t (2x0t + x̃0t ) +                           ∑ µkt xkt          ∆t + o (∆t) ,               (23)
                                                                                              k =1


which also defines the aggregate growth rate in the balanced growth path (BGP). Here, o (∆t)
represents second-order terms, which captures the probability of two or more innovations within
the interval ∆t.16 The transition of µmt for m̄ > m > 1 is as follows:

                  µmt+∆t − µmt
                               =+ xm−1t µm−1t + ((1 − φ) x−m−1t + (1 − φ̃) x̃−m−1t ) µm+1t
                      ∆t
                                − ( xmt + x−mt + x̃−mt + δ) µmt + o (∆t) /∆t.                                                                (24)

Briefly, the first term on the right-hand side represents the additions to the measure due to
innovations of leaders at m − 1. The second term sums the additions of incumbents that were
previously at m + 1 and deteriorated because of incremental innovations by the follower or a
new entrant. Finally, the measure of industries at position m shrinks when there is an innovation
by incumbents or entrants in those industries or when an exogenous catch-up shock hits, as
captured in the second line. For brevity, we leave the expressions for special cases of µmt with
m = 0, m = 1, and m = m̄ to Appendix B.1.

Definition 1 (Equilibrium) A dynamic general equilibrium in this economy is an allocation

                                                                                                                                 t∈[0,∞)
                {rt , wt , p jt , y jt , x jt , x̃ jt , h jt , h̃ jt , l jt , Rt , Lt , Yt , Ct , Gt , Qt , {µmt }m∈{−m̄,...,m̄} } j∈[0,1]

such that (i) the sequence of prices and quantities { p jt , y jt } satisfies equations (3)–(5) and maximize the
operating profits of the incumbent firm in the intermediate-good product line j; (ii) the R&D decisions
  x jt , x̃ jt are defined in equations (13) and (15), and the aggregate R&D expenditure Rt is specified in


equation (22); (iii) the supply of labor L = 1 is equal to the sum of intermediate-good producers’ profit-
maximizing production worker demand (given in equation 7) and optimal R&D worker demand (given
in equation 19), as in equation (17); (iv) Yt is as given in equation (20), and Ct = Yt ; (v) aggregate
wage wt clears the labor markets at every t; (vi) interest rate rt satisfies the households’ Euler equation;
(vii) the government’s tax collection and subsidy expenditure balance obtains Gt in equation (21), and the
  16 The   term satisfies lim∆t→0 o (∆t) /∆t = 0.


                                                                           18
                          What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


government holds a balanced budget at all times once the lump-sum transfers to or taxes from households
are accounted for; and (viii) Qt and {µmt }m∈{−m̄,...,m̄} evolve as specified in equations (23) and (24)
consistent with optimal R&D decisions.

      In our quantitative exploration, we will analyze the implications of four main channels: a
decline in corporate tax rates (τ), an increase in R&D subsidy rates (s), an increase in entry costs
(α̃), and a decline in knowledge diffusion (δ). In the past several decades, the U.S. business
environment has witnessed significant shifts in all of these margins. There has been a decline in
the effective corporate tax rate, especially after 2000; federal R&D tax credits were introduced for
the first time in 1981; and a web of regulations that are potentially more cumbersome for business
entry has rapidly expanded, which we describe in more detail in Appendix A. Moreover, a heavy
use of intellectual property protection and a concentration of patenting in the hands of top firms,
patterns that we discuss in light of novel empirical evidence in Section 9, likely distorted the
flow of knowledge between frontier and follower firms. What is common to these mechanisms is
that they can affect firm incentives and the nature of competition in asymmetric ways that favor
frontier firms, leading to higher concentration and declining business dynamism eventually. In
the following quantitative analysis, we use our structural model to identify and quantify the
effects of these likely culprits behind declining business dynamism.



4     Calibration of the Initial Balanced Growth Path

Our ultimate aim in this paper is to quantify the relative importance of some key potential
drivers of declining U.S. business dynamism. In particular, as noted previously, we focus on four
channels: a decline in corporate income tax rates, an increase in R&D subsidies, an increase in
entry costs, and a decline in knowledge diffusion. In our main exercise, we will assume that the
model starts from a BGP in 1980 and then replicate the transitional dynamics of the U.S. economy
in the post-1980 period to back up the relative variation in each of these margins. Therefore, we
will first describe how we determine the initial BGP of the economy, which reflects the average
long-term conditions of the U.S. economy in the pre-1980s period. Before doing so, we first
introduce the analytical expressions for the model counterparts of the empirical variables on
which we focus in our quantitative analysis.


4.1    Model Counterparts of Empirical Variables of Interest

Entry Rate. The firm entry rate is determined by the distribution of sectors across technology
gaps and the intensity of entrant innovation aimed at those sectors:

                                                       1 m̄
                                                       2 k∑
                                      entry ratet =          µkt x̃kt ,                            (25)
                                                          =0



                                                  19
                         What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


where the division by 2 reflects the fact that there are two firms operating in each line.


Labor Share.     Labor share of GDP is given by

                                                              wt L
                                         labor sharet =            = ωt .
                                                              Yt


Markups.    Average markup level is defined by

                                                    m̄             
                                    markupt =       ∑     µkt λk − 1 .                            (26)
                                                   k =0



Profit Share.   Profit share of GDP is given by

                                          pro f it sharet = 1 − ωt .                              (27)


Concentration.    Average sales concentration measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index
(HHI) is determined by the share of leveled sectors, where sales are equalized because of Bertrand
competition, and the share of unleveled sectors, where the leaders are the sole supplier, i.e.,

                  hhit = (1 − µ0t ) × [(100%)2 + (0%)2 ] + µ0t × [(50%)2 + (50%)2 ]
                      = 0.5 + 0.5µ0t .                                                            (28)


Productivity Gap. The productivity gap between frontier and laggard firms is defined as
the difference between the average (log) productivity across leaders and followers. Precisely,
define the average productivity across leader firms with an m-step advantage as ln Qmt =
      ∑2 (ln qijt )I{qijt > q−ijt }dj and the corresponding measure for the followers as ln Q−mt =
R
Rµmt 2i=1
  µmt ∑i =1
            (ln qijt )I{qijt < q−ijt }dj. Then the economy-wide productivity gap becomes
                                                         m̄
                             productivity gapt =       ∑ (ln Qmt − ln Q−mt )
                                                       k =1
                                                         m̄
                                                   =   ∑ µkt ln λk .                              (29)
                                                       k =1



Other Variables. The other three variables—employment share of young firms, gross job re-
allocation, and cross-sectional dispersion of firm growth—cannot be summarized in analytic
expressions. We calculate the employment share of young firms by simulation. We compute the
gross job reallocation rate including entrant and exiting firms and accounting for both produc-
tion and R&D workers. We follow Decker et al. (2014) in defining job creation and destruction
rates, which in turn are based on the firm-level employment-growth measure proposed by Davis


                                                       20
                            What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


et al. (1996), a metric that takes a value between [−2, 2]. We compute the standard deviation of
firm growth based on the same formula.


4.2    Data and Identification

The calibrated balanced growth path of our model reflects the state of the U.S. economy be-
fore the early 1980s.      Eleven structural parameters define this balanced growth path: θ ≡
{ρ, τ, s, λ, α, α̃, γ, γ̃, φ, φ̃, δ}. We set five of these externally. On the household side, we take the
time discount parameter ρ = 5%. In combination with the calibrated growth rate of our economy,
this rate results in a long-run interest rate of about 6.5%, a reasonable value for the United States
(see Cooley and Prescott, 1995). On the firm side, we set the curvature parameter of the R&D
production function for incumbents to γ = 1/0.35, in line with previous work in the literature
(Kortum, 1993; Acemoglu and Akcigit, 2012; Acemoglu et al., 2016). We also assume that the
entrants’ R&D production function has the same curvature value, i.e., γ̃ = γ. Finally, we set the
corporate income tax to τ = 30%, mimicking the effective rate in the United States before the
1980s, and the R&D subsidy rate to s = 5%, using the pre-1981 estimate in Akcigit et al. (2018).
The policy parameters are constant along the BGP.

      We calibrate the rest of the parameters {λ, α, α̃, φ, φ̃, δ} to a set of six data targets that are
informative about the key features of the model. The first target we include is the average an-
nual (utilization-adjusted) total factor productivity (TFP) growth rate obtained from the Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco’s (FRBSF) database (see Fernald, 2012), which helps us discipline
the step size λ. To capture the long-run trend, we compute the average over two decades, a
period that runs from the early years of the available National Science Foundation data for R&D
spending until 1980, which yields our second target. We include the average annual ratio of
aggregate R&D spending to GDP to obtain information on the R&D cost scale parameter α. To
put discipline on the scale parameter of entrants’ R&D cost function α̃, we use the average firm
entry rate in the United States, for which the data are available from the U.S. Census Bureau’s
Business Dynamics Statistics starting only from 1978. The fourth target we include is the aver-
age markup, calculated based on De Loecker and Eeckhout (2017) and Eggertsson et al. (2018),
which informs the calibration about the exogenous probability of catch-up δ.17 Notice that in our
model economy, average markup depends on the basic step size λ and the distribution of firms
across gaps. Therefore, given λ, the average markup is informative about the shape of the gap
distribution, which in turn is closely related to δ because it determines the rate with which prod-
uct lines switch to the neck-and-neck state. Similarly, we also target the aggregate profit share
in the economy, the increase in which will be of interest when we calibrate the transition path
of the model. The measure we use for this target is the ratio of before-tax profits (adjusted for
inventory valuation and capital consumption) of domestic U.S. corporations to the gross value

  17 Because these two recent and prominent studies obtain markedly different estimates for average markup in the
United States, we take the simple average of their estimates as our markup target in our exercises.


                                                       21
                          What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


added, obtained from the NIPA (national income and product accounts) tables maintained by
the Bureau of Economic Analysis. Finally, we target the employment share of young firms in the
economy, available from Decker et al. (2016b) starting from 1981. This target is informative about
the probability of an innovation being drastic, which we take to be the same for both followers
and entrants (i.e., φ̃ = φ). The idea is that drastic innovations allow firms to catch up with the
frontier quickly, increasing the chances of capturing the production of an intermediate good and
starting to employ production workers. As most entrants start as followers (except the ones that
enter a leveled industry), these parameters influence how quickly young firms start producing
and thus the employment share of young firms in the economy. In the model, we obtain this
moment simulating an economy with 104 firms for a long period.


4.3    Parameter Values, the Model Fit and Sensitivity Analysis

Table 1 summarizes the calibrated parameters, and Table 2 presents the fit of the model to data.
Despite its parsimonious structure, the model is fairly successful in matching key moments in the
data, except for some overestimation in aggregate profit share and markups. The results suggest
that the initial condition of the model economy replicates well the state of the U.S. economy
before the early 1980s.

                                 Table 1: List of parameter values

          Panel A: Externally calibrated                      Panel B: Internally calibrated
 Parameter Value Description                           Parameter Value Description
     ρ         5%       Rate of time preference            λ      1.044 Innovation step size
    γ, γ̃      1/0.35 R&D cost curvature                   α      7.179 R&D scale, incumbents
     τ         30%      Corporate income tax               α̃     0.075 R&D scale, entrants
     s         5%       R&D subsidy                        δ      2.78% Exogenous catch-up
                                                         φ = φ̃   4.23% Drastic innovation prob.


      Table D.1 in Appendix D summarizes the percentage change in each calibration moment
used in Section 4 in response to a 1 percent change in each calibrated parameter. A few quick
takeaways stand out. First, the employment share of young firms is quite sensitive to almost every
parameter except the R&D cost scale of incumbent firms. Second, the most sensitive variable to
(α) is the aggregate share of R&D in GDP. Third, the aggregate growth rate is exclusively sensitive
to the step size (λ). Fourth, while the employment share of young firms is strongly sensitive to
the drastic innovation probability (φ), the effect of φ on other variables is very muted. Lastly, the
aggregate profit share is most sensitive to the knowledge diffusion parameter (δ), while markups
are also most sensitive to δ, second only to λ. In contrast to the case of φ, the effect of δ on other
variables relative to its effect on young firms’ employment share is also much stronger.



                                                  22
                                  What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


                                                       Table 2: Model fit

               Moment                           Model         Data        Source
       M1      TFP growth                       1.32%         1.37%       Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
       M2      R&D to GDP                        2.40%        2.40%       National Science Foundation
       M3      Firm entry                       13.57%       13.55%       Business Dynamics Statistics, Census
                                                                          De Loecker and Eeckhout (2017)
       M4      Markup                             1.18         1.08       and Eggertsson et al. (2018)
       M5      Profit share                     10.9%          6%         Bureau of Economic Analysis (NIPA)
       M6      Employment (age<5)               20.11%       18.00%       Decker et al. (2015)
    Notes: The moments are averages across to decades prior to 1981 if data are available (M1,M2,M4,M5); if not, they reflect
    the average over the most recent available years before 1981. The markup reflects the simple average of the findings of De
    Loecker and Eeckhout (2017) and Eggertsson et al. (2018). As our model does not feature capital in production, the profit
    share is scaled proportionally such that the aggregate labor and profit shares of GDP add to 1 while their ratio is kept at the
    actual value in the data. This adjustment reflects the fact that the model lacks physical capital as a productive input. See
    Section 4.2 for further details regarding the moments.


      In the next two sections, we use our model to investigate potential mechanisms that may have
contributed to the empirical trends discussed in Section 2. We proceed in two steps. In Section 5,
we illustrate the implications of variations in the channels of interest by introducing shocks one at
a time to the respective parameters governing those channels. This exercise helps us understand
the relative ability of different margins to account for the observed empirical trends and the
underlying dynamics. In Section 6, we turn to the analysis of the transition path and focus on
the joint moves in these margins. In particular, we first replicate the transition path of the U.S.
economy in the post-1980 period allowing joint variations in all four channels. Then we quantify
the contribution of each individual channel to the model-generated trends (which replicate their
data counterparts) by shutting them down one at a time. This exercise provides the main result
of our quantitative analysis regarding the culprit behind declining business dynamism.



5     Understanding the Mechanisms in Isolation

In this section, we shock the initial BGP of the model through one parameter at a time and
present the responses of model-based variables in order to illustrate the dynamics generated by
each channel. Again, these channels are (i) a decline in corporate taxes, (ii) an increase in R&D
tax subsidies, (iii) a rise in entry costs, and (iv) a decrease in the rate of knowledge diffusion.
A crucial feature of this analysis is that, because our calibration strategy matches the initial
BGP to pre-1980 statistics in the data, the BGP does not reflect any precondition with regards
to the empirical trends that we analyze later. Therefore, our model-based responses will almost
exclusively rely on information that predates the shifts in the U.S. business environment, which
we aim at explaining here, with the minimal exceptions clarified later. In other words, the
exercise will reflect only minimal information from the observed dynamics of declining business
dynamism. Nevertheless, as we shall see next, the response of the model to a decline in the

                                                                 23
                                       What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


intensity of knowledge diffusion tracks the empirical trends quite closely.

     Our approach is to introduce a path of shocks to {α̃t , δt , τt , st } one at a time. We assume
that each change takes place over a period of 30 years, accounting for the three decades between
1980 and 2010. We specify the paths of shocks as follows. In the data, the corporate income tax
rate decreases from 30% to 20%, and R&D subsidies increase from 5% to 20% (see Section 6.1
for further details). To demonstrate the strengths and weaknesses of these channels, we consider
larger moves: a drop to 0 percent for corporate tax rates and a an increase to 50 percent in R&D
subsidies in linear fashion.18

     Because it is difficult to obtain reliable estimates of firm entry costs and the intensity of
knowledge diffusion, we determine the size and shape of the changes in these margins by forc-
ing the model-generated response to match the decreasing profile of establishment entry in the
data.19 This exercise implies a 300 percent rise in the entry cost and a 65 percent decline in
knowledge diffusion intensity. Figure 3 illustrates the implied time paths of the entry rate in
these two experiments, superimposed with their counterpart in the data. The figure demon-
strates the success of the individual channels in generating the decline in entry observed in the
data.

                                0.16


                                0.15


                                0.14


                                0.13
                        Entry




                                0.12


                                0.11


                                              data
                                 0.1
                                              diffusion
                                              entry cost
                                0.09
                                   1980        1985        1990    1995   2000       2005        2010
                                                                  Years

                                          Figure 3: Path of entry rate, model vs. data
            Notes: The figure superimposes the observed decline in the entry rate with the model-generated entry
            paths in the two experiments regarding the entry cost and the knowledge diffusion. In both experiments,
            the change in the respective channel is disciplined to capture the path of the empirical entry rate.


    18 We consider these magnitudes that are considerably larger than their empirical counterparts for the sake of

visibility and clarity in the demonstration of the effects of the specific channels. As highlighted by our quantitative
results in Section 6, the effects of the changes in these margins that are analogous to the data are in the same direction
with the results shown here but are much more muted.
    19 In the experiments presented in this section, the observed path of entry constitutes the only piece of information

that pertains to the transitional dynamics in the data and yet informs our exercise. For the specifics of the computation
of the transition path, please see Section 6.1. See Appendix C for the details of the solution algorithm.


                                                                  24
                                 What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


      Table 3 summarizes the key qualitative results. It shows the direction of the observed change
in each variable (column 1) and compares them with their model counterparts in each experi-
ment. A few observations stand out. First, changes in corporate tax rates (column 2) and R&D
subsidies (column 3) fail to generate most trends observed in the data. Second, despite a con-
siderably better performance, the decline in entry cost (column 4) fails to replicate changes in
key aspects of the data such as increasing markups. Finally, the intriguing result is that the fall
in the knowledge diffusion intensity (column 5) has remarkable success in accounting for most
empirical trends. Next, we discuss our findings regarding each channel in more detail.


                                       Table 3: Qualitative experiment results

                                                         Lower              Higher             Higher             Lower
                                           Data         corporate            R&D               entry            knowledge
                                                           tax             subsidies            cost             diffusion
                                            (1)            (2)                (3)                (4)                 (5)
  Concentration                              ↑             ←→                  ←→                ←→                    ↑
  Markups                                    ↑             ←→                  ←→                ←→                    ↑
  Profit share                               ↑             ←→                    ↓               ←→                    ↑
  Labor share                                ↓             ←→                    ↑               ←→                    ↓
  Entry∗                                     ↓             ←→                  ←→                  ↓                   ↓
  Young firms’ empl. share                   ↓             ←→                    ↓                 ↓                   ↓
  Frontier vs. laggard gap                   ↑             ←→                  ←→                ←→                    ↑
  Gross job reallocation                     ↓             ←→                    ↓               ←→                    ↓
  Dispersion of firm growth                  ↓                ↓                  ↓                 ↑                   ↓
Notes: Upward arrows indicate an increase in the variable of interest, downward arrows indicate a decline, and flat arrows indicate
no or negligible change. If the absolute magnitude of the response of a variable is less than 20 percent of the actual change in the
data, we denote it by a flat arrow.
∗ In columns 4 and 5, the experiments match the decline in entry by construction (see Figure 3).




5.1    Decline in Corporate Tax Rates

Figure 4 presents the model-based counterparts of four empirical trends of interest, which we will
use to spotlight the differences between patterns that emerge in each experiment. As indicated
by crossed purple lines, the effect of the decline in corporate tax rates on most margins is close
to nil.20 Importantly, the response of firm entry is negligible (and positive, if anything), a stark
contrast to the trend in the data. The reason is that higher operating profits have only an indirect,
and positive, effect on the entry decision. The value of the followers, in turn, is indirectly affected

    20 The negligible response of the aggregate profit share to a decrease in corporate profit taxes may seem odd at

first glance. However, notice that the figure shows before-tax profit share, which in turn depends on the distribution
of firms across gaps. As expected, the share of after-tax profits rises mechanically with the drop in corporate taxes
(not shown here).


                                                                  25
                                                    What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


         0.16                                                                                                   0.22



         0.15                                                                                                    0.2




                                                                             Employment share of firms age<=5
         0.14                                                                                                   0.18
Entry




         0.13                                                                                                   0.16



         0.12                                                                                                   0.14


                     diffusion                                                                                              diffusion
         0.11        entry cost                                                                                 0.12        entry cost
                     subsidy                                                                                                subsidy
                     corp. tax                                                                                              corp. tax
          0.1                                                                                                    0.1
            1980      1985        1990       1995      2000   2005   2010                                          1980   1983   1986    1989   1992   1995    1998   2001   2004   2007   2010
                                            Years                                                                                                      Years


                                         a) Entry                                                                            b) Employment share of young firms

         1.27                                                                                                   0.16
                     diffusion                                                                                              diffusion
         1.26        entry cost                                                                                 0.15        entry cost
                     subsidy                                                                                                subsidy
         1.25        corp. tax                                                                                              corp. tax
                                                                                                                0.14

         1.24
                                                                                                                0.13
                                                                             Profit share
Markup




         1.23
                                                                                                                0.12
         1.22
                                                                                                                0.11
         1.21

                                                                                                                 0.1
          1.2

         1.19                                                                                                   0.09


         1.18                                                                                                   0.08
            1980      1985        1990       1995      2000   2005   2010                                          1980      1985         1990         1995       2000        2005         2010
                                            Years                                                                                                      Years


                                     c) Markup                                                                                              d) Profit share

                                         Figure 4: Implied responses to changes in individual channels

                by higher profits only through the followers’ forward-looking behavior and the chances of taking
                over the industry, which die off quickly for followers lagging further behind the frontier because
                of the intensifying discouragement effect. Therefore, lower corporate taxes create only a muted
                and positive effect on firm entry. This negligible effect also implies a subdued influence on the
                firm distribution across gaps and thus on concentration and markups, among other variables
                (recall that a leader’s markup level depends on the size of its lead). The limited effect on firm
                entry and the gap distribution is also responsible for the muted response of the employment
                share of young firms and other variables listed in column 2 of Table 3.




                                                                            26
                          What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


5.2    Increase in R&D Subsidies

In Figure 4, the dotted yellow lines denote the responses to the increase in R&D subsidies. Al-
though the responses to the increase in R&D subsidies are slightly stronger, they are still very far
away from the empirical patterns, most crucially in the case of firm entry. The increase in innova-
tive activity affects firms’ distribution across gaps, moving some variables such as markups and
the employment share of young firms (and gross job reallocation, to some extent) in the right di-
rection, although the magnitude of the changes is very limited. Moreover, the profit share of GDP
declines counterfactually. This result may appear at odds with the pickup in markups, but the
rationale is as follows. The profit share of GDP is slightly different than the average (operational)
profitability of firms, which would reflect only the distributional changes and move, therefore,
in parallel to markups. However, the profit share of GDP is related to the aggregate labor share,
which reflects the wage level in the economy. With higher R&D subsidies, the demand of leading
firms for R&D employment increases, pushing up the wage level in the economy. Reciprocally,
the profit share of GDP decreases. Higher wages also imply a higher cost of entry, which drives
the slight decline in the entry rate.


5.3    Increase in Entry Costs

As described earlier, the increase in entry costs analyzed here is such that the response of firm
entry matches the empirical pattern. Therefore, it is no surprise that in Figure 4a the model-
generated entry rate (dashed red line) closely follows its empirical counterpart, with entry being
discouraged by higher costs of entry innovation. In contrast to the tax and subsidy experiments,
the decline in entry costs is able to generate a modest fall in the employment share of young
firms, as lower firm entry implies lower supply of new and young firms.

      Despite some success in capturing entry and young firm dynamics, the rise in entry cost
fails to generate any significant move in markups and the profit share. The main reason for these
results is that a fall in entry itself does not alter incumbent incentives to a degree that can cause
a large enough shift in the distribution of firms toward larger gaps. On the contrary, the share of
leveled sectors increases mildly, as reflected by the counterfactual decline in market concentration
(column 4 in Table 3). The mechanics behind this result is as follows. Lower entry implies a lower
churning for the follower firms, damping the negative business stealing effect exerted by entry
on the innovation incentives of followers. This lower churning rate, in turn, boosts innovation by
the followers, increasing the share of leveled sectors and thus pushing down concentration. But
this shift loses steam over time, allowing the sectoral distribution to move slightly toward larger
gaps, which causes some pickup in markups and the profit share, albeit a very small one. The
weak distributional response is also responsible for the experiment’s failure to replicate other
patterns such as gross job reallocation.




                                                 27
                          What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


5.4    Decline in Knowledge Diffusion

Similar to the previous experiment, the pattern that we introduce for the decline in knowledge
diffusion is such that the model response in firm entry matches the empirical pattern, with the
lower catch-up probability decreasing the value of being a follower and thus the benefit for
entry. In stark contrast to the previous experiments, however, the decline in knowledge diffusion
succeeds in generating reasonable variations in all margins in correct directions (indicated by
solid blue lines). Average markup and the profit share of GDP rise dramatically, while the decline
in the employment share of young firms is the strongest. Moreover, as shown in the last column
of Table 3, aggregate labor share decreases as well, a feature that all previous experiments miss.
In addition, both gross job reallocation and the standard deviation of firm growth decline in line
with the empirical regularities.

      The crux of this experiment lies in the shift of the gap distribution to larger gaps induced by
the decline in knowledge diffusion. The decline in δ decreases the intensity with which leaders of
any lead find themselves in a neck-and-neck position, thus resulting in larger masses of product
lines across relatively larger gap differences. This shift induces higher concentration, average
markups, and profit share. Less catch-up also leads to less job reallocation and a fall in firm
growth dispersion. Moreover, with lower knowledge diffusion, the process of new (and therefore
young) firms, which start the business replacing followers, taking over production slows down,
resulting in a lower employment share of young firms in the economy. Notice that the decline in
this margin is larger than in the experiment of higher entry costs, even though the magnitude of
the drop in the entry rate is almost the same in both experiments. A stronger response occurs in
this exercise because of the additional negative effect of lower knowledge diffusion, decreasing
the intensity with which young followers catch up with the leaders and eventually take over the
production.

      Overall, these model responses imply that a decline in knowledge diffusion stands out as a
likely suspect behind the decline in U.S. business dynamism. In order to assess quantitatively
whether this was actually the case, we next turn to the analysis where we let these four forces be
jointly at play and quantify their relative importance.



6     Investigation of Joint Forces

The channels we consider here have been moving simultaneously over the years. For exam-
ple, changes in corporate tax policies and the introduction of R&D subsidies were major policy
changes that happened during the 1980s (see Appendix A). Although our previous analysis indi-
cates that some channels may fail to account for several empirical trends, individual forces may
have reinforced each other. Moreover, even though certain margins may have the potential to
explain the shifts in the economy, the data may suggest only little changes in those margins, with


                                                  28
                               What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


limited effect on the economy. In this section, we present a decomposition exercise that carefully
addresses these considerations.

        In order to correctly gauge the contribution of each margin to the observed trends, we need
to discipline their relative strength by the data. Therefore, we study the joint moves implied by
the calibrated transition path of the model. We will first calibrate shock paths for each channel
that will jointly allow the model to replicate salient empirical trends in the data. Then, by
shutting down each channel one at a time, we will quantify the contribution of each specific
force to the observed changes in U.S. business dynamism. In our analysis, we will also discuss
the performance of the calibrated transition path with respect to changes that are not targeted by
the calibration and now serve as out-of-sample validation tests.


6.1      Disciplining the Transition Path of the Model

The transitional dynamics of our model, which capture the evolution of U.S. business dynamism
from the early 1980s until the late 2000s, is shaped by changes in the four channels of interest.
Eight additional parameters govern these changes: θ tr ≡ {τT , s T , α̃ T , δT , ντ , νs , να̃ , νδ }. The first
four denote the terminal values of parameters that govern the entry cost, knowledge diffusion
intensity, corporate taxes, and R&D subsidies, respectively. The other four parameters denoted
by ν determine the path of the changes in the first four parameters from their BGP levels to
their terminal values. Precisely, we assume that the path of the change in a parameter value
follows a simple functional form that ensures a smooth transition pattern. The key term of the
parametric structure is exp(− Tt ν), where t is the specific period during the transition and T is the
terminal period, after which the parameters settle at their terminal values.21 Thus, the curvature
parameters ν measure the speed of adjustment in the parameter values and are to be determined
by the data. We consider a transition over three decades, setting T = 30.22

        Two of the terminal values, τT and s T , are set externally to the corresponding levels in the
data. Corporate profit taxes in the United States decline to an average of about 20% in the 2000s.
Akcigit et al. (2018) calculate that R&D subsidy rates in the United States rose to an average of
about 20% in the post-1981 period. We also set ντ and νs to unity, implying that they change
   21  The exact functional form is such that, for any parameter e that changes during the transition, its value in period
t is given by

                                                         exp(− Tt νe ) − 1
                                            e t = e0 +                     ( e T − e0 )
                                                           exp(νe ) − 1
                                              ≡ e0 + f (t; ν) (eT − e0 ) ,

with f (t; ν) ∈ [0, 1] for all t ∈ [0, T ] . Here, e0 denotes the value of the parameter in the calibrated initial BGP, and eT
is the terminal value. Notice that a value of νe close to zero implies an almost linear change in e. Higher values of
νe imply an abrupt shift (increase or decline) in e initially, which then quickly reaches its terminal value, resembling
a one-time shock in the limit. See Figure 5 in this section and Figure D.4 (in Appendix D) for the calibrated paths of
parameters over the transition period.
    22 Notice that the transition does not necessarily mean that the model economy reaches its new BGP in T periods.

The economy continues its convergence to the new BGP even after changing parameters reach their terminal values.


                                                                29
                               What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


almost linearly over the transition. We calibrate the remaining four parameters that pertain to
the entry cost and knowledge diffusion, matching six data points. Four of these targets are the
terminal values of the establishment entry rate, the average markup, the aggregate profit share,
and the employment share of young firms, capturing the aggregate variations in U.S. business
dynamism. These targets are particularly informative about the terminal parameter values α T
and δT . Moreover, we include two additional targets that help the calibrated model replicate the
empirical trend in the establishment entry rate. These targets are the relative decline in entry
after the first 10 and 20 years. Therefore, our calibration strategy forces the model to reflect not
only the decline in entry, but also its time path. This feature, in turn, disciplines the transition
path of the model economy, informing the calibration about να and νδ .

      We solve the transition path of the model using an iterative backward solution method. For
brevity, we defer the details of the procedure to Appendix C.


6.2    Parameter Values and the Model Fit

Table 4 summarizes the calibrated parameters. Importantly, the comparison of the BGP and
terminal values of δ and α̃ indicates a 60 percent increase in the entry cost and a 60 percent
decline in the intensity of knowledge diffusion. Moreover, the calibrated curvature parameters
να̃ and νδ imply that α̃ changes almost linearly, while δ drops quickly and then slowly converges
to its terminal value (Figure 5).23




                                        Table 4: List of parameter values

        Panel A: Externally calibrated                                Panel B: Internally calibrated
  Parameter Value Description                                   Parameter Value Description
      τT      20%     Corporate income tax                         α̃ T      0.120 R&D scale, entrants
      sT      20%     R&D subsidy                                   δT       1.09% Exogenous catch-up
      ντ      1       Corporate income tax                          να̃      0.829 R&D scale, entrants
      νs      1       R&D subsidy                                   νδ       5.012 Exogenous catch-up




  23 See   Figure D.4 in Appendix D for the paths of s and τ.


                                                          30
                                                                What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?



                                                               0.028                                                            0.14

                                                               0.026
                                                                                                                                0.13




                          Knowledge Diffusion Parameter Path
                                                               0.024




                                                                                                                                       Entry Cost Parameter Path
                                                                                                                                0.12
                                                               0.022

                                                                0.02                                                            0.11
                                                                                                                Diffusion
                                                                                                                Entry cost
                                                               0.018                                                            0.1

                                                               0.016
                                                                                                                                0.09
                                                               0.014

                                                                                                                                0.08
                                                               0.012

                                                                0.01                                                            0.07
                                                                   1980       1985   1990   1995   2000     2005             2010
                                                                                            Year


                                                                          Figure 5: Transition paths of α̃ and δ

    The transition path mirrors very closely the dynamics of U.S. business dynamism, as de-
picted in Figure 6 (overleaf). The figure superimposes the calibrated paths of variables used in
the calibration with the actual data points. Notice that the calibration uses multiple data points
only from the path of the entry rate; the other target variables provide information only on the
terminal changes. The model’s ability to match the empirical pattern of the entry rate is reassur-
ing about the path of the parameter changes in the model. In addition, the transition paths of
other variables are replicated quite successfully as well.

    It is also worth noting that our calibration strategy does not condition on several other
empirical regularities discussed in Section 2, which we now consider as out-of-sample tests for
the calibrated economy. Table 5 compares empirical changes in these margins with the model-
generated responses. The model also replicates these moments quite successfully, except for the
change in sales concentration and the widening of the productivity gap. The reason for the
former is that, in this model, within-industry concentration can take only two levels: 1/2 in the

                  Table 5: Changes (∆) in untargeted moments during the transition

                                                                          Moment                          Data      Model
                                                                D1        ∆   Labor Share                 -8%          -5%
                                                                D2        ∆   Concentration                5%          1%
                                                                D3        ∆   Job Reallocation            -7%          -9%
                                                                D4        ∆   Firm Growth Dispersion      -8%         -11%
                                                                D5        ∆   Productivity Gap            25%          8%
     Notes: The changes reflect the total deviation between 1980 and 2010. The empirical magnitudes are taken from
     Karabarbounis and Neiman (2013) (D1), Autor et al. (2017b) (D2), Decker et al. (2015) (D3,D4), and Andrews et al.
     (2016) (D5). D1-D4 reflect changes in the United States, whereas D5 refers to the OECD average in manufacturing
     sector. D2 reflects the change in the concentration share of top four firms in the U.S. manufacturing sector.




                                                                                            31
                                                 What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


           leveled sector and 1 in all of the the unleveled sectors (see Section 4.1).24 In this regard, the
           model generates richer heterogeneity in terms of markups and profit shares compared with sales
           concentration.

         0.16                                                                                                    0.22


         0.15                                                                                                     0.2




                                                                              Employment share of firms age<=5
         0.14                                                                                                    0.18


         0.13                                                                                                    0.16
Entry




         0.12                                                                                                    0.14


         0.11                                                                                                    0.12


          0.1                                                                                                     0.1
                    all channels                                                                                             all channels
                    data                                                                                                     data
         0.09                                                                                                    0.08
            1980     1985          1990       1995    2000     2005   2010                                          1980   1983   1986      1989   1992   1995    1998   2001   2004   2007   2010
                                             Years                                                                                                        Years


                                          a) Entry                                                                            b) Employment share of young firms

         1.32                                                                                                    0.18
                    all channels                                                                                             all channels
          1.3       data                                                                                                     data
                                                                                                                 0.16
         1.28

         1.26
                                                                                                                 0.14
                                                                              Profits share




         1.24
Markup




         1.22                                                                                                    0.12

          1.2
                                                                                                                  0.1
         1.18

         1.16
                                                                                                                 0.08
         1.14

         1.12                                                                                                    0.06
            1980     1985          1990       1995    2000     2005   2010                                          1980      1985           1990         1995       2000        2005         2010
                                             Years                                                                                                        Years


                                          c) Markup                                                                                            d) Profit Share
                                                             Figure 6: Calibration Targets
           Notes: The calibration procedure targets the terminal points in Panels 6b, 6c, 6d and the decennial declines in entry in Panel 6a.
           Solid black lines show the model–generated paths when all four channels are moving.


                   Regarding the widening of the productivity gap between frontier and laggard firms, notice
           that the empirical magnitude is computed across the OECD countries, while we calibrate our
           model to the U.S. data. Our conclusion is that, to the extent that a similar widening happens in
              24 A constant-elasticity-of-substitution aggregator in the final-good production can generate a richer heterogene-

           ity in sales concentration but would also add complication to the computational analysis without further insight.
           Therefore, we decided to work with the current version of the model.


                                                                             32
                                      What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


the United States, which appears to be the case in light of the declining productivity dispersion
shown in Figure 1b, this model captures such dynamics reasonably well.


6.3    Decomposition Results

Finally, we turn to the counterfactual experiments, where we shut down each channel one at
a time. Shutting down a specific channel means that the parameter governing the particular
margin remains constant at the initial BGP level over the transition period. Therefore, each ex-
periment obtains the hypothetical transition path that would have arisen had the specific channel
remained unchanged over time. Then the resulting difference between the hypothetical path and
the calibrated transition path provides a measure of the relative magnitude of the role played by
the specific channel in driving the model responses. Figure 7 illustrates the thought experiment
decomposing the entry rate, with the solid black line denoting the calibrated path while other
lines denote the hypothetical paths generated by the experiments. A quick glance at this figure
reveals that the contributions of declining corporate income tax rates (purple crossed line) and
increasing R&D subsidy rates (yellow line with short-long dashes) are quite limited. This result
holds for most of the other trends, as summarized in Table 6, and is consistent with our findings
in the previous section.


                               0.16


                               0.15


                               0.14


                               0.13
                       Entry




                               0.12


                               0.11
                                           all channels
                                           diffusion
                                           cost
                                0.1
                                           subsidy
                                           corp. tax
                               0.09
                                  1980      1985          1990    1995     2000          2005    2010
                                                                 Years

                                       Figure 7: Decomposition of the entry decline
           Notes: The solid black line denotes the calibrated path.      Each of the rest of the lines represent an
           experiment with one channel shut down.



      Denoting a variable of interest by X, its value at time t when all four channels move by Xt4 ,
                                                                                  4\ i
and its hypothetical value when channel i is shut down by Xt , we can express the contribution


                                                                 33
                                  What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


of the channel i to the total deviation over the three decades as follows:

                                                                      4         4\ i
                                                                     X2010 − X2010
                                              contributioni =         4       4
                                                                                   .                                            (30)
                                                                     X2010 − X1980

Accordingly, Table 6 presents the magnitudes of the decomposed contributions. In line with
the findings of Section 5, the results decisively highlight that the largest contributions to the
variations in model-generated variables stem from the slowdown in knowledge diffusion. Other
channels account for a meaningful part of transitional dynamics only in a limited number of
variables. For instance, the higher entry cost accounts for 18 percent of the decline in entry rate,
corroborating the findings in the recent work by Gutiérrez et al. (2019). Its negative effect on
entry generates 22 percent of the decline in job reallocation. However, given that the rest of
the contributions rarely exceed 10 percent, we will focus our attention on the discussion of the
knowledge diffusion channel to avoid repetition.

                 Table 6: Quantitative experiment results (contributions as in equation 30)

                                           Lower              Higher             Higher            Lower
                  Channel i               corporate            R&D               entry           knowledge
                                             tax             subsidies            cost            diffusion
                  Entry                      -8.2%              -0.4%            17.9%               50.6%
                  Labor                      -9.0%              -7.7%             3.6%               78.7%
                  Markup                      7.6%              10.8%             3.6%               84.2%
                  Profit                     -9.0%              -7.7%             3.6%               78.7%
                  Concentration               4.3%               7.1%             -7.2%              96.2%
                  Young firms               -13.2%              -7.7%             -1.3%              71.2%
                  Prod. gap                   7.2%              10.5%             3.5%               83.8%
                  Reallocation               -6.9%               0.2%            13.6%               48.5%
                  Dispersion                 32.7%              29.2%            -44.6%              136%
        Notes: Percentage values measure the share of the contribution from the specific channel to the total model-generated
        deviation between 1980 and 2010. Negative values mean that adding the specific channel moves the model-generated
        variable in the opposite of the empirical counterpart. A value larger than 100% means that the difference between the
        hypothetical and empirical paths is larger than the observed variation.



6.3.1     Decline in Knowledge Diffusion

The calibrated 60 percent decline in knowledge diffusion accounts for more than 70 percent of
the variation in all but two variables, in which case the contribution is half of the total change.
The results clearly demonstrate the major role a weaker knowledge diffusion plays in generating
the trends in the aggregate variables. To summarize the mechanics briefly again, the effect
operates through a direct and indirect channel. With knowledge diffusion slowing down, the
direct effect is that market leaders are protected from being imitated. As a result, the technology
gaps start widening, presenting market leaders a stronger market power. Market concentration

                                                                34
                         What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


and markups rise on average. Profit share of GDP increases, and labor share decreases. Larger
gaps also discourage the followers, causing the productivity gap between them and the leaders
to open up. The strengthening of leaders also discourages forward-looking entrants; hence, firm
entry and the employment share of young firms go down. Discouraged followers and entrants
exert smaller competitive pressure on market leaders; as a result, market leaders relax, and they
experiment less. Hence, overall dynamism and experimentation decrease in the economy.

    To sum up, our quantitative investigation in this section underscores the importance of po-
tential distortions in knowledge diffusion in explaining the declining U.S. business dynamism.
Section 9 zeros in on this interesting theoretical mechanism and presents novel empirical evi-
dence on the symptoms of a decline in the intensity of knowledge diffusion in the United States.
Before delving into the empirical findings, we next discuss the welfare implications of our model
and then conclude our quantitative exploration with the discussion of additional mechanisms,
robustness exercises, and model extensions.



7   Market Power and Welfare

Our main goal in this paper is not normative but positive, and the model is designed accordingly.
Yet our framework can potentially speak to the intriguing observation by Syverson (2019) on
the ambiguous relationship between aggregate welfare and market power (when measured by
market concentration). He points out that higher concentration can be associated with an increase
or decrease in aggregate welfare, depending on the specific market structure or the source of
higher concentration (pure market power or efficiency gains). In this section, we briefly elaborate
on this relationship, analyzing the normative implications of our model.

    The relationship between market power (manifested in higher average markup or concentra-
tion) and aggregate welfare is also ambiguous in our model. Consider a change in the intensity
of knowledge diffusion. In one extreme, in which knowledge diffusion occurs almost with cer-
tainty, incumbents lose their market power immediately and thus have no incentive to innovate.
This negative effect on innovation incentives essentially destroys the engine of aggregate growth
in the economy. In the other extreme, in which knowledge diffusion almost never occurs, incum-
bents would open up their technological edge, leading to higher concentration and markups on
average. Yet too many sectors may shift away from close competition—which, through an escape-
competition effect, provides a strong incentive to innovate—again damping innovation incentives
and thus aggregate growth. Clearly, the two cases imply opposite shifts in market power and the
nature of competition. However, in both cases, innovation incentives are reduced (because of too
much or too little competition), generating a loss in aggregate growth, which in turn translates
into lower welfare. Figure 8a indeed confirms this conjecture. The figure depicts aggregate wel-
fare as a function of the knowledge diffusion parameter δ along the BGP (with other parameters



                                                35
                                                                 What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


                          kept fixed).25 The graph presents an inverse-U shape, implying that a higher or lower intensity
                          of diffusion may be welfare enhancing, depending on the initial diffusion intensity.

                     8                                                                                                                  1%


                    7.5                                                                                                                                               Calibrated value




                                                                                              Consumption-equivalent Welfare Change
                                                                                                                                                                      of diffusion
                                                                                                                                      0.5%
                     7                                                                                                                                   Estimated
                                                                                                                                                         decline in
                                                                                                                                                          diffusion
Aggregate welfare




                    6.5
                                                                                                                                        0%

                     6

                                                                                                                                      -0.5%
                    5.5


                     5
                                                                                                                                       -1%
                    4.5


                     4                                                                                                                -1.5%
                          0    0.5     1    1.5      2     2.5    3       3.5   4   4.5   5                                                   0   0.01      0.02      0.03        0.04   0.05   0.06
                                                  Knowledge diffusion /                                                                                       Knowledge diffusion 


                                     a) Aggregate welfare across BGPs                                                                    b) Consumption-equivalent welfare across transitions

                                                     Figure 8: Implied responses to changes in individual channels
                          Notes: The left panel compares the welfare across BGPs that are differentiated by the level of δ. The right panel shows the percentage
                          deviation in consumption-equivalent welfare from the baseline over three decades in response to a shift in δ from the calibrated
                          value. The values of δ on the horizontal axis can become larger than 1, as δ denotes a flow rate, with the implied probability of the
                          diffusion event in a unit interval of time given by δ∆t.



                                   In light of the preceding deliberation, we ask next whether, in the calibrated economy, a
                          higher or lower knowledge diffusion is welfare improving in the transition. Figure 8b depicts the
                          change in consumption-equivalent welfare as a function of the knowledge diffusion parameter
                          δ. To generate this graph, we basically repeat the exercise in Section 5 by introducing a change
                          in δ over the period of three decades. We then compute the change in consumption-equivalent
                          welfare by comparing the resulting consumption path with the baseline one, i.e., the path that
                          arises when there is no change in δ from the calibrated value and the economy evolves along the
                          calibrated BGP. In Figure 8b, we focus on a range of values around the calibrated level, and the
                          horizontal axis refers to the terminal value of δ. The value zero on the vertical axis pinpoints
                          the baseline economy at the calibrated δ value on the horizontal axis. The results imply that in
                          the baseline case, higher knowledge diffusion increases the consumption-equivalent welfare, as
                          the function is strictly increasing. Indeed, doubling δ would create a 0.7 percent higher welfare
                          in consumption-equivalent terms over a 30-year period. Hence, while the model can generate
                          a decrease or increase in welfare with higher market power—in the same vein as in Syverson
                          (2019)—the calibrated economy happens to benefit from a higher degree of knowledge diffusion,
                          which translates into a higher degree of competition and a lower level of average markup.


                              25   For brevity, we present the derivation of welfare in Appendix B.2.


                                                                                              36
                                    What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


8     Alternative Mechanisms, Robustness, and Extensions

In this section, we discuss the model implications of three additional channels—a decline in the
interest rate, in research productivity, and in the market power of workers relative to firms—
in light of empirical trends. We then repeat the decomposition exercise from Section 6, which
constitutes our main quantitative finding, under alternative specifications to gauge the robustness
of our results. We end the section with a discussion of some model extensions.


8.1      Alternative Mechanisms

In our quantitative analysis, we focused on four prominent channels from the literature. Yet it
is worth noting a few others that have been debated more recently with regard to their partial
or direct link to some of the trends we consider here. These mechanisms are a secular decline
in the interest rate (Eggertsson et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019), a decline in research productivity
(implying that ideas are getting harder to find; Gordon, 2016, and Bloom et al., 2017), and a
decline in workers’ market power relative to employers/firms (Bivens et al., 2014; Naidu et al.,
2018). In this section, we shed some light on the potential of these alternative mechanisms to play
a dominant role in jointly driving the empirical trends in consideration, repeating the exercise
in Section 5. We introduce shock paths to the variables that govern the alternative mechanisms
one at a time, and Table 7 summarizes the results comparing them with our baseline findings.
To preview, we find that while some of the alternative mechanisms considered here could have
contributed to some empirical trends, each one of them generates counterfactual responses in
other trends, which we review more in detail now.


                    Table 7: Qualitative experiment results for alternative mechanisms
                                       Lower        Higher        Higher       Lower         Declining       Ideas       Weaker
                             Data     corporate      R&D          entry      knowledge        interest      getting     power of
                                         tax       subsidies       cost       diffusion         rate        harder      workers
                              (1)        (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)          (7)         (8)

 Concentration                 ↑        ←→            ←→           ←→             ↑             ←→             ↓          ←→
 Markups                       ↑        ←→            ←→           ←→             ↑             ←→             ↓           ↑
 Profit share                  ↑        ←→              ↓          ←→             ↑               ↓            ↓           ↑
 Labor share                   ↓        ←→              ↑          ←→             ↓               ↑            ↑           ↓
 Frontier vs. laggard gap      ↑        ←→            ←→           ←→             ↑             ←→           ←→            ↑
 Entry                         ↓         ↑            ←→             ↓            ↓               ↑            ↓           ↑
 Young firms’ empl. share      ↓        ←→              ↓            ↓            ↓             ←→             ↓          ←→
 Gross job reallocation        ↓         ↑              ↑          ←→             ↓               ↑            ↓           ↑
 Dispersion of firm growth     ↓         ↓              ↓            ↑            ↓               ↓            ↑           ↓

Notes: Upward arrows indicate an increase in the variable of interest, downward arrows indicate a decline, and flat arrows indicate
no or negligible change. If the absolute magnitude of the response of a variable is less than 20 percent of the actual change in the
data, we denote it by a flat arrow.




                                                                37
                               What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


8.1.1   Declining Interest Rates

A stark trend observed in the U.S. economy since the 1980s has been a secular decline in interest
rates, with short-term nominal interest rates even hitting a zero lower bound in the aftermath of
the Great Recession (Summers, 2014b). This drastic shift has, of course, drawn the attention of
many researchers, who have built a large body of work looking at the causes and implications
of a low interest rate environment. Closer to our work, Liu et al. (2019) argued more recently
that a decline in interest rates could be the reason behind the increase in measured market power
and a decline in productivity growth, which the authors hypothesize in a basic Schumpeterian
step-by-step innovation model. As the argument goes, lower interest rates increase the return on
investment, but more strongly for market leaders, because those firms are the ones that generate
positive profits. In this exercise, we assess the potential of this channel for driving the observed
trends we consider here.

     To generate an exogenous fall in the interest rate, we proceed along the lines proposed
by Liu et al. (2019). In particular, we introduce a steady decline to the discount rate (ρ) over the
transition, as we did with other parameters in Section 5. Recall that the household’s optimization
obtains
                                                      rt = gt + ρ.

The magnitude of the decline in ρ is about 4 percent, which generates an analogous fall in
the interest rate over three decades, in line with the fall in the natural rate of interest since
the 1980s (Williams, 2015).26 Column 6 in Table 7 shows that while this channel could have
contributed (albeit by a narrow margin) to an increase in market power measured by average
markups, its implication for firm entry appears to be at odds with the observed decline in the
data. Indeed, similar to the implications of a drop in corporate tax rates, the decline in interest
rates increases incumbent firm value and pushes up firm entry, in contrast to the data. Moreover,
the quantitative effect of this channel on several other margins is quite muted. Therefore, we
conclude that while the decline in interest rates might have contributed to some observed trends
in the data, it is unlikely through the lens of our model that it has played a dominant role in
jointly driving the trends in U.S. business dynamism.


8.1.2   Ideas Getting Harder

In an extensive work, Gordon (2016) argues that the U.S. economy has run out of low-hanging
fruit ideas that are easier to obtain and yet have broad economic applications, implying a lower
aggregate growth rate in the foreseeable future. In a similar vein, the intriguing work of Bloom et

   26 Williams (2015) applies the methodology established by the seminal work of Laubach and Williams (2003) to

estimate the natural rate of interest to more recent data to extend the series. His findings indicate a fall in the natural
rate of interest from around 4 percent in 1980 to about 2 percent right before the Great Recession and a further 2
percent drop over the next few years, with an outsized decline during the recession.


                                                            38
                              What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


al. (2017) contends that novel and productivity-enhancing ideas have become harder to generate,
which manifests itself in a declining research productivity. The authors document, using both
macro and firm-level data, that the idea output (measured by variables such as TFP growth) per
researchers employed has been steadily falling over most of the past century. To reflect on the
potential effects of this shift, we consider an increase in the cost of R&D for both entrant and
incumbent firms via higher scale parameters (α and α̃) in a similar exercise to the “higher entry
cost” experiment in Section 5.

     Recall that the R&D cost functions read as
                                                  γ                                γ
                                                 xijt                            x̃ijt
                                      Rijt = α          wt   and    R̃ijt = α̃           wt .
                                                  γ                               γ

Effectively, higher scale parameters means that, in order to generate the same innovation rate,
firms need to devote more resources, which translates into a decline in research productivity.
Measurements by Bloom et al. (2017) imply an average decrease in research productivity over
three decades by a factor of about 15 for Compustat firms and by a factor of about 6 for aggregate
series. Accordingly, we consider an extreme 10-fold increase in the scale parameter of R&D cost
in our exercise. The results indicate that such a drastic shift would be able to pull down firm entry
and the employment share of young firms, as shown in column 7 of Table 7. However, a distortion
on firms’ innovative activity via this margin would counterfactually damp concentration or other
measures of market power through the lens of the model. Therefore, this channel would not
be able to jointly account for all of the trends we consider here, missing chiefly the changes in
market power.


8.1.3   Weaker Market Power of Labor

The third alternative mechanism concerns a decline in workers’ relative market power. Recent
work (Bivens et al., 2014; Naidu et al., 2018) suggests that this decline could have depressed wage
growth despite sizeable productivity gains, which would translate into a lower aggregate labor
share.27 We capture the potential effect of this change via an exogenous rise in the step size (λ).
Recall that operating profits π (mit ) = (1 − λ−mit ) Yt depend negatively on λ and the wage level
is given as
                                                                   m̄
                                                 wt = Qt λ− ∑k=0 kµkt .

Therefore, a higher step size translates into higher operational profits of firms and to a (statically)
lower labor share. The increase we introduce to λ is so as to match the decline in the aggregate
labor share observed in the data. The last column of Table 7 indicates again that this channel
also fails to jointly generate the observed empirical trends. While it could have contributed to an

   27 The findings of recent work by Bivens et al. (2017) and Farber et al. (2018) indicate that a decline in unionization

could have suppressed a broad-based wage growth. Azar et al. (2017) document an increase in monopsony power in
labor markets.


                                                             39
                              What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


intensification in market power and a decline in aggregate labor share, this time, the counterfac-
tual implication is that it cannot generate a decline in the entry rate and the employment share
of young firms (if anything, it increases entry).

      In sum, when the moves we have observed in the U.S. business environment are considered
jointly, our analysis suggests a limited effect from the alternative mechanisms analyzed in this
section. However, it is essential to note that these mechanisms have most likely been crucial
factors behind several other prominent trends in the economy, which are beyond the scope of the
analysis in this paper.28


8.2     Robustness

This section assesses the robustness of our main quantitative results under five alternative speci-
fications.


8.2.1   Untargeting Markup

In the empirical literature, there is a lively debate about the magnitude of the change in markup
levels. While De Loecker and Eeckhout (2017) find a drastic increase in markups, a number of
other papers observe a less dramatic rise (Nekarda and Ramey, 2013; Eggertsson et al., 2018;
Hall, 2018). Considering this empirical disagreement, we opted for a middle ground, including
an average markup target when matching our model’s transition path to the evolution of the U.S.
economy. Now we go one step further and recalibrate the transition path, dropping the change in
markups from the set of targets altogether. As in Section 6.3, we then recalculate the contribution
of the knowledge diffusion channel to the model-generated responses. Table 8 summarizes these
decomposition results along with the findings from other robustness exercises that we discuss
later. For brevity, we show only the effect for the knowledge diffusion channel, as in the last
column of Table 6. The first column of Table 8 shows the baseline results, and the second one
shows the findings in this exercise. As revealed by the comparison of the first two columns,
the effect under this specification is quantitatively very similar to the baseline. Therefore, we
conclude that our quantitative results do not crucially depend on the magnitude of the increase
in markups.


8.2.2   Revisiting Effective Corporate Tax Rates

As discussed in Appendix A, corporations take advantage of several regulatory loopholes to de-
crease their effective tax burden. Therefore, to the extent these practices became more common

   28 Forinstance, lower real interest rates raise concerns for financial stability (Summers, 2014a). Farber et al. (2018)
highlight the negative effect of declining unionization on income inequality.


                                                           40
                                What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


        Table 8: Robustness analysis for decomposition results: knowledge diffusion channel

                         Untargeting                                                                              Quadratic
                                               Baseline       Zero tax       ** Low φ **       * High φ *
                          markup                                                                                  R&D cost
                             (1)                   (2)            (3)             (4)               (5)             (6)
 Entry                        45.2%              50.6%          50.0%           44.3%              1.0%               -0.4%
 Labor                        78.2%              78.7%          78.8%           74.1%             76.5%              69.5%
 Markup                       82.6%              84.2%          77.3%           89.9%             50.4%              79.2%
 Profit                       78.2%              78.7%          78.8%           74.1%             76.5%              69.5%
 Concentration                99.8%              96.2%          85.0%           86.9%             150%                125%
 Young firms                  63.6%              71.2%          73.9%           98.8%             -0.6%              35.7%
 Prod. gap                    82.3%              83.8%          76.8%           89.5%             50.6%              78.4%
 Reallocation                 48.9%              48.5%          43.6%           37.6%             35.0%              -58.6%
 Dispersion                   166%               136%           117%            114%               7.7%               423%
Notes: Percentage values measure the share of the contribution from the knowledge diffusion channel to the total model-generated
deviation between 1980 and 2010. Negative values mean that adding the knowledge diffusion channel moves the model-generated
variable in the opposite of the empirical counterpart. A value larger than 100% means that the difference between the hypothetical
and empirical paths is larger than the observed variation.


in recent decades, there might be a concern as to whether the decline in average effective corpo-
rate tax rates has been more dramatic than what we have penciled into our calibration based on
national accounts data. In that case, we would artificially restrict the potential role the changes in
corporate tax rates could actually play in driving model-based responses. To alleviate this con-
cern, we consider an extreme case where we assume that corporate tax rates decline to 0 percent
over the transition period. Setting τT = 0 and keeping the rest of the parameters determined
by the initial BGP fixed, we reran our transition calibration. Column 3 in Table 8 shows the
decomposition results based on the new transition path. Again, the quantitative magnitudes are
quite similar to the baseline decomposition, corroborating our original findings that exhibit the
significant contribution of a decline in knowledge diffusion to the model-based dynamics.


8.2.3    Alternative Values for Drastic Innovation

In the model, drastic innovation and knowledge diffusion both lead to a quick catch-up of fol-
lower firms. By decoupling the two channels, we allow firms the chance to endogenously gen-
erate drastic innovations even when there are distortions to the knowledge diffusion channel. In
this way, we avoid assigning an artificially large importance to knowledge diffusion and grant
a fair treatment to other potential channels of interest. However, having two similar sources of
quick catch-up may raise questions about their identification. Reassuringly, the sensitivity anal-
ysis in Section 4.3 demonstrates that exogenous knowledge diffusion has a much stronger effect
on margins such as markups and profits than the endogenous drastic innovation channel does.
Yet we still find worth discussing the robustness of our quantitative results to alternative values
of φ. To this end, we recalibrate the transition of the model under the assumption of a low and

                                                               41
                         What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


a high value of φ (keeping other parameters fixed) and regenerate our decomposition results in
these alternative environments.

    We start with the discussion of low-φ case. Setting φ to one-tenth of the original value
while keeping other parameters listed in Table 1 fixed, we recalibrate the parameters that define
the transition path of the model. Next, we recompute the quantitative effect of the recalibrated
decline in knowledge diffusion intensity. The results, shown in the fourth column of Table 8,
demonstrate that the original findings still go through: The knowledge diffusion channel has a
very high power in explaining the transition path of the model variables.

    Next, we repeat the same exercise with a high value of φ, which we set to about 42 percent,
10 times the baseline value. This extreme value implies that almost half of the innovations gener-
ated by followers are of a drastic nature and leaves very little scope for the exogenous knowledge
diffusion in the model. The fifth column of Table 8 presents the results based on the recalibrated
transition path in this specification. The significant finding is that in this case, the knowledge
diffusion channel contributes very little to variations in entry-related margins (in particular, the
entry rate and the employment share of young firms). These margins are now almost fully ex-
plained by a calibrated increase in the entry cost (not shown). This finding is perhaps expected
given the extremely limited scope for the diffusion channel in this specification. But a more strik-
ing observation is that even in this constrained specification, the knowledge diffusion channel
has the most significant power in driving the increase in market concentration, markups, and
aggregate profit share and the reciprocal decline in aggregate labor share. The common denom-
inator of these margins is that they crucially depend on the shifts in the distribution of sectors
across technology gaps. Therefore, this exercise shows that even in this case, the changes in
knowledge diffusion are the main driver of such distributional shifts in the economy.


8.2.4   R&D Elasticity

In quantitative Schumpeterian growth literature, a commonly used value for the labor elasticity
of R&D expenditure is 0.5, implying a quadratic R&D cost function (see Acemoglu et al., 2018,
for a discussion). Therefore, we next repeat our decomposition exercise under the assumption of
quadratic R&D cost functions. To this end, we recalibrate the transition path, setting γ = γ̃ = 2
while keeping other calibrated parameters listed in Table 1 fixed. The last column in Table 8
presents the results. Similar to the exercise with a higher drastic innovation probability, we
observe that while the explanatory power of a decline in knowledge diffusion becomes negligible
(most of the entry decline is driven by higher entry cost), the channel retains its significance in
accounting for changes in variables such as aggregate profit share and average markup.

    A seemingly confusing finding is that a decline in knowledge diffusion plays a considerable
role in driving the decline in young firms’ employment share despite its negligible effect on firm
entry. The reason is that, in fact, the decline in knowledge diffusion does not fail to generate


                                                42
                               What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


meaningful action in firm entry (as opposed to the exercise with a high φ). While lower δ
provides an additional force that drives down firm entry, it also causes an initial jump in this
variable, implying a steeper decline over the transition.29 Therefore, shutting down the diffusion
channel implies a smaller magnitude for the decline in firm entry; but because the initial jump is
also removed, the terminal value of firm entry barely changes. Therefore, we obtain a seemingly
negligible contribution from the knowledge diffusion channel, as shown in Table 8 (see also
equation 30). Nevertheless, the ability of this channel to generate meaningful dynamics still
manifests itself in other variables such as the employment share of young firms.


8.3      Model Extensions

In this study, we focus on 10 empirical regularities and aim at analyzing them in a comprehen-
sive but parsimonious setting. Yet the model is flexible enough to incorporate other features
that can prove useful in future research. One such extension could be the generalization of
the market structure in intermediate-good production. Currently, Bertrand competition among
intermediate-good producers implies that only one firm produces the particular good. As a
result, the concentration measure (HHI) takes two values (1/2 or 1). A straightforward general-
ization would be to use a constant-elasticity-of-substitution production function at the industry
level à la Aghion et al. (2001), which would make both firms produce in each product line.
Accordingly, one would obtain more heterogeneity in terms of concentration. However, this ex-
tension would complicate the computation of the model, especially over the transition (a key
contribution of the study), without adding much further insight, as the key mechanism of the
model would remain intact. Therefore, we stuck to the current version of the model.

        Another possible extension relates to the labor share distribution of firms. Autor et al. (2017b)
and Kehrig and Vincent (2018) argue that most of the labor share decline at the industry level
stems from the relocation of activity to low-labor-share, highly productive firms (rather than a
widespread decline in firms’ labor share). Accordingly, they find that the labor share distribution
of firms has barely changed.30 On the one hand, our model is consistent with the empirical
observation that low-labor-share firms capture a higher share of economic activity as market
concentration increases. On the other hand, the model does not generate a stable labor share
distribution.31 To reflect on these empirical findings, the model can be extended by assigning
heterogeneous research productivity types to firms.32 In this study, we did not take that route,
because it would come at a significant loss in tractability—an essential feature for our structural
analysis of transitional dynamics. While the aforementioned regularities are a few from many
   29   This initial response stems from the increase in leader’s value, incentivizing firm entry, especially to leveled
sectors. As the elasticity of R&D cost function is lower in this exercise, the initial response of firm entry to the change
in incumbent firms’ value is also more pronounced.
    30 The evidence is more decisive for the manufacturing sector.
    31 Indeed, the distribution shifts toward lower-labor-share firms in lockstep with increasing concentration and

average markups in the model.
    32 Aghion et al. (2019) consider such type heterogeneity to analyze labor share dynamics of incumbent firms.



                                                            43
                                  What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


other empirical trends that could be added to the extensive set analyzed here, notice that they are
not crucial for our main quantitative results (the pecking order among potential drivers in terms
of their power in explaining observed trends in the economy). This corollary holds because the
inconsistency is not specific to the dynamics created by a particular channel, but it is rather a
model feature. Therefore, we proceed with the current parsimonious framework and leave these
additional considerations to future research.



9     New Evidence for Future Research: U.S. Patent Trends

In Section 6, we established that a decline in knowledge diffusion is the dominant culprit behind
the observed market power and business dynamism trends in the United States. A natural follow-
up question is, what caused a decline in knowledge diffusion? Providing a decisive answer to
this question is beyond the scope of the analysis presented here. Nevertheless, we think it is
worth reflecting briefly on this question in light of some new empirical evidence, which may
prove useful in guiding future research in this direction.

      In Akcigit and Ates (2019), we elaborate on several candidates that could justify a decline in
knowledge diffusion—use of tacit knowledge and data in production, outsourcing of production
processes, and regulations, to name a few. We extend the discussion here by providing new
evidence on the use (or abuse) of patents in the United States. Patent and reassignment data from
the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) provide a fertile ground for investigating patterns
of knowledge diffusion, as firms rely heavily on patent protection to shield themselves from
imitators. A decline in imitators’ ability to copy and learn from market leaders’ technology due to
heavier, and especially strategic, use of patents by the leaders would limit the flow of knowledge
between firms and lead to a reduction in the intensity of knowledge diffusion. Therefore, we
now turn our attention to the changes in the use of patents in the U.S. economy across time.


Patent Concentration and Post-1980 Trends

As we reviewed in Section 2, many indicators of business dynamism suggest a declining trend
since the 1980s along with rising market concentration. We first investigate if there has been
a concomitant change in patenting concentration. To answer this question, Figure 9a looks at
the share of patents registered by the top 1 percent of innovating firms with the largest patent
stocks. The ratio exhibits a dramatic increase. While in the early 1980s about 35 percent of
patents were registered by the top 1 percent of firms sitting on the largest patent stocks, this ratio
reached almost 50 percent in three decades.33 In addition, the share of patents registered by new
entrants (firms that patent for the first time) exhibits the opposite trend: Notwithstanding the


    33 Notice   that the increase in this ratio has been larger than the rise in market concentration (see Autor et al., 2017b).


                                                                44
                                                                  What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?
               .5




                                                                                                               .09
Share of Top-1% Innovating Firms




                                                                                                               .08
                     .45




                                                                                                     Entrant Share
                                                                                                      .06      .07
       .4




                                                                                                               .05
                                                                                                               .04
               .35




                                   1980              1990             2000              2010                                 1980             1990             2000        2010
                                                               year                                                                                     year


                                          a) Share of Patents of the Top 1% Patenting Firms                                         b) Entrants’ Patent Share over Time

                                                                                Figure 9: Registry of Patents

                                                            Source: Authors’ own calculation using U.S. Patent and Trademark Office data


                                   small pickup in the early 1980s, there has been a dramatic secular decline in the entrants’ share
                                   since then, with the ratio falling more than 50 percent in 25 years (Figure 9b).

                                          A common practice that market leaders follow is to buy patents in the market to strengthen
                                   their intellectual property arsenals. This way, leaders can create a dense web of patents or “patent
                                   thickets” (Shapiro, 2001), which makes it difficult for competitors to get close to the market
                                   leader’s technology domain and potentially leapfrog. To investigate related patterns, we make
                                   use of patent reassignment data, which keep detailed records of all transactions of patents be-
               .55




                                                                                                               .75
                           .5




                                                                                                               .7
Share of Top-1% Buyer Firms




                                                                                                     Share of Small Buyers
                 .45




                                                                                                                  .65
          .4




                                                                                                         .6
.35




                                                                                                               .55
               .3




                                                                                                               .5




                                   1980              1990             2000              2010                                 1990      1995          2000         2005    2010
                                                               year                                                                                     year


                                                a) Share of Top-1% Buyers over Time                                                 b) Share of Small Buyers over Time

                                                                             Figure 10: Reassignment of Patents

                                                            Source: Authors’ own calculation using U.S. Patent and Trademark Office data




                                                                                                45
                           What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


tween entities. As in patent registries, we observe stark trends in patent reassignments since the
1980s. Figure 10a focuses on the purchasing trends of the top 1 percent of firms with the largest
patent portfolios. The figure reveals that while 30 percent of the transacted patents were reas-
signed to the firms with the largest patent stocks in the 1980s, the share went up to 55 percent by
2010. This drastic increase has crowded out small players in the market, as illustrated in Figure
10b. The figure shows the likelihood of a patent to be assigned to a small firm, conditional on
that patent being transacted from another small firm and recorded.34 In the past two decades, the
fraction of transacted patents that are reassigned to small firms has dropped dramatically from
75 percent to almost 50 percent, implying a shift of ownership from the hands of small firms to
large ones.

       These figures reveal that concentration in patent production and reassignment has surged,
and firms with the largest patent (knowledge) stock have further expanded their intellectual
property arsenals. Given that patents are exclusively used to prevent competitors from using
the patent holders’ technology, these trends can imply that the heavy use of patents by market
leaders might have caused the decline in knowledge diffusion from the best to the rest. Fur-
thermore, empirical evidence shows that the decline in business dynamism has accelerated after
2000, especially in some high-tech sectors (Decker et al., 2016b). A closer look at the patent data
reveals corroborating evidence on the potential strategic use of patents, which we elaborate next.


Strategic Use of Patents and Post-2000 Trends

In this part, we investigate whether firms produce strategic patents, which help the firm build
thickets around its core business to ensure that technologies are not easily copied and challenged
by others. To this end, we make use of patent records, which contain a lot of information about
the potential use of specific patent files. Two pieces of information are especially useful for our
purposes: citations and text of claims. We start with the analysis of the former.

       Either firms can explore new areas of research to expand into new fields, or they can focus on
their existing technologies and try to build a protective wall around them. Akcigit and Kerr (2018)
dub the former exploratory patents as “external” and the more exploitative ones as “internal”
patents. If a firm’s aim is mostly protecting its core technology, the new internal patent will
cite many patents from the firm’s existing portfolio. In contrast, if a firm’s aim is expanding
into new fields, more citations will be made in that case to patents that are not in the firm’s
portfolio. In this regard, the fraction of self-citations is informative about how internal a patent
is and how likely it is that a patent serves to build a thicket. Figure 11a explores the self-citation
dynamics over time. The striking observation is that while until 2000 patents were becoming
more explorative in nature based on our earlier interpretation, this trend reverses completely
around 2000, and patents become more exploitative and internal since then.
  34 The designation as a “small business concern” derives from the USPTO’s U.S. Patent Grant Maintenance Fee
Events database, which records information on patent renewals.


                                                     46
                                                        What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?




                                                                                                     180
           .4
           .35




                                                                                                             170
Share of Self Citations




                                                                                           Mean Claim Length
               .3




                                                                                                 160
    .25




                                                                                                     150
           .2




                                                                                                     140
           .15




                          1980            1990              2000              2010                                 1980          1990             2000        2010
                                                     year                                                                                  year


                                      a) Share of Self Citations over Time                                                b) Average Claim Length over Time

                                                      Figure 11: Self-citation and Claim Length Patterns

                                                  Source: Authors’ own calculation using U.S. Patent and Trademark Office data


                                 Another interesting piece of information on a patent file is the length of its claims. If a firm
                          is introducing a novel technology that makes a broad contribution to the field, the relevant patent
                          would be expected to have a relatively short claim, reflecting the broader scope. However, if a
                          patent is making a marginal contribution to an already crowded area, then the claims are likely to
                          be much longer and also much narrower in scope. Therefore, the length of the claim could show
                          us how broad or narrow the contributions are. Figure 11b shows the evolution of average patent
                          claim length over time. Intriguingly, patent claims were getting shorter until 2000, suggesting
                          that patents were becoming broader in scope, which completely reversed again around 2000.
                          Since then, claim length has been increasing steadily, indicating that patents are getting narrower
                          in scope and also less original.

                                 These post-2000 observations likely imply that patents have recently been used to crowd ex-
                          isting technology fields with incremental additional information, limiting the scope for spillovers
                          to competitors. Intriguingly, the timing of these dramatic changes coincides with the period when
                          business dynamism has slowed down even more. While several measures of business dynamism
                          have indicated a slowdown in most sectors of the U.S. economy since the 1980s, the decline in the
                          high-tech sector has become most visible in the 2000s (Decker et al., 2016b). As shown in Figure
                          12, the dispersion of firm growth in high-tech sectors started to decline steadily around 2000.
                          Decker et al. (2016b) document that other measures of business dynamism, such as gross job
                          reallocation, reverberate with this post-2000 pattern, again especially in high-tech sectors. In this
                          regard, our post-2000 findings tell a coherent story with these empirical regularities, suggesting
                          a concurrent slowdown in knowledge diffusion and business dynamism.

                                 To sum up, these results constitute strong suggestive evidence that the concentration and use
                          of patents, or intellectual property more broadly, have dramatically changed over time. Patent


                                                                                      47
                                                       What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?




                                     35
                      90−50 Differential, High Tech
                          25         20      30




                                                      1980            1990             2000                2010
                                                                                year


                                                       Figure 12: 90-50 Differential in High Tech Sector
       Notes: Taken from Decker et al. (2016b). Similar patterns are documented for the 50-10 differential,
       for the balanced sample of continuers, and gross job reallocation in the Information sector.


concentration has been trending up since the 1980s, and the nature of patents produced started
to shift around 2000 toward more internal and narrower in scope, indicating a more strategic use
of patents. These observations are broadly consistent with declining knowledge diffusion from
the technology frontier to followers and have likely contributed to declining business dynamism
through the lens of our model.



10    Conclusion

In this paper, we shed light on the heated debate about rising market concentration and declining
business dynamism using a micro-founded structural model of endogenous firm dynamics. The
key mechanism of the framework is the strategic innovation decisions of firms in response to
the degree of competition they face, which reflects their technological position relative to their
competitors. The resulting best–versus–the–rest dynamics help the model jointly account for
several prominent empirical trends that the U.S. economy has observed over the past several
decades. This structural framework allows us to assess the importance of four relevant channels
that could have contributed to the observed regularities. We accomplish this analysis in two
quantitative exercises in which we carefully account for the responses of aggregate variables of
interest over the transitional period. Both exercises highlight the dominant role of a slowdown in
knowledge diffusion from the frontier firms to the follower ones in explaining empirical trends.
This result hinges on the trickle-down effect of slower knowledge diffusion on firm entry as well
as the compositional dynamics arising from the less frequent catching–up of followers with the


                                                                              48
                         What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


market leaders, distorting competition dynamics.

    In their extensive study, Andrews et al. (2016) show a widening productivity gap between
frontier and laggard firms, which the authors interpret to indicate declining knowledge diffusion.
In parallel, our complementary empirical investigation presents new evidence on the potential
symptoms of slower knowledge diffusion from the U.S. patent data. In particular, we docu-
ment a higher concentration of patent ownership through both production and acquisition of
new patents, echoing the broader patterns of market concentration. Moreover, we observe an
increasingly more strategic use of patents in the post-2000 era, as indicated by their increasingly
internal nature. These changes have likely contributed to the decline in business dynamism, with
the flow of knowledge or spillovers to competitors becoming more constrained over time.

    The findings of this paper also present a direction for both future research and policy design.
As discussed previously, several channels could have distorted the diffusion of knowledge. A
short list of candidates include globalization, regulations, the changing nature of production and
the increasing use of data. In addition, our empirical investigation points to an intensified use
of patents to deter knowledge spillovers and potential competition. Opening the black box of
the nature of knowledge diffusion and determining the drivers of its slowdown are vital topics
for future research in this direction. To that end, in an ongoing work (Akcigit et al., 2019),
we study the link between globalization and knowledge diffusion in the OECD countries. Our
current findings show that the diffusion of knowledge shows a great degree of heterogeneity
across firms and has become stronger among multinational firms while getting weaker among
domestic ones. In terms of policy, the results suggest that the appropriate response to revive
business dynamism should focus on post-entry distortions that impede competition between
leader and follower firms. Such competition policy would not only affect incumbent firms, but
also incentivize business entry through positive trickle-down effects.

    Finally, our work emphasizes the importance of a comprehensive approach that links micro-
level changes in market primitives to macro outcomes in analyzing the drivers of prominent
empirical trends in the U.S. economy. The distinction between market primitives and the ob-
served outcomes is essential in that it helps us avoid enforcing a certain relationship between
macro outcomes that might be related in various ways—a criticism by Syverson (2019)—and get
to the root of those outcomes. While each one of candidate mechanisms can potentially speak
to some specific trends, a comparative study of all these channels in light of all empirical reg-
ularities allows us to determine the relative quantitative bite of these channels and to identify
the potential common cause. We believe that such quantitative comparison is vital for academic
work to guide policy decisions.




                                                49
                       What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


References
Acemoglu, Daron and Pascual Restrepo, “Robots and Jobs: Evidence from US Labor Markets,”
 2017. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 23285.
   and Ufuk Akcigit, “Intellectual Property Rights Policy, Competition and Innovation,” Journal
  of the European Economic Association, 2012, 10 (1), 1–42.
  , , Douglas Hanley, and William Kerr, “Transition to Clean Technology,” Journal of Political
  Economy, 2016, 124 (1), 52–104.
  , , Harun Alp, Nicholas Bloom, and William Kerr, “Innovation, Reallocation, and Growth,”
  American Economic Review, 2018, 108 (11), 3450–3491.
Aghion, Philippe, Antonin Bergeaud, Timo Boppart, Peter J. Klenow, and Huiyu Li, “A Theory
 of Falling Growth and Rising Rents,” 2019. mimeo.
  , Christopher Harris, and John Vickers, “Competition and Growth with Step-by-step Innova-
  tion: An Example,” European Economic Review, 1997, 41 (3-5), 771–782.
  , , Peter Howitt, and John Vickers, “Competition, Imitation and Growth with Step-by-Step
  Innovation,” Review of Economic Studies, 2001, 68 (3), 467–492.
  , Nick Bloom, Richard Blundell, Rachel Griffith, and Peter Howitt, “Competition and Inno-
  vation: An Inverted-U Relationship,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2005, 120 (2), 701–728.
Akcigit, Ufuk and Sina T. Ates, “Ten Facts on Declining Business Dynamism and Lessons from
 Endogenous Growth Theory,” 2019. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
 25755.
   and William R. Kerr, “Growth through Heterogeneous Innovations,” Journal of Political Econ-
  omy, 2018, 126 (4), 1374–1443.
  , Sina T. Ates, and Giammario Impullitti, “Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized
  World,” 2018. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 24543.
  , , and Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, “Diverging Productivity of the Best and the Rest: The Role
  of Globalization,” 2019. mimeo.
Andrews, Dan, Chiara Criscuolo, and Peter N. Gal, “Frontier Firms, Technology Diffusion and
 Public Policy,” 2015. OECD Productivity Working Paper No. 2.
  , , and , “The Best versus the Rest: The Global Productivity Slowdown, Divergence across
  Firms and the Role of Public Policy,” 2016. OECD Productivity Working Paper 5/2016.
Appelbaum, Binyamin, “Corporate Tax Code Proves Hard to Change,” The New York Times, 2011.
 https://www.nytimes.com/2011/01/28/us/politics/28tax.html?_r=1, accessed on 1/28/2019.
Autor, David, David Dorn, Lawrence F. Katz, Christina Patterson, and John Van Reenen, “Con-
 centrating on the Fall of the Labor Share,” American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (5), 180–85.
  , , , , and , “The Fall of the Labor Share and the Rise of Superstar Firms,” 2017.
  National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 23396.
Azar, José, Ioana Marinescu, and Marshall I. Steinbaum, “Labor Market Concentration,” 2017.
 National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 24147.



                                              50
                        What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


Bajgar, Matej, Giuseppe Berlingieri, Sara Calligaris, Chiara Criscuolo, and Jonathan Timmis,
  “Industry Concentration in Europe and North America,” 2019. OECD Productivity Working
  Papers No. 18.
Baker, Jonathan B., “Economics and Politics: Perspectives on the Goals and Future of Antitrust,”
  Fordham Law Review, 2012, 81, 2175.
Barkai, Simcha, “Declining Labor and Capital Shares,” 2017. mimeo.
Bessen, James E., “Accounting for Rising Corporate Profits: Intangibles or Regulatory Rents?,”
  2016. Law & Economics Paper Series 16-18, Boston University School of Law.
  , “Information Technology and Industry Concentration,” 2017. Law & Economics Paper Series
  17–41, Boston University School of Law.
Bivens, Josh, Elise Gould, Lawrence Mishel, and Heidi Shierholz, “Raising America’s Pay:
  Why It’s Our Central Economic Policy Challenge,” 2014. Economic Policy Institute. Washing-
  ton, D.C.
  , Lora Engdahl, Elise Gould, Teresa Kroeger, Celine McNicholas, Lawrence Mishel, Zane
  Mokhiber, Heidi Shierholz, Marni von Wilpert, Valerie Wilson, and Ben Zipperer, “How
  Today’s Unions Help Working People: Giving Workers the Power to Improve Their Jobs and
  Unrig the Economy,” 2017. Economic Policy Institute. Washington, D.C.
Bloom, Nicholas, Charles I. Jones, John Van Reenen, and Michael Webb, “Are Ideas Getting
  Harder to Find?,” 2017. National Bureau Economic Research Working Paper 23782.
Boehm, Christoph E., Aaron Flaaen, and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar, “Multinationals Offshoring, and
  the Decline of U.S. Manufacturing,” 2017. Center for Economic Studies, U.S. Census Bureau,
  Working Papers 17-22.
Bravo-Biosca, Albert, Chiara Criscuolo, and Carlo Menon, “What Drives the Dynamics of Busi-
  ness Growth?,” 2013. OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers No. 1.
Budd, Christopher, Christopher Harris, and John Vickers, “A Model of the Evolution of
  Duopoly: Does the Asymmetry between Firms Tend to Increase or Decrease?,” Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies, 1993, 60 (3), 543–573.
Calligaris, Sara, Chiara Criscuolo, and Luca Marcolin, “Mark-ups in the Digital Era,” 2018.
  OECD Working Paper 2018-10.
Congressional Budget Office, “Federal Support for Research and Development,” 2007. Wash-
 ington, D.C. https://www.cbo.gov/publication/18750.
  , “International Comparisons of Corporate Income Tax Rates,” 2017.         Washington, D.C.
  https://www.cbo.gov/publication/52419.
Cooley, Thomas F. and Edward C. Prescott, “Economic Growth and Business Cycles,” in
 Thomas F Cooley, ed., Frontiers of Business Cycle Research, Princeton University Press, 1995,
 pp. 1–38.
Crain, Nicole V. and W. Mark Crain, “The Impact of Regulatory Costs on Small Firms,”
  2010.   Washington, D.C.: Office of Advocacy, U.S. Small Business Administration
  https://www.sba.gov/advocacy/impact-regulatory-costs-small-firms.




                                              51
                       What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


Crouzet, Nicolas and Janice Eberly, “Understanding Weak Capital Investment: The Role of
  Market Concentration and Intangibles,” 2018. Jackson Hole Economic Policy Symposium.
Cunningham, Colleen, Song Ma, and Florian Ederer, “Killer Acquisitions,” Academy of Manage-
 ment Proceedings, 2018, (1).
Davis, Steven J. and John C. Haltiwanger, “Dynamism Diminished: The Role of Housing Mar-
 kets and Credit Conditions,” 2019. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
 25466.
Davis, Steven, John Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh, Job Creation and Destruction, Cambridge, MA:
 MIT Press, 1996.
De Loecker, Jan and Jan Eeckhout, “The Rise of Market Power and The Macroeconomic Impli-
 cations,” 2017. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 23687.
   and , “Global Market Power,” 2018. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
  24768.
De Ridder, Maarten, “Market Power and Innovation in the Intangible Economy,” 2019.
 Cambridge-INET Working Paper 2019/08.
Decker, Ryan A., John C. Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, “Changing Business
 Dynamism and Productivity: Shocks vs. Responsiveness,” 2018. National Bureau Economic
 Research Working Paper 24236.
  , John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, “Where Has All The Skewness Gone?
  The Decline In High-Growth (Young) Firms In The US,” 2015. National Bureau of Economic
  Research Working Paper 21776.
  , , , and , “Declining Business Dynamism: What We Know and the Way Forward,”
  American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 2016, 106 (5), 203–07.
  , , , and , “Where Has All The Skewness Gone? The Decline in High-Growth (Young)
  Firms in The US,” European Economic Review, 2016, 86, 4–23.
Decker, Ryan, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, “The Role of Entrepreneur-
 ship in US Job Creation and Economic Dynamism,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2014, 28
 (3), 3–24.
Diez, Federico, Daniel Leigh, and Suchanan Tambunlertchai, “Global Market Power and Its
 Macroeconomic Implications,” 2018. International Monetary Fund Working Papers 18/137.
Eggertsson, Gauti B., Jacob A. Robbins, and Ella Getz Wold, “Kaldor and Piketty’s Facts: The
  Rise of Monopoly Power in the United States,” 2018. National Bureau of Economic Research
  Working Paper 24287.
Elsby, Michael, Bart Hobijn, and Aysegul Sahin, “The Decline of the U.S. Labor Share,” 2013.
  Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Working Paper 2013-27.
Farber, Henry S., Daniel Herbst, Ilyana Kuziemko, and Suresh Naidu, “Unions and Inequality
  Over the Twentieth Century: New Evidence from Survey Data,” 2018. National Bureau of
  Economic Research Working Paper 24587.




                                             52
                         What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


Farhi, Emmanuel and François Gourio, “Accounting for Macro-Finance Trends: Market Power,
  Intangibles, and Risk Premia,” 2018. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
  25282.
Fernald, John G., “A Quarterly, Utilization-Adjusted Series on Total Factor Productivity,” 2012.
  Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Working Paper Series 2012–19.
Furman,     Jason    and    Laura   Giuliano,   “New   Data    Show    That   Roughly
  One-Quarter     of   U.S.    Workers     Hold  an   Occupational  License,”     2016.
  https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/blog/2016/06/17/new-data-show-roughly-one-
  quarter-us-workers-hold-occupational-license.
  and Peter Orszag, “Slower Productivity and Higher Inequality: Are They Related?,” 2018.
  Working Paper 2018-4, Peterson Institute for International Economics.
Gordon, Robert J., The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil
 War, Princeton University Press, 2016.
Gourio, François, Todd Messer, and Michael Siemer, “What Is the Economic Impact of the
 Slowdown in New Business Formation?,” Chicago Fed Letter, 2014, (Sep).
Gravelle, Jane, “Historical Effective Marginal Tax Rates on Capital Income,” 2004. Congressional
 Research Service RS21706, Library of Congress.
Grossman, Gene M., Elhanan Helpman, Ezra Oberfield, and Thomas Sampson, “The Produc-
 tivity Slowdown and the Declining Labor Share: A Neoclassical Exploration,” 2017. National
 Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 23853.
Grullon, Gustavo, Yelena Larkin, and Roni Michaely, “Are U.S. Industries Becoming More
 Concentrated?,” 2017. mimeo.
Gutiérrez, Germán and Thomas Philippon, “Investment-less Growth: An Empirical Investiga-
 tion,” 2016. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 22897.
   and , “Declining Competition and Investment in the U.S.,” 2017. National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research Working Paper 23583.
  and     , “Fading Stars,” 2019. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 25529.
  , Callum Jones, and Thomas Philippon, “Entry Costs and the Macroeconomy,” 2019. National
  Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 25609.
Hall, Robert E., “New Evidence on Market Power, Profit, Concentration, and the Role of Mega-
 Firms in the U.S. Economy,” 2018. Standofrd University, mimeo.
Haltiwanger, John, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, “Who Creates Jobs? Small versus Large
 versus Young,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2013, 95 (2), 347–361.
Harris, Christopher and John Vickers, “Perfect Equilibrium in a Model of a Race,” Review of
 Economic Studies, 1985, 52 (2), 193–209.
  and     , “Racing with Uncertainty,” Review of Economic Studies, 1987, 54 (1), 1–21.
Hopenhayn, Hugo, Julian Neira, and Rish Singhania, “From Population Growth to Firm De-
 mographics: Implications for Concentration, Entrepreneurship and the Labor Share,” 2018.
 National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 25382.



                                                53
                        What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, Bent Sorensen, Carolina Villegas-Sanchez, and Vadym Volosovych,
 “How to Construct Nationally Representative Firm Level Data from ORBIS Global Database
 and What Do We Learn from Representativeness?,” 2019. mimeo.
Karabarbounis, Loukas and Brent Neiman, “The Global Decline of the Labor Share,” Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 2013, 129 (1), 61–103.
Karahan, Fatih, Benjamin Pugsley, and Aysegul Sahin, “Demographic Origins of the Startup
 Deficit,” 2016. New York Fed, mimeo.
Kaymak, Baris and Immo Schott, “Corporate Tax Cuts and the Decline of the Labor Share,”
 2018. Society for Economic Dynamics, 2018 Meeting Papers 943.
Kehrig, Matthias and Nicolas Vincent, “The Micro-Level Anatomy of the Labor Share Decline,”
 2018. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 25275.
Khan, Lina M., “Amazon’s Antitrust Paradox,” Yale Law Journal, 2016, 126, 710–805.
Klapper, Leora and Inessa Love, “The Impact of Business Environment Reforms on New Firm
  Registration,” 2010. World Bank Impact Evaluation series no. IE 49, Policy Research working
  paper no. WPS 5493.
  , Luc Laeven, and Raghuram Rajan, “Entry Regulation as a Barrier to Entrepreneurship,”
  Journal of Financial Economics, 2006, 82 (3), 591–629.
Klette, Tor Jakob and Samuel Kortum, “Innovating Firms and Aggregate Innovation,” Journal of
  Political Economy, 2004, 112 (5), 986–1018.
Kocieniewski, David, “G.E.’s Strategies Let It Avoid Taxes Altogether,” The New York Times, 2011.
 https://www.nytimes.com/2011/03/25/business/economy/25tax.html?pagewanted=all, ac-
 cessed on 1/28/2019.
Kortum, Samuel, “Equilibrium R&D and the Patent–R&D Ratio: U.S. Evidence,” The American
 Economic Review, 1993, 83 (2), 450–457.
Laubach, Thomas and John C. Williams, “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,” Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 2003, 85 (4), 1063–1070.
Lawrence, Robert Z., “Recent Declines in Labor’s Share in U.S. Income: A Preliminary Neoclas-
  sical Account,” 2015. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 21296.
Liu, Ernest, Atif Mian, and Amir Sufi, “Low Interest Rates, Market Power, and Productivity
  Growth,” 2019. Becker Friedman Institute Working Papers Series 2019-09.
Lynn, Barry C., Cornered: The New Monopoly Capitalism and The Economics of Destruction, John
  Wiley & Sons Hoboken, NJ, 2010.
Naidu, Suresh, Eric A. Posner, and Glen Weyl, “Antitrust Remedies for Labor Market Power,”
 Harv. L. Rev., 2018, 132, 536.
Nekarda, Christopher J. and Valerie A. Ramey, “The Cyclical Behavior of the Price-Cost
 Markup,” 2013. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 19099.
OECD, “Market Concentration - Note by the BIAC,” 2018. Hearing on Market Concentration.
  , “Market Concentration - Note by the United States,” 2018. Hearing on Market Concentration.



                                               54
                         What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


Pugsley, Benjamin W., Peter Sedláček, and Vincent Sterk, “The Nature of Firm Growth,” 2018.
  Center for Economic Studies, U.S. Census Bureau, Working Paper 18-30.
Rossi-Hansberg, Esteban, Pierre-Daniel Sarte, and Nicholas Trachter, “Diverging Trends in
 National and Local Concentration,” 2018. National Bureau of Economic Research Working
 Paper 25066.
Shapiro, Carl, “Navigating the Patent Thicket: Cross Licenses, Patent Pools, and Standard Set-
  ting,” in “Innovation Policy and the Economy, Volume 1” NBER Chapters, National Bureau of
  Economic Research, Inc., October 2001, pp. 119–150.
Summers, Laurence H., “Reflections on the ’New Secular Stagnation Hypothesis’,” in Richard
  Baldwin and Coen Teulings, eds., Secular Stagnation: Facts, Causes and Cures, CEPR Press Lon-
  don, A VoxEU.org eBook, 2014, pp. 27–38.
Summers, Lawrence H., “US Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero
  Lower Bound,” Business Economics, 2014, 49 (2), 65–73.
Syverson, Chad, “Market Structure and Productivity: A Concrete Example,” Journal of Political
  Economy, 2004, 112 (6), 1181–1222.
  , “Product Substitutability and Productivity Dispersion,” The Review of Economics and Statistics,
  2004, 86 (2), 534–550.
  , “Macroeconomics and Market Power:          Facts, Potential Explanations, and Open
  Questions,” Brookings Institution Report, January 2019.    Accessed January 21, 2019.
  https://www.brookings.edu/research/macroeconomics-and-market-power-facts-potential-
  explanations-and-open-questions/.
The Economist, “Regulating the Internet Giants: The World’s Most Valuable Resource Is No
  Longer Oil, but Data,” May 2017.
Tyson, Laura and Greg Linden, “The Corporate R&D Tax Credit and US Innovation and Com-
  petitiveness: Gauging the Economic and Fiscal Effectiveness of the Credit,” 2012. Washington:
  Center for American Progress.
U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, “Corporate Profits after Tax (without IVA and CCAdj) [CP]
  and Federal Government: Tax Receipts on Corporate Income [FCTAX],” 2019. retrieved from
  FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis; https://fred.stlouisfed.org/graph/?g=aWA accessed
  on 1/26/2019.
U.S. Chamber of Commerce Foundation, “The Regulatory Impact on Small Businesses: Com-
  plex. Cumbersome. Costly.,” 2017. Washington, D.C.
Williams, John C., “The Decline in the Natural Rate of Interest,” Business Economics, 2015, 50 (2),
 57–60.




                                                55
                                                    What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?



Appendices

A        Some Notable Changes in the U.S. Economy

In the past several decades, there have been some notable (regulatory) changes in the United
States that have shaped the channels that we consider as potential drivers of declining business
dynamism and rising market concentration. In this section, we briefly discuss these changes with
a focus on the corporate tax rates, R&D subsidies, and entry costs (see Section 9 in the main text
for the changes in the knowledge diffusion margin).
     The U.S. tax system experienced two major overhauls in the 1980s with the passage of the
Economic Recovery Act of 1981 and the Tax Reform Act of 1986. Although the United States
has notoriously sustained the highest statutory corporate income tax rates among the developed
countries until recently, the Tax Reform Act actually decreased this rate substantially in 1986,
as shown by the solid black line in Figure A.1. Moreover, despite high statutory rates, the
effective tax rates that determine the actual corporate tax bill paid by the firms are known to
be much lower due to various tax benefits. According to the estimates of the CBO, the effective
rate was about 19 percent in 2012, almost 20 percent below the statutory rate (Congressional
Budget Office, 2017).35 Indeed, the average effective rates were lower in the period after 1980
                                    50        40
                           Corporate Tax Rates
                         20        30
                                    10




                                                   1970         1980      1990      2000               2010
                                                                           year

                                                          Statutory    Effective   Effective, capital income



                                          Figure A.1: Effective Corporate Tax Rate in the U.S.
Notes: Statutory tax rates are obtained from Internal Revenue Service Statistics of Income Historical Table 24 and show
the value for the top bracket. Statutory tax rates have been at least the level shown in the graph for corporate income
brackets above USD75,000. Effective corporate tax rate is calculated as Tax Receipts on Corporate Income/(Corporate
Profits After Tax (without IVA and CCAdj)+Federal Government’s Tax Receipts on Corporate Income) using Federal
Reserve Economic Data (U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, 2019). Effective corporate tax rates on capital income is
taken from Congressional Research Service report RS21706 (Gravelle, 2004).

    35
     For instance, while trucking companies paid 30 percent, biotech companies paid less than 5 percent of their
income as tax in 2009 (Appelbaum, 2011). Even more, some companies such as General Electric not only did not pay


                                                                         56
                                              What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


than the previous two decades and have fallen further strongly after 2000 (dashed line). Finally,
the effective corporate tax rate on capital income has declined as well, as depicted by the marked
solid line.
     Probably a less-known change has occurred in the R&D support provided by the U.S. gov-
ernment. In 1981, the government introduced a federal R&D tax credit for the first time. Starting
in 1982 with Minnesota, several states followed suit by introducing their own state-level R&D
tax credits. Figure A.2 summarizes these changes. The gray bar denotes the introduction of the
federal tax credit, and the subsequent bars show the total number of U.S. states with a provision
of R&D tax credits, along with their names. This substantial support for R&D boosted firms’ in-
vestment in innovative activity (Akcigit et al., 2018), which is especially true for large established
incumbents—the recipients of the bulk of R&D tax credit claims (Tyson and Linden, 2012)—given
that firms need to generate taxable profits to claim the credit.36 Figure A.2 also shows that there
were significant changes in both R&D expenditure of firms and domestic innovative activity fol-
lowing these aggressive policy changes. Average R&D intensity of publicly traded U.S. firms
Make America Great Again!
showed a dramatic increase (solid line). Moreover, after an expected delay, the annual share of
patents registered by U.S. residents in total patent applications increased as well (dashed line).

                                      .04                    Introduction of R&D                                                 .7
                                                               tax credit (ERTA)




                                                                                                                                       US Share in Total Patents (dashed)
                                                                                                                       17
                                                                                                                       AZ   16
                                     .035                                                                              NJ AZ
                                                                                                                       RI   NJ
                 R&D/Sales (solid)




                                                                                                                  13   MO RI
                                                                                                                                 .65
                                                                                                                  CT CT MO
                                                                                                        11 11     NH NH CT
                                      .03
                                                                                                   10   MA MA MA MA MA
                                                                                              9    IL   IL   IL   IL   IL   IL
                                                                                         8    OR OR OR OR OR OR OR
                                                                                         ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND
                                     .025                                           6    KS KS KS KS KS KS KS KS                 .6
                                                                                5   CA CA CA CA CA CA CA CA CA
                                                                               WI   WI   WI   WI   WI   WI   WI   WI   WI   WI
                                                                          3    WV WV WV WV WV WV WV WV WV WV

                                      .02                                 IN   IN   IN   IN   IN   IN   IN   IN   IN   IN   IN
                                                             1   1   1    IA   IA   IA   IA   IA   IA   IA   IA   IA   IA   IA
                                                             MN MN MN MN MN MN MN MN MN MN MN MN MN MN
                                                                                                                                 .55
                                            1975      1980               1985                     1990                  1995
                                                                  Year
                                     Figure A.2: Federal and State-level R&D Tax Credit in the U.S.
                                     — R&D Intensity             - - - Patenting Share of the U.S.
                                                        Source: Akcigit et al. (2018).

    Market economies are regulated to level the playing field for competing firms and encourage
a more dynamic business environment. Yet too much regulation could slow the economy by sim-
ply distorting the incentives to invest and grow. “Overregulation” has become a growing concern
among policy circles, especially with its potentially larger burden on small businesses (Crain and

any taxes, they even claimed positive tax benefits (Kocieniewski, 2011).
   36 In fact, the nonrefundability feature of the U.S. R&D tax credits is subject to major criticism, along with the

lack of preferential rates for small firms, which contrasts with schemes in other major economies such as France
and the United Kingdom (Congressional Budget Office, 2007; Tyson and Linden, 2012). These features are especially
important for the efficiency of tax credits in supporting the innovative activity of highly dynamic small and young
firms, which are usually the firms that are constrained by the high cost of R&D capital.


                                                                         57
                                            What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


Crain, 2010; U.S. Chamber of Commerce Foundation, 2017), and the current U.S. administration
is working hard to scale back the regulatory framework.37 The detrimental effect of higher entry
barriers, and regulations in particular, on business entry has also been documented by the aca-
demic literature (Klapper et al., 2006; Klapper and Love, 2010). In more recent work, Gutiérrez
et al. (2019) stress the importance of higher entry costs in terms of the regulatory framework in
driving the decline in business entry and competition.
     The level of regulatory burden in the economy is hard to measure. However, the length of
the Federal Register, where all new rules, executive orders, and other legal notices are published,
gives a clue about how the regulatory burden has evolved in the United States. Figure A.3
plots the number of pages in the Federal Register over time. The increase in the amount of
flow of new regulations lends some support to the argument that regulatory burden on U.S.
businesses has grown, which could reasonably be expected to have weighed on entrants and
small businesses. In this sense, this regulatory shift could have had some detrimental impact on
the business dynamism. In light of this debate, we also investigate changes in the cost of entry
in our quantitative analysis.
                                       90000    80000
                                Number of Pages
                            60000    70000
                                       50000




                                                        1980 1983 1986 1989 1992 1995 1998 2001 2004 2007 2010 2013



                  Figure A.3: The Number of Pages in the Federal Register of the U.S.

                                                  Notes: Data is obtained from Regulatory Studies Center.




  37   See the Wall Street Journal article “The Trump Regulatory Game Plan.”


                                                                                   58
                              What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


B     Additional Analytical Derivations

B.1   Evolution of µmt


µm̄t+∆t − µm̄t
               = xm̄−1t µm̄−1t − ( x−m̄t + x̃−m̄t + δ) µm̄t                                                    (B.1)
     ∆t

 µ1t+∆t − µ1t
              = (2x0t + x̃0t ) µ0t + ((1 − φ) x−2t + (1 − φ̃) x̃−2t ) µ2t − ( x1t + x−1t + x̃−1t + δ) µ1t
     ∆t
                                                                                                       (B.2)


                  m̄
 µ0t+∆t − µ0t
              = ∑ φ f x−kt + φe x̃−kt + δ µkt + ((1 − φ) x−1t + (1 − φ̃) x̃−1t ) µ1t − (2x0t + x̃0t ) µ0t
                                         
     ∆t         k =1
                                                                                                               (B.3)


B.2   Welfare

In the model economy, aggregate welfare over horizon T calculated at time t0 is given by
                                             Z t0 + T
                                  Wct0   =              exp(−ρ (s − t)) log Ccs ds.
                                              t0

In Section 7, we report the difference in consumption-equivalent welfare between a counterfactual
and the baseline economy using the following relationship:
      Z t0 + T                                          Z t0 + T                                      
                                        new                                                       base
                 exp(−ρ (s − t0 )) log Ccs  ds =                   exp(−ρ (s − t0 )) log (1 + ς) Ccs     ds.   (B.4)
       t0                                                t0

If a parameter change generates a new income sequence Cct   new between t and t + T satisfying
                                                                          0     0
the above relationship, we say that the representative household in the counterfactual economy
has a ς% higher (lower) consumption-equivalent welfare over horizon T, with ς > 0 (ς < 0). In
other words, when ς > 0 (ς < 0), the representative consumer in the baseline economy would
need to receive ς% higher (lower) income at each point in time between t0 and t0 + T in order to
obtain the same level of welfare it would have in the counterfactual scenario.



C     Solution Algorithm

Before the discussion of the calibration results, a brief description of our solution algorithm is
in order. The algorithm builds on the one developed by Akcigit et al. (2018), who construct an
open-economy version of the model considered here. Our aim to find the transition path that
emerges as the result of endogenous responses of firms to changes in parameters. We solve a
discretized version of the system. The solution algorithm assumes that the economy is initially


                                                              59
                        What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


in the BGP and that the shocked parameter values converge to their new BGP value in T periods,
where each period is divided into eight sub-periods. Notice that, due to the endogenous firm
decisions and the resulting endogenous adjustments in aggregate variables, the convergence of
the economy the new BGP takes longer, which we assume to happen Tbgp > T periods. The
algorithm is an iterative backward solution method (see Acemoglu et al., 2016). The progression
of the algorithm starts with solving for the terminal balanced growth path and then derives firm
values and aggregate variables over the transition going backward from the terminal state. A
summary of steps is as follows.
  1. Start with a guess of parameter values.
  2. Compute the initial balanced growth path, where time derivatives are zero by definition.
     Compute the innovation rates, the implied growth rates, and finally the interest rate com-
     patible with balanced growth.
  3. Compute the terminal balanced growth path in Tbgp defined by the terminal parameter
     values similarly.
  4. Next calculate the equilibrium over the transition. Guess a time path for the interest rate
     with the terminal value set to its new BGP level. Solve for firm values and innovation rates
     backward in time starting from the terminal BGP.
  5. Using the resulting sequences and starting from the initial gap distribution implied by the
     initial BGP, simulate forward the income path and its growth rate. Use the Euler equation
     to derive the implied interest rate sequence and compare it to the series fed initially.
  6. Update the guess for the interest rate series with the implied one and restart from step 2
     until the two converge. Once they do, use the final interest rate series and firm decisions to
     compute the moments of interest.
  7. Compare model-based moments to data targets. Search over the parameter space until the
     following objective function (see Acemoglu et al., 2018) is minimized:

                                     N
                                          |model(k) − data(k)|
                                     ∑   1                1
                                                                          ,
                                    k =1 2 |model( k )| + 2 |data( k )|

     where k denotes each moments and N is the number of targets.




                                                 60
                                                           What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?


D      Additional Quantitative Results

                                                            0.2                                                              0.3

                                                                                                                             0.29
                                                           0.18
                                                                                                                             0.28



                             Subsidy Rate Parameter Path
                                                           0.16




                                                                                                                                    Tax Rate Parameter Path
                                                                                                                             0.27
                                                           0.14
                                                                                                                             0.26
                                                                                                          Subsidy
                                                           0.12                                                              0.25
                                                                                                          Corporate Tax

                                                                                                                             0.24
                                                            0.1
                                                                                                                             0.23
                                                           0.08
                                                                                                                             0.22
                                                           0.06
                                                                                                                             0.21

                                                           0.04                                                              0.2
                                                              1980      1985    1990   1995      2000      2005           2010
                                                                                       Year


                                                                     Figure D.4: Transition paths of s and τ



                  Table D.1: Sensitivity analysis: responses to 1% change in parameters

                   R&D scale                                           R&D scale         Step           Knowledge                                      Drastic
                  incumbent α                                           entrant α̃      size λ          diffusion δ                                innovation φ = φ̃
  Growth               -0.32%                                             -0.07%        1.35%              0.10%                                              0.02%
  Entry                -0.09%                                             -0.21%        0.32%              0.30%                                              0.09%
  R&D                  -0.46%                                              0.03%        1.22%             -0.44%                                              -0.10%
  Profit               -0.34%                                              0.09%        1.05%             -0.78%                                              -0.19%
  Markup               -0.07%                                              0.01%        0.21%             -0.13%                                              -0.03%
  Young                0.26%                                               2.82%        2.99%              2.24%                                              1.17%
Notes: Table entries show the elasticity of moments to each parameter. Precisely, they show the percentage change in each target in
response to a 1 percent increase in each parameter, keeping the other parameters constant at their calibrated value.




                                                                                       61
