NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE LOCAL AGGREGATE EFFECTS OF MINIMUM WAGE INCREASES
Daniel Cooper
María José Luengo-Prado
Jonathan A. Parker
Working Paper 25761
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25761

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2019

Special thanks to Giovanni Olivei and participants at the 2019 Federal Reserve System Credit
Bureau Data Users Conference for helpful suggestions and to David Brown, Chloe Lee, and
Sarah Morse for excellent research assistance. The views in this paper are our own and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston or the Federal Reserve
System or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Daniel Cooper, María José Luengo-Prado, and Jonathan A. Parker. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Local Aggregate Effects of Minimum Wage Increases
Daniel Cooper, María José Luengo-Prado, and Jonathan A. Parker
NBER Working Paper No. 25761
April 2019
JEL No. D14,E20,E31,J20,J38
ABSTRACT
Using variation in minimum wages across cities and controlling for differences in business-cycle
factors and long-run local economic trends, we find that following minimum wage increases, both
prices and nominal spending rise modestly. These gains are larger for certain sub-categories of
goods such as food away from home and in locations where low-wage workers are a larger share
of employment. Further, minimum wage increases are associated with reduced total debt among
households with low credit scores, higher auto debt, and increased access to credit.

Daniel Cooper
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
600 Atlantic Avenue
Boston, MA 02210
Daniel.Cooper@bos.frb.org
María José Luengo-Prado
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
600 Atlantic Ave
Boston, MA 02210
maria.luengo-prado@bos.frb.org

Jonathan A. Parker
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-642
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
JAParker@MIT.edu

1

Introduction

The minimum wage is one of the most popular, contentious, and frequently adjusted
economic policies in the United States. Since its introduction at the federal level in 1938,
the national minimum wage has been raised 22 times. State-level minimum wage changes
have occurred more frequently—especially recently—with 22 states increasing their minimum wages in 2019 alone (following 20 state-level increases in 2018). In addition, a
number of cities have raised the minimum wage within their geographic boundaries in
recent years. While a binding minimum wage raises the incentive for low-wage workers
to work, it also reduces the incentive for employers to hire them. As a result, a binding minimum wage lowers employment in a competitive labor market, although it can
raise employment in a monopsonistic labor market. A voluminous literature measures
the microeconomic effects of the minimum wage on the outcomes of low-wage workers
by, for example, comparing similar workers in the same labor market that are subject
to different minimum wages (see, Card and Krueger, 1994), or comparing employment
rates of different types of workers shortly after changes in minimum wages, controlling
for city-level economic conditions. But an important outcome of minimum wage changes
may be their influence on local economic conditions.
In this paper, we study local economies—defined as metropolitan statistical areas
(MSA’s or cities) that correspond to broad labor markets—and show how price levels,
consumer spending, household debt, and credit access adjust over time following minimum wage hikes.
We first show that overall inflation increases modestly in the year of a minimum
wage increase, and again by a similar amount in the subsequent year. This slow localaggregate price adjustment comes from rapid adjustment in prices for food away from
home, which is typically produced using a larger share of low-wage workers, and slower
and smaller adjustment in the prices for goods produced using fewer local low-wage
1

workers. Consistent with this interpretation, food away prices increase more in cities
where ex ante there are more workers earning at or near the minimum wage.
Second, we find increases in nominal consumption expenditures that are more broadbased following a rise in the minimum wage, although spending in most categories outside
of the food sector are small and roughly in line with the price increases in those sectors.
The response of nominal expenditure on food away from home is particular strong and
our estimates imply that real spending on food rises (households adjust the quantity
of their food expenditures) when minimum wages increase. This finding implies that
the income effects from minimum wage gains for low-wage workers and any local general
equilibrium effects (increases in local earnings or economic activity) that raise incomes or
demand outpace the substitution effects from the higher prices of food away from home.
We also find evidence that durable goods purchases rise in some specifications consistent
with Aaronson, Agarwal, and French (2012).
Finally, and consistent with this reaction of durable goods purchases, we show that
auto loans increase in response to an increase in the minimum wage, with larger effects
among likely constrained borrowers (subprime and young). Also, consistent with a relaxation of payment-to-income constraints on borrowing when the minimum wage increases,
credit appears to become easier to obtain, as measured by the number of open accounts
relative to credit inquiries (success rate). Overall, however, there is little change in debt
for the average individual, and debt levels for subprime individuals decrease when the
minimum wage rises, suggesting the effects of debt repayment dominate those of new
borrowing for bigger ticket items for this group.
We reach these conclusions by using the variation in minimum wages across states
(and cities where applicable) and over time. We measure the responses of growth rates
in local economic outcomes the year during and one year after a change in the minimum
wage. Many previous studies focused on the more immediate minimum wage effects over

2

a few months, which measure well the direct impact of the increase in the cost of lowwage labor, but omit medium-term responses to the prices of intermediate inputs (from
other firms) as the local economy converges to a new equilibrium. On the other hand,
we do not focus purely on the long-run relationship between minimum wages and local
outcomes because the long-run propensity of a state (city) to have a high minimum wage
seems likely to be related to other policies or the standard of living in that state (city).
For instance, a state (city) with a high long-run growth rate may raise its minimum wage
more than a low-growth state (city) due to increases in the relative cost of living. To
avoid such bias, we condition our analysis on the long-run growth rate in each locality
by including location fixed effects and conducting our analysis in growth rates (we also
include aggregate time effects). As a final control for the possibility that minimum
wage changes are to some extent predicated on transient local economic conditions, we
incorporate a Bartik-style (exogenous) measure of local employment growth that, by
construction, is orthogonal to changes in the local minimum wage and other city-specific
factors.
Quantitatively, we find that an increase in the minimum wage is associated with
a modest (borderline significant) rise in city-level prices: a 10 percent increase in the
minimum wage increases the local-aggregate CPI by 0.14 percentage points in the year
of the increase. This city-level inflation effect is persistent, with a cumulative price gain—
taking into account the lagged minimum wage change—of about 25 basis points for a 10
percent hike in the minimum wage.
These overall price increases are larger and more significant when we account for
differences in the share of low-wage workers across locations. Higher minimum wages
are likely associated with greater cost increases in locations with more low-wage workers.
Indeed, following a 10 percent increase in the minimum wage, we find that overall CPI
inflation is cumulatively 0.08 percentage points higher for each one-standard deviation

3

higher share of low-wage workers. The price change is larger, and more rapid, for prices
of food away from home, a consumption good that is typically produced using a greater
share of local, low-wage workers. Services prices—another sector dominated by low-wage
workers—also increase more noticeably following a minimum wage increase when we
account for differences in the low-wage worker share across locations.
Second, a 10 percent increase in the minimum wage is followed by 0.22 percent increase
in nominal consumer spending, presumably as a result of greater income and perhaps
employment, but also through relative prices and other channels as the local economy
adjusts to the higher minimum wage. For food at home and away from home, we find
that when the minimum wage rises, nominal spending increases more than the price
gains, suggesting that, on net, consumers raise the quantity of food that they consume
at and away from home. For durable goods, we find that cumulative nominal spending
increases roughly in line with prices when the minimum wage rises—a response that
is not statistically significant. However, nominal and real durable goods expenditure
growth exhibits a large and statistically significant response, at least contemporaneously,
to a change in the minimum wage when we control for differences in the share of lowwage workers across locations. While the real expenditure growth increase does not
persist – in the second year durable goods inflation rises while spending does not – this
durable consumption response to a change in the minimum wage is broadly consistent
with minimum wage increases relaxing households’ borrowing constraints for big-ticket
items.
Finally, we provide evidence consistent with improved credit availability for lowincome workers when minimum wages rise. Credit bureau data from the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York Consumer Credit Panel provided by Equifax (CCP) show higher success rates for credit applications following an increase in the minimum wage—particularly

4

for young and subprime borrowers.1 There is also a sizeable increase in auto loans following a minimum wage change, which points towards a demand-driven explanation for the
change in durable expenditures we observe along with the lagged gain in durable good
prices that we document. However, among households with low credit scores, minimum
wage hikes reduce the stock of debt outstanding.
Our baseline estimate that inflation rises 0.24 percentage points cumulatively in response to a 10 percent increase in minimum wages is consistent with early work by Wolff
and Nadiri (1981), who find that a 10-to-25 percent increase in the minimum wage raises
prices by 0.3 to 0.4 percentage points, a relatively modest effect. Lemos (2004) finds
that minimum wage increases in Brazil had similarly small price effects.2 These results
are also related to the (partial-equilibrium) analysis in Aaronson (2001)3 and Card and
Krueger (1994) of relative local restaurant prices in the months following an increase in
the minimum wage.
We focus on the price, spending, debt, and credit supply effects of minimum wage
changes and not the employment effects because the latter has been extensively researched
in the literature. State-level panel data analyses of the employment effects of the minimum wage are sensitive to specification, with estimates of the employment decline for
the most affected groups (teenage employees or low-wage workers) ranging from 0 to 0.19
percent for a 10 percent increase in the minimum wage.4 Our results on the importance
of the share of low-wage workers—across cities and in goods production—are consistent
1

Dettling and Hsu (2017) further document more direct-mail credit card offers for low-income individuals following minimum wage increases.
2
Lemos (2008) emphasized the limited work at the time on the relationship between minimum wage
changes and consumer prices. However, this is changing. Ganapati and Weaver (2017), Leung (2018),
MacDonald and Nilsson (2016), and Renkin, Montialoux, and Siegenthaler (2017) all examine the link
between minimum wages and prices.
3
Aaronson (2001) examines the relationship between minimum wage changes and restaurant-price
inflation relative to CPI inflation, not the local-aggregate outcomes of minimum wage changes.
4
For recent examples see Neumark, Salas, and Wascher (2014) and Dube, Lester, and Reich (2016).
In addition, Totty (2017) provides a nice review of the literature and the current minimum wage and
employment debate (see Table 1). Not focusing on specific groups like teenagers, we find negligible
effects of minimum wages on total employment or labor income in our city-level specifications.

5

with the existing literature that focuses on the employment effects of minimum wage
changes for teenage and/or fast-food workers or restaurant-industry price changes (see,
for example, Aaronson, French, and MacDonald, 2008; Card and Krueger, 1994; Basker
and Kahn, 2016). Similarly, Aaronson, Agarwal, and French (2012) examine the changes
in household income that occur in response to minimum wage changes for households
with minimum-wage workers compared to households without minimum-wage workers.
MaCurdy (2015) shows that increases in the national minimum wage raise consumer
prices across goods in a way that is more regressive than a typical state-level sales tax
increase, and that this effect is large enough that it can completely neutralize the direct
benefits for the working poor. Both our focus on local-aggregate outcomes and our results
on household debt and credit access complement these results by showing more broadly
how the local economy responds to minimum wage changes.5
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses minimum wage
changes in the United States along with our other data, Section 3 highlights our empirical
approach, and Section 4 presents our results. Section 5 concludes.

2

Data

We conduct our analysis at the city (MSA) level—consistent with the locations and
boundaries defined by BLS for their MSA-based CPI indices (CPI MSAs)—because this
level of geography captures a local labor market. Going forward we will refer to interchangeably to these areas as “cities” or “MSAs.” Our sample period runs from 1999
through 2017 (see Secton 2.5) and includes, especially recently, substantial variation in
minimum wages across locations. In addition, some data like minimum wages occur nat5

Many researchers are studying the relationship between minimum wages and outcomes other than
employment. For example, there is a nascent literature on the effects of minimum wages on health (see
Meltzer and Chen, 2011; Horn, Maclean, and Strain, 2016; Wehby, Dave, and Kaestner, 2016; Lenhart,
2017a,b).

6

urally at the state level while other data are constructed (e.g. consumption expenditures)
at the state level. Section 2.4 describes how we move from state-level data to city-level
data.

2.1

Minimum Wage Changes in the United States

Since its inception in 1938 as part of the Fair Labor Standards Act, policymakers at the
federal, state, and local levels have debated the appropriate level of the minimum wage
and often legislated changes. While minimum wages at the federal level (currently $7.25
per hour, and unchanged since 2009) serve as a floor for workers’ wages (and the minimum
wage in some states), many states set higher local minimum wages and recently there has
been a push in some states toward a $15 per hour minimum (“living”) wage.6 In addition,
some cities such as Seattle have city-specific minimum wages that supersede state-level
minimum wages. Indeed, to date, 41 localities (cities and metropolitan counties) have
minimum wages above the corresponding state minimum wage, of which roughly 30 are
part of our CPI-MSA sample. In calculating minimum wages, we also take into account
these locality-specific minimum wages. Our results are very similar, however, if we do
not do this, because this policy change is relatively recent.7
In 2017, the latest year in our sample period, minimum wages ranged from $7.25
per hour in states that followed the federal minimum wage like Pennsylvania, Texas,
and Utah to $12.5 per hour in the District of Columbia. Locality-based minimum wages
ranged from $8.8 per hour in Albuquerque, New Mexico to $14 per hour in San Francisco,
California. In addition, while minimum wage changes are infrequent—especially at the
federal level—they have increased in frequency at the state level in recent years. 22
6

Reich, Allegretto, and Montialoux (2017) examine the potential effects of raising California’s minimum wage to $15 per hour by 2023.
7
Where relevant, we include city-specific minimum wage changes into our CPI-MSA-level measure
of minimum wages by aggregating population weighted county-level minimum wage information for each
location.

7

states raised their minimum wages in 2017, after 17 states increased their minimum wage
throughout 2016.8 As a result, there is substantial variation in minimum wages across
states and localities as well as over time.
Figure 1 demonstrates how the federal minimum wage acts as a floor for our MSAlevel minimum wage data. In particular, it plots the federal minimum wage (red line), the
average minimum wage across the MSAs in our sample (black line), as well as the range
of minimum wages across these MSAs in each year (blue boxes show the interquartile
range). Figure 1 also shows that the dispersion of minimum wages across locations has
increased somewhat over time.
Historical data on minimum wages comes from four primary sources: the Tax Policy
Center (TPC), the U.S. Department of Labor (U.S. DOL), various state departments of
labor (state DOL), and local government websites for city- or county-specific minimum
wages. Our final minimum wage dataset combines information from all four sources, and
when possible, it accounts for the actual dates when the minimum wage changes occurred.
Since our final unit of analysis is a year, we take the average annual minimum wage in
locations that have more than one minimum wage in a year.9 We further focus on the
effective minimum wage in each city (hereafter minimum wage), which is the maximum
between the posted (state, city, or county) minimum wage and the federal minimum wage
in each year.
8

Minimum wage changes in a number of states (7 in 2017) were very small, automatic increases tied
to the cost-of-living. For more details on the most recent minimum wage changes see http://www.ncsl.
org/research/labor-and-employment/state-minimum-wage-chart.aspx.
9
Because most minimum wage changes occur at the start of the year, alternative approaches, such
as taking the first or last minimum wage value of the year by location, yield very similar results.

8

2.2

Additional Data Sources

The BLS publishes CPI data for 28 metropolitan areas for various subcategories of consumer spending at various frequencies (monthly, bimonthly, semiannual, and annual).10
For consistency across locations and over time, we convert all data to an annual frequency
by taking the average of the higher-frequency data where applicable. We calculate inflation as the percent change in the annualized CPI data. In addition, while the data
for many cities start in 1970, a few locations have data starting more recently, such as
Phoenix, AZ (2003). For our inflation analysis, we construct an unbalanced panel of the
available price data.
We measure nominal personal consumption expenditures (PCE) based on the statelevel series produced by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). These state-level data
are estimated, like all BEA data, but these series rely more heavily on interpolation
than do BEA data for the aggregate economy. In particular, most components of statelevel PCE are based on annual state-level spending estimates that are then adjusted to
scale to the national level as well as for out-of-state spending by residents and in-state
spending by non-residents. Roughly sixty percent of these annual estimates are based
on the Economic Census in years with an Economic Census while the remaining categories (primarily housing, utilities, higher education, foreign travel, and financial services
and insurance) are calculated from (higher-frequency) state-level data on quantities and
prices. These annual measures are then interpolated and extrapolated between economic
censuses using the growth rate of wages from the Quarterly Census of Employment and
Wages (QCEW) for the industries that sell the relevant goods and services. The BEA
finds the interpolation to be quite accurate in the sense that the extrapolated series from
one census matches well the level of the series from the subsequent census.11
10

The BLS’ CPI-MSA boundaries do not necessarily match the (more common) boundaries used by
the Census Bureau for all locations. The Appendix contains a full list of these BLS metropolitan areas.
11
See Awuku-Budu et al. (2016) and Lenze (2018). Because Economic Censuses are infrequent, our

9

We are also interested in the relationship between minimum wage changes and real
expenditures in a city. However, the BEA only produces state-level implicit price deflators for GDP.12 Since we are conducting our analysis at the city level, we use the CPI
to construct approximate real consumption data for spending categories where there is
reasonable overlap between the nominal PCE data and the price data. In particular,
the CPI and PCE coverage for food away, food at home, and durables are reasonably
similar. Real consumption growth is the difference between annual nominal expenditure
growth and annual inflation for these categories. We also combine total CPI data with
nominal total PCE data to study total real consumption spending despite the fact that
the treatment of some goods and services, notably housing and health care, are quite
different between the NIPA and CPI. Thus, these constructed real spending data are
reasonable (albeit imperfect) for some categories, and not as good for others.13
We also use credit bureau data from the CCP to analyze the relationship between
minimum wages and individuals’ credit access and debt holdings. The CCP is a longitudinal nationally representative 5 percent random sample of individuals with credit
records in the United States. The data are available quarterly and include information
on most aspects of individuals’ credit and debt, including credit scores as well as balances
on credit cards, auto loans, student debt, and mortgages. Importantly, the dataset also
includes information on the number of credit inquiries (related to credit applications)
and the number of open accounts for an individual in a given period, information which
allows us to track whether individuals are successful in their credit applications.
longer-term estimates of consumption responses may be more accurate than our shorter-term responses.
With our shorter-term estimates, one might be concerned that, to the extent that employment-based
interpolation does not accurately measure local retail activity, our results may partly measure the effect
of the minimum wage on the total wage bill.
12
When the BEA first introduced state-level PCE (in 2014), they viewed producing PCE price deflators as a longer-term (lower) priority (see, Awuku-Budu et al., 2013).
13
The CPI has excellent price data, so the approximation underlying this approach comes from
assuming that the weights used to aggregate price changes across different subcategories of goods and
services are the same in the PCE data as in the CPI data.

10

Finally, minimum wage changes are likely to be more relevant and binding in locations
with a larger share of low-wage workers. Therefore, we calculate the share of workers in
each state that have hourly earnings (or effective hourly earnings if they are salaried) that
are within 110 percent or less of the minimum wage in that state based on wage data from
the March Current Population Survey (CPS) supplement. We convert these state-level
measures to city-level data using the weighting approach discussed in Section 2.4.

2.3

Local Employment Growth

We construct a Bartik-style measure of local employment growth (hereafter BEG) to
control for local business cycle conditions. The Bartik approach captures shocks to
local demand based on changes in industry-level employment at the national level and
the shares of employment by industry in a given location (see Bartik, 1991, for more
details). Employment data by state and industry come from the BEA, and we focus
on the largest industries (2-digit NAICS codes) for our analysis. To ensure that local
changes in employment—especially in large states—do not unduly influence the measure
of national employment growth, we exclude employment growth in state i from the
measure of national employment growth used to calculate the Bartik growth rate for
state i.14 Finally, for MSAs that span multiple states we convert the state-level Bartik
growth data to city-level data using the population-based weighting approach described
next.

2.4

Reconciling Different Data Geographies

As noted, we conduct our analysis at the city (MSA) level based on the geographic
boundaries defined by the BLS for their MSA-level CPI data. Whereas previous research
focuses on state-level (often cross-border) analysis, we focus on cities because we believe
14

This approach has been used by Paciorek (2013) and others.

11

they best define a local market and we are interested in local aggregate outcomes of
changes in the minimum wage. Indeed, markets for labor and a substantial fraction
of consumption are defined by commuting distances, and are thus better measured by
MSA-level data than state-level data.
Since a number of the BLS’ CPI-MSA locations, like the New York and Philadelphia
MSAs, contain suburbs that extend across state lines, we must appropriately convert
state-level minimum wage and other information into city-level data. To do so, we first
determine the share of the MSA (city) population belonging to each state in each location
using Census population data and information from the BLS on the counties in each CPI
MSA. We then population weight the state-level data to generate boundary-consistent
city-level data. We follow this approach to construct city-level consumption, low-wage
worker shares, and BEG. Our approach is quite similar for constructing city-level minimum wages, however we incorporate actual city-level minimum wage information for the
counties within the CPI MSA boundaries to which the city minimum wage applies before
aggregating the data based on population shares. Alternative aggregation approaches,
such as using the minimum or maximum value of a given data measure among the relevant locations (states or counties) within each city’s boundaries, yield similar results.
Also, since the CCP data are at the individual-level and contain county-level geographic
identifiers we aggregate them up to the city-level directly.

2.5

Sample Period and Relevant Summary Statistics

Our analysis focuses on the 28 CPI MSAs for which the BLS publishes city-level price
data. These locations cover roughly half of the U.S. population and most of the population living in or near cities.15
15

According to a 2015 Census Bureau report, 62.7 percent of the U.S. population lives in a city. See
https://www.census.gov/newsroom/press-releases/2015/cb15-33.html.

12

Our baseline sample period runs from 1999 through 2017 and is determined by the
availability of the PCE data (starting in 1997 and available through 2017), NAICS industry employment data (growth rates starting in 1999), county-level population data
(available through 2017), and household debt (CCP) data (available starting in 1999).
The Appendix includes estimates of the effect of minimum wage changes on inflation
using all the available CPI and minimum wage data (1983–2018).16
Figure 2 shows the number of CPI MSAs with a minimum wage change in a given
year. Not surprisingly, most minimum wage changes occur in years when the federal
minimum wage increases. However, many states and (more recently) cities adjust their
minimum wage at other times, thus generating variation in the number of CPI MSAs
with a minimum wage change within and across years. There are 228 specific changes
in the minimum wage across 35 states excluding changes in the federal minimum wage
during our sample period.17
The average change in the minimum wage in our sample is 5.1 percent (conditional on
a change occurring) with a standard deviation of 5.1 percent. Figure 2 further highlights
that state- and city/county-driven changes in the minimum wage, and hence fluctuations in minimum wages across CPI MSAs, have become more frequent recently. All of
this variation across locations helps us identify the relationship between minimum wage
changes and inflation, consumption growth, and household debt growth.
Figure 3 shows data on the share of low-wage workers over time (left panel) as well as
the average low-wage worker share by state (right panel). There is substantial variation
in the share of low-wage workers both across states (on average and within a year) and
over time, with the shares ranging from around 10 percent in Nevada and Virginia to
16

These estimates do not include controls for local economic conditions since the BEG data are only
available starting in 1999.
17
Including changes in the federal minimum wage in 2007, 2008, and 2009, there are 304 minimum
wage changes across all 50 states and the District of Columbia. The largest increase was about 39 percent
in Pennsylvania in 2007, while the minimum wage declined a touch in Colorado in 2010.

13

closer to 20 percent in states like Mississippi and Montana.
Finally, there is also reasonable variation in inflation, nominal consumption growth,
and debt growth across our cities. Total CPI inflation ranges from –2.6 percent to 6.0
percent, with a mean of 2.2 percent and a standard deviation of 1.3 percent, whereas
total nominal consumption growth ranges from –3.1 percent to 10.2 percent, with a mean
of 4.3 percent and a standard deviation of 2.1 percent. Debt growth ranges from -10.1
percent to 120 percent with a mean of 6.1 percent and a standard deviation of 11.6
percent.18 Tables A.1–A.4 in the Appendix provide additional summary statistics for the
relevant components of inflation, consumption, debt as well as minimum wage changes.

3

Empirical Framework

We examine the relationship between inflation (or PCE growth or changes in debt) and
minimum wage changes by estimating the following reduced-form relationship:

k
∆yi,t
= α i + νt +

J2
X

β(j)∆wi,t−j + η xi,t + ei,t .

(1)

j=−J 1

Here ∆yitk is the (annualized) percent change in CPI prices (PCE growth or debt growth)
for a given price (consumption or debt) category k (for example, food away from home)
in city i between time t and t − 1; ∆wi,t is the percent change in the minimum wage
(MWPC) for city i between time t and t − 1; αi captures time-invariant differences across
cities, including differences in long-run inflation or growth by location; vt is a time fixed
effect that captures macroeconomic trends across all CPI MSAs; xit is a measure of local
economic conditions; and J2 and J1 denote the number of lags and leads, respectively, of
the MWPC.
18

The maximum value for total debt growth (and auto loan growth), which is a bit of an outlier, is
for Chicago in 2000. We have verified our results are robust to excluding this observation or the year
2000 entirely from the regressions using the CCP data.

14

As noted in the introduction, by using annual data and looking at responses over
a couple of years, our specification strikes a balance between measuring only the very
immediate response to a change in the minimum wage and estimating a response that
is biased by possible correlations between other characteristics of a city and its average
relative minimum wage. Indeed, prices may take a couple of years to adjust within a city,
because some sectors use other local goods as inputs, some may have significant strategic
complementarities in price setting, and some others might experience investment, entry,
or exit when minimum wages rise.
In our empirical specification, the locality-specific fixed effects attempt to control for
long-run differences across locations, such as their general size of government, generosity
of social insurance, or other highly-persistent factors that might affect economic outcomes
and also correlate with the minimum wage. We do not, however, include as control
variables any economic outcomes, such as overall inflation, that are possibly affected by
the minimum wage, and so would be endogenous to the local aggregate impact of the
minimum wage increase. Including such variables is appropriate for studies estimating
individual-level or partial-equilibrium, high-frequency effects, as in Aaronson (2001).
We do however include exogenous controls for local economic conditions, denoted
by xit in equation (1), to capture time-varying, city-specific factors that might affect
inflation, consumption growth, or debt growth, but are not caused by the change in
the minimum wage. These controls not only absorb unexplained variation and increase
precision, but also account for possible correlations or even reverse causation, as local
economic conditions may spur changes in the minimum wage. We use BEG to control for
local labor demand, since it is exogenous with respect to changes in the local minimum
P2
wage.19 With BEG as a control, the estimated minimum wage effect, Jj=−J
β(j), cap1
19

The industry share of employment within a state is relatively fixed over time, and national employment growth by industry should be independent of a given’s state’s minimum wage. Still, national
employment growth data may be less exogenous in years when a large number of states change their
minimum wage. However, our results are very similar if we exclude years from our sample when twelve

15

tures the pass-through of minimum wage changes to inflation, consumption growth, debt
growth, or credit access that is uncorrelated with changes in local economic conditions
driven by the industrial composition of the location and the national patterns of employment growth by industry. Ultimately, our choice of control for local economic conditions
has little effect on our minimum wage coefficient estimates; for example, including the
local employment-to-population ratio or not having any controls for local conditions yield
very similar results.20
Overall, the conditional correlation between minimum wage changes and local aggregate outcomes that we estimate represents the causal effect of minimum wages if the
controls we employ in estimating equation (1) capture any reverse causation or endogeneity in changes in the minimum wage. Thus, the causal interpretation of our results
requires more assumptions than existing individual-level studies which can and do make
use of variation that more closely approximates that of a true experiment.
We estimate equation (1) from 1999 to 2017 using one lag and no leads (J2 =1, J1 =0)
of the MWPC. The lag helps determine the persistence of any effect. We considered
including one lead (J1 =1) to capture any anticipatory relationship between minimum
wage changes and local economic outcomes since minimum wage changes tend to be
announced well in advance of their effective date, especially recently. However, there is
limited empirical evidence for an anticipatory relationship and thus our baseline estimates
include a lag but no leads. (The Appendix reports estimates where we include one lead
and one lag (J2 =1, J1 =1)—see Tables A.6–A.8). We are interested in both the initial
P
effect of the change in the minimum wage, β(0), and the total effect, 1j=0 β(j).21
It is important to note that despite our controls, if minimum wage increases were
or more states change their minimum wages.
20
In the Appendix, we discuss alternative approaches to control for local economic conditions, including unobserved local factors that might impact our estimated minimum wage effects. These approaches
also yield very similar results.
21
Our empirical framework is most similar to that in Lemos (2004).

16

only a function of economic conditions, then it would be impossible to identify the effect
of minimum wages on economic outcomes because all the variation in minimum wages
would represent reverse causation. Thus, we are particularly concerned about indexing
minimum wages to annual changes in the cost-of-living. Such indexing, however, is only
a very recent and limited phenomenon. In 2017 only 8 states raised their minimum wage
due to such indexation: Alaska, Florida, Minnesota, Missouri, Montana, New Jersey,
Ohio, and South Dakota.22 Minimum wage hikes due to inflation indexation have also
been very small compared to changes in states that do not index their minimum wages.
Also, unlike in Brazil where minimum wage changes are solely determined at the national
level, and historically have been tied to large fluctuations in aggregate inflation, we have
both cross-sectional and time-series variation in minimum wage changes. This variation
helps us, among other things, to identify the effect of minimum wages on prices, since
the vast majority of the changes in minimum wages at the state, city or county level are
legislated and not enacted in response to local inflationary pressures.
Finally, in some specifications we allow for the relationship between minimum wages
and economic outcomes to vary with the relative number of likely minimum wage workers
in a local area. To do this, we include an interaction between the minimum wage change
and the share of low-wage workers in each city.23 This approach tests whether our
observed economic outcomes are differentially larger in locations with a greater share of
low-wage workers. Since the share of such workers in a location is arguably driven by longrun factors such as the composition of a city’s industrial base, consistent identification
of this heterogeneity requires weaker assumptions than are required to observe how local
outcomes respond to minimum wage changes.
22

In the past Arizona, Colorado, Nevada, and Washington State also indexed their minimum wage
changes to inflation.
23
We calculate the share of minimum-wage workers based on the minimum wage that prevailed as of
time t − 1 given the timing conventions in equation (1).

17

4

Results

4.1

Minimum Wage Changes and Inflation

Our baseline inflation results (Table 1) show that minimum wage changes have the most
substantial and precisely-estimated effect on the price of food away from home.24 With
a 10 percent increase in the minimum wage, food away from home inflation is higher by
about 0.4 percentage points over the first year (column 8). Overall, food away from home
inflation rises by 0.5 percent taking into account lagged minimum wage changes (t − 1).25
A particularly strong inflation response for food away is consistent with restaurants
typically employing a large number of minimum-wage workers, and thus facing relatively
greater cost pressures when minimum wages rise.
The estimates in Table 1 further show that a 10 percent increase in the minimum wage
is associated with an overall (all items) inflation rate that is 14 basis points higher relative
to the preceding year (p-value 0.104). This effect is small and only borderline significant,
especially given that a 10 percent minimum wage increase is double the average MWPC
in our sample. The cumulative, (all items) price effect is larger, but it is still imprecisely
estimated. Core inflation, which excludes food and energy prices, and all items less energy
inflation exhibit similar initial and cumulative responses to a minimum wage change.
The results also highlight differences in the speed with which prices adjust following
a change in the minimum wage. The majority of the increase in food away inflation
occurs in the first year, with a smaller gain occurring in the year after the change (lagged
effect), suggesting that minimum wage changes are associated with a fast and largely
24

The Bureau of Labor Statistics defines food away from home as all food purchases at restaurants,
concession stands, vending machines, fast food establishments and other similar food purveyors, while
food at home refers to expenditures at grocery stores excluding nonfood items. For more details see:
https://www.bls.gov/cex/csxgloss.htm.
25
The “two-year effect” memo line in the result tables includes the contemporaneous (t) and lagged
(t − 1) minimum wage estimates to measure the cumulative response of a given outcome to a minimum
wage change (the p-values for these estimates are in the square brackets).

18

transitory effect on food away inflation, and a permanent effect on food away prices. The
increase in inflation following an increase in the minimum wage is more uniform over
time outside of the food sector, with all-items, all-items excluding energy, and core CPI
inflation rising about the same amount in the year following the minimum wage change as
it does contemporaneously—a result driven by a strong lagged response of durable goods
prices to the minimum wage change. Still, the cumulative response of these broader
inflation measures is not significant at conventional levels although the response is larger
and more precisely estimated in cities with a greater share of low-wage workers, as we
discuss in Section 4.3. Owing to the strong lagged response, durable goods inflation is
also cumulatively, but insignificantly higher, due perhaps to increased demand, as we
discuss in section 4.2.
In addition, the estimates for BEG in Table 1 suggest that higher employment growth
is associated with greater local inflation. This effect is quite large for durable goods. In
particular, 1 percent higher predicted local employment growth leads to 0.9 percentage
points higher durable goods inflation (column 4). The response of inflation to BEG
growth is also much larger than its response to minimum wage changes.26 However, as
we noted earlier, controlling for local economic conditions using BEG or other measures,
has little effect on our estimated minimum wage effects (see Table A.5 in the Appendix).
Implied Pass-Through of Minimum Wages to Consumer Prices
The cumulative, relatively large gains in food away inflation and durable goods inflation in response to an increase in the minimum wage imply a relatively significant
pass-through of labor costs to prices in these sectors. Indeed, the magnitude of our price
effects are larger than can likely be attributed to the share of minimum wage workers
26

The estimated BEG effects are substantially larger than the employment growth effect estimates
obtained using actual employment growth in a given city (not shown). Some of this difference is likely
due to attenuation bias since actual employment growth is likely endogenous. The BEG variable also
controls for something slightly different than actual employment growth, so we would not expect the
coefficient to be the same even if there was no endogeneity.

19

salaries in firms’ overall marginal costs, consistent with minimum wage hikes leading to
increases in input prices and other local aggregate effects.
If prices (in a sector or industry) increase by 3 percent for a given change in the
minimum wage, but firms’ marginal costs (in that sector) increase by 4 percent, then
there is less than full pass-through of higher labor costs. However, embedded in this
calculation is an assumption regarding the share of low-wage workers’ salaries in firms’
overall costs. If the implied share of (low-wage worker) labor costs is unreasonably large
given the observed increase in prices following a minimum wage hike, then there are likely
other local aggregate outcomes associated with higher minimum wages that also affect the
pass-through. Ultimately, the degree of pass-through depends on the response of firms’
labor costs (payroll) and production inputs (intermediate good prices) to minimum wage
gains. The share of labor costs and intermediate goods prices in firms’ overall marginal
costs also matters.27
To further investigate extent to which minimum wage increases are passed through to
prices we use data from the Census Bureau’s County Business Patterns (CBP) database
on (NAICS-based) industry-level payrolls to calculate the effect of minimum wages on
firms’ labor costs by sector. However, we do not observe the relationship between minimum wages and firms’ intermediate good costs, nor the labor share of firms’ overall
costs (by sector).28 Instead, we judge the price pass-through based on our observed price
increases, data on labor cost increases, and whether the implied labor share is reasonable.
Using the CBP database, we estimate that payroll growth in the food away sector
increases about 0.5 percentage points29 following a 10 percent increase in the minimum
27

Firms may respond to minimum wage changes by adjusting employment or employees hours. However, Basker and Kahn (2016) consider that managers in the fast-food sector may change employment
levels in response to minimum wage hikes, and find such potential employment effects to be negligible.
28
It is possible to estimate the labor share for certain years and industries, but obtaining estimates
of the cost share for intermediate goods is difficult.
29
This estimate is based on using payroll growth for “Food Services and Drinking Places” (NAICS
722). Unfortunately, the NAICS industry categories do not line up exactly with the food away from home
category in the CPI, so we have to choose a NAICS industry (or industries) that is (are) reasonably

20

wage.30 Basker and Kahn (2016) determine that payroll costs account for about half of
firms’ marginal costs in the fast-food sector. If we assume that labor costs account for
half of firms’ marginal costs more generally in the food away from home sector, then the
cumulative inflation increase we observe (0.5 percentage points for a 10 percent minimum
wage hike) represents more than a full pass-through of the minimum wage change. This
outsized implied pass-through of labor costs suggests that firms in the food away sector
also face rising product costs and other increased expenses when minimum wages increase.
If instead we focus on narrower definitions of food away for our payroll cost estimates,
such as “full service restaurants” or “limited service restaurants,” the average payroll
growth increase for 10 percent rise in the minimum wage is about 1.0 percentage point.
In this case, our results would imply roughly full pass-through of labor costs, ignoring
any other changes in production costs associated with the minimum wage hike.
We further find that payroll growth at motor vehicle and parts dealers—which account
for a large share of consumer durable purchases—rises about 0.6 percentage points for a
10 percent increase in the minimum wage, whereas our baseline results show that durable
goods inflation increases 0.3 percentage points cumulatively for the same minimum wage
change. Full pass-through of this labor cost increase, assuming no other cost changes
at motor vehicle and parts dealers, would imply a labor share of marginal costs in that
sector of about 50 percent. This share is unrealistically high since durable goods firms
likely employ less low-wage workers than firms in the food service industry. Most likely
durable goods firms face other costs associated with minimum wage increases and have
a low-wage labor cost share that is less than 50 percent. A lower labor share along with
close. If we instead use “Full Service Restaurants” (NAICS 7221) or “Limited Service Restaurants”
(NAICS 7222), the payroll effects are larger.
30
We estimate payroll effects using a specification similar to equation (1), but with payroll growth as
the dependent variable and with only the contemporaneous minimum wage change (the other controls
are unchanged). This approach is similar to the one in Basker and Kahn (2016), but we use growth
rates instead of levels (of payrolls and the minimum wage) to be more consistent with our empirical
specification. These estimates are not shown, but they are available upon request.

21

additional costs associated with minimum wages would imply less than full pass-through
of minimum wage increases to consumer prices.
Overall, our results suggest large pass-through effects of minimum wage hikes to
consumer prices based on labor cost changes alone. Existing literature on the pass
through of minimum wages to prices is mixed and fairly limited. Basker and Kahn
(2016) find full pass-through of minimum wage changes to prices in the fast-food sector
(limited-service restaurants; NAICS 7222). In addition, using Nielsen retail scanner data
Leung (2018) finds a large pass-through of minimum wages to grocery store prices, but
not drugstore or general merchandise store prices.31 In contrast, Ganapati and Weaver
(2017) find much more limited pass-through of minimum wages to grocery store and
wholesale club prices.32

4.2

Minimum Wage Changes and Consumption

Turning to the relationship between minimum wage hikes and the local aggregate response
of household consumption, we find a statistically significant increase in nominal spending
for overall PCE as well as multiple subcategories when minimum wages rise. Like with
prices, the biggest gain following a minimum wage increase is for food away spending. In
addition, while total consumption rises roughly in line with total prices, we further find
that real expenditures on food rise—especially food away from home. That is, households
appear to increase the quantity of food they consume when minimum wages and food
prices rise—an effect that is larger when we control for the share of low-wage workers in a
city.33 While it may seem counterintuitive that food quantities rise when food prices rise,
31

Leung argues that the differences across store types are likely the result of differences in their
price-setting behavior.
32
Unlike others in the literature, Ganapati and Weaver (2017) find little evidence of minimum wages
affecting labor costs, even in the grocery store sector.
33
We interpret quantity in a broad sense. The effect on real consumption could also indicate a change
in the composition of low-wage workers’ consumption basket towards higher-quality, more expensive
products.

22

as we discuss further below, our results are consistent with income effects outweighing
substitution effects as earnings gains from minimum wage increases accrue mainly to
low-wage workers who tend to have a higher propensity to consume food out of income
gains.
Table 2 reports nominal consumption results. Total PCE expenditures rise roughly
0.2 percentage points on impact with a 10 percent increase in the minimum wage. In
comparison, nominal food away consumption growth rises by nearly 0.9 percentage points
(on impact and cumulatively), and food at home spending growth rises about half as much
as food away both initially and cumulatively—gains that are also statistically significant.
We further observe an increase in nondurable goods consumption growth, consistent with
the strong gains in food spending. Services spending also edges up a precisely estimated
0.2 percentage points initially with a 10 percent gain in the minimum wage, while durable
goods spending rises somewhat more than services initially and cumulatively but neither
gain is statistically significant. The response of durable goods consumption to minimum
wage changes is larger and more precisely estimated if we allow for an anticipatory
response to the minimum wage change (see Table A.7). Indeed, anticipatory durable
good spending is quite large, consistent with recent work suggesting minimum wage
increases relax credit constraints (see Dettling and Hsu, 2017).34 Our examination of the
relationship between minimum wages and consumer debt holdings in Section 4.4 supports
this idea. As expected, consumption growth is also positively related to local economic
conditions, with the estimated BEG effects on consumption growth somewhat larger than
the corresponding effects for inflation. However, controlling for local economic conditions
again has little impact on our estimated minimum wage effects.35
Our estimated food away and food at home consumption responses to minimum wage
34

Similarly, Aaronson, Agarwal, and French (2012) document an increase in automobile purchases by
low-income individuals when minimum wages increase.
35
These results are available upon request.

23

hikes are also noticeably larger than the respective food price effects in Table 1, suggesting
that nominal food consumption increases more than the amount that would be implied
by higher prices alone. That is, consumers appear to adjust the amount of food that
they consume when the minimum wage rises, with the response of food away being more
immediate, and rise in food at home occurring over time. We use our constructed real
consumption data (see Section 2.2) to investigate this finding further.
Table 3 reports estimates of the relationship between minimum wage changes and
real consumption growth. Real food away and real food at home spending growth rises
following an increase in the minimum wage, with real food away rising more quickly and
the gains in real food at home occurring more slowly but lasting longer. Despite the
increase in real food away expenditures following a minimum wage hike, overall real PCE
growth is essentially unchanged as overall inflation and overall nominal PCE growth rise
by similar amounts. The same is true for real service expenditures. Real spending on
durable goods also rises, at least initially, following an increase in the minimum wage
although this response is not precisely estimated. This real durable spending response
is larger and more precisely estimated when we control for differences in the share of
low-wage workers across locations (see section 4.3).
The finding that some categories of consumption rise suggest that the average consumer is better off following an increase in the minimum wage. While we cannot directly
measure whether the increase in real consumption is primarily coming from households
with low-wage workers, if it were at least proportional, then this finding runs counter to
the conclusion in MaCurdy (2015) that minimum wage changes provide little benefit to
the poor. Our results are broadly consistent with Alonso (2016) and Leung (2018), studies
that also find some evidence of increases in real (nondurable) sales following a minimum
wage hike. These authors take different approaches to estimating real consumption, with
the approach in Leung (2018) most similar to ours.

24

Interpretation and implications
Our results for real food spending raise the following question: How do price increases
lead to more real food consumption? Basic theory suggests that, for normal goods,
quantities fall when prices rise. However, the standard price-quantity theory is based on
holding income fixed (uncompensated demand). An increase in the minimum wage also
causes incomes to rise. Additionally, there are distributional effects. Prices (presumably)
rise for all consumers, but the increase in income primarily affects low-wage workers who
have higher propensities to consume food out of income gains than higher-wage workers.
Indeed, using data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) we find that on average
individuals in the bottom 20 percent of the income distribution spend roughly 33 percent
of their after tax income on food (22 percent on food at home and 11 percent on food
away), whereas individuals in the top 20 percent of the distribution spend only about
9 percent.36 Finally, there could be local general equilibrium effects. Greater spending
by low-wage workers may stimulate the local economy, leading to higher incomes and
consumption than without general equilibrium effects.
Is it possible that the increase in real food consumption is driven by redistributive
factors alone, without any general equilibrium effects? In theory, yes, given low-wage
workers relatively high propensity to consume food (based on their income share of
spending). Thus, because increases in the minimum wage accrue primarily to households
in the bottom quintile of the income distribution, there can be a disproportionate increase
in the demand for food consumption.
However, an extreme assumption is required for this scenario to be plausible. Specifically, the demand for food by high-wage workers must be highly price inelastic, so that
their consumption demand remains stable and their continued purchases ‘pay for’ much
of the increase in the minimum wage. Also, the income effect of the minimum wage has
36

These results are based on summary CEX data published by the BLS for 2015 and can be found
here: https://www.bls.gov/cex/2015/combined/quintile.pdf.

25

to substantially dominate the substitution effect of the food price increase for low-wage
workers.37 These conditions seem very stringent, particularly the inelasticity of demand
by high-wage workers.
The scenario becomes more plausible if the cost increase caused by an increase in the
minimum wage is only partly passed through to prices. This follows directly from the
fact that the income effect dominates the substitution effect because the income increase
becomes larger relative to the price change. To see this directly, consider the increase
in consumption of food away from home. For a 0.4 percentage point inflation increase,
the only way to get a larger increase in nominal spending on food away is to have a low
price elasticity of demand for food away and a large increase in demand from the income
effects of the minimum wage increase. Given a propensity of the bottom income quintile
to spend roughly 11 percent of their income on food away from home, it is therefore
necessary that the income increase be significantly larger in total dollar terms than the
increase in price times total ex-ante spending on food away from home. That is, the
increase in costs must be only partly passed through into prices.
These arguments imply that the minimum wage either has a stimulative effect on
the local economy so as to cause a net rise in food consumption or is only partly passed
through into food prices, or both. A partial pass-through effect may seem at odd with
our claim in Section 4.1 that the pass-through of minimum wages to food away prices
is relatively large. However, this argument is based only on considering the share of
minimum wage workers’ salaries in a firm’s overall marginal cost (due to data limitations).
However the pass-through could still be small relative to all cost increases associated with
37

Also, any decrease in profits (as firms’ costs rise in response to a minimum wage hike and prices
do not rise sufficiently to offset) must not lead to lower demand for food consumption in a given city.
Demand would not necessarily decline if, for example, firm owners live outside the local area. For
example, a local McDonalds’ profits decline, but it is owned by the parent company or a large franchisee
based elsewhere. Across broader geographies any distributional spending effects from low-wage workers’
income gains when minimum wages rise will be more muted as the incomes of higher earners decline
(due to lost profits) if price changes do not fully offset increased labor costs. Even then, we would still
expect some spending distributional effects.

26

the minimum wage (input prices and (spillover) costs associated with non-minimum-wage
workers) if local aggregate equilibrium effects are at play.

4.3

Are the Effects Bigger When More Workers are Affected?

The relationship between minimum wage changes and local aggregate outcomes should
depend on the number of workers the minimum wage affects in a given location. When
minimum wage changes apply to a limited number of workers, perhaps because the number of low-wage workers in a location is fairly low, then we would expect relatively small
economic responses, whereas we would expect larger changes when many workers are affected. Indeed, when we allow for the relationship between minimum wages and inflation
(or consumption) to vary with the share of low-wage workers by city, we find some evidence that the price (or spending) response to minimum wage changes is larger in areas
where the low-wage worker share is larger.38 Higher prices in locations with a greater
proportion of low-wage workers are consistent with labor costs increasing more in those
areas, leading firms in these cities to raise their prices more to offset their higher costs.
Similarly, more spending in locations with a greater proportion of low-wage workers is
consistent with greater overall income gains from changes in the minimum wage in those
areas.
Table 4 reports these results, with the estimates for prices in the upper panel, and
estimates for nominal and real consumption growth in the lower panels. Rather than
show all the estimates for both the direct minimum wage effects and the incremental
(interaction) effects for low-wage workers, we report only the contemporaneous (impact)
effects and their respective cumulative effects. The heterogenous treatment effect (HTE)
38

As discussed in Section 2, low-wage workers are those whose wages are within 110 percent of the
minimum wage in a given location at beginning of the period over which the minimum wage change is
measured, t − 1, to avoid potential endogeneity. Our results are robust to alternative (higher) cut-offs for
defining low-wage workers. We use a threshold above the local minimum wage to account for potential
spillover effects to workers earning somewhat more than the minimum wage.

27

has been standardized so that its coefficient can be interpreted as the differential effect
of the minimum wage change for locations with a one standard deviation larger share of
low-wage workers relative to the sample mean.
In general, prices rise somewhat more on impact (positive HTE effect) in locations
with a greater share of low-wage workers, with the largest differential effect for food
away prices. Controlling for the share of low-wage workers across locations also tends
to increase the size and precision of the direct (contemporaneous) inflation response to
minimum wage changes across price categories. The cumulative (direct) inflation effects
are also somewhat larger. In addition, the cumulative differential inflation effect (HTE),
while fairly small, tends to be fairly precisely estimated especially for the broader price
categories and for food away. In terms of interpretation, the results suggest that all-items
inflation is 0.08 percentage points higher than average following a 10 percent increase
in minimum wages in locations with a one-standard deviation higher share of low-wage
workers. Relative to the direct effect of 0.38 percentage points (for a 10 percent minimum
wage hike), this differential inflation effect is non-trivial but not large. Overall, the results
imply that prices increase more in areas where more workers are affected by a minimum
wage change.
The pattern of results for nominal consumption growth are similar—the direct spending response is somewhat stronger than when we do not control for the share of low-wage
workers across locations, and there is evidence of a small but positive differential effect in
areas with a higher share of low-wage workers. However the cumulative HTE effects for
consumption growth tend to be smaller and insignificant despite a spending growth response to minimum wage hikes that, at least initially, is larger (and generally significant)
in locations with a greater share of low-wage workers. In terms of real consumption, the
overall results are not much different from our baseline findings. Nominal expenditure
growth tends to rise in line with inflation—both overall and for the majority the PCE

28

subcategories—with the exception being real food consumption, which increases at home
and away from home in a manner very similar to our baseline results. Controlling for
the share of low-wage workers in a location does not appear to have much effect on the
response of real food spending to minimum wage hikes.
One particularly relevant result that comes out of this analysis, as we noted earlier,
is that there is a strong contemporaneous, and precisely estimated, response of nominal
and real durable good spending to a minimum wage hike. Higher real durable goods
consumption growth does not persist, in part because as we saw earlier durable goods
prices rise with a lag. However, it is consistent with the idea that demand for durable
goods rises following an increase in the minimum wage (or perhaps even in anticipation of
an increase—see Table A.8) even though the estimates we get are imprecise when we do
not control for HTE. The observed durable goods spending response is further consistent
with our results regarding auto loan debt and individuals’ success obtaining credit more
generally following a minimum wage hike that we discuss next.

4.4

Minimum Wage Changes and Debt

We use the CCP data to show that households with low credit scores decrease total
debt in response to minimum wage increases, whereas auto loan debt growth increases
temporarily. Also, credit appears to become easier to obtain, as measured by the number
of open accounts relative to credit inquiries (success rate).
Since we are interested in local aggregate outcomes, we aggregate the individual-level
CCP data to the city level for our debt and credit measures of interest. We separately
examine people by their creditworthiness: everyone (the most inclusive group), subprime
borrowers (those with Equifax risk/credit scores below 660, about 40 percent of the
sample), young individuals (people 35 years-old or younger, 27 percent), and subprime
and young combined (14 percent). For each city and year, we calculate total debt (or
29

auto loans) by adding the debt balances of all individuals within the city borders, and
compute the city-level annual percentage change in debt.39 We also calculate a credit
inquiry “success rate” by taking the city average of the ratio of an individual’s number
of open accounts in the last 12 months relative to his/her number of credit inquiries over
the same horizon.40 We run regressions that parallel our specification for inflation and
consumption growth (equation 1) with the following dependent variables: (1) percentage
change in total debt; (2) percentage change in auto loans; (3) success rates.
Table 5 summarizes the results for total debt, which is little changed when minimum
wages rise for the population as a whole (column 1) and for the young (column 3). In
contrast, total debt balances decline noticeably for subprime borrowers (column 2).41
There are several possible explanations for these results. First, minimum-wage workers
are not necessarily subprime borrowers, but to the extent that some of them are, lower
debt balances could indicate that minimum wage increases allow some borrowers to repay
debt. Alternatively, if credit supply is fixed, non-minimum wage subprime borrowers
could face more competition for credit from minimum-wage borrowers with better credit
scores and improved income prospects following a minimum wage hike. Finally, it is also
possible that the share of subprime individuals in the population declines with an increase
in the minimum wage, and debt for the subprime group decreases simply because there
are fewer of them. Indeed, column (5) of Table 7 shows that there is a small decline in
the share of the population with subprime credit scores during, and following a minimum
wage increase.
In comparison, there is a clear increase in auto loan debt (debt incurred for the pur39

The CCP data are quarterly, therefore we average debt balances over the four quarters in a given
year. Our findings are similar if we only use data for the last quarter of each year instead. Results are
also similar if we use average debt instead of total debt in a given city to compute the city-level percent
changes.
40
Our definition of success rates follows Amromin, Nardi, and Schulze (2017). Unfortunately, the
CCP data do not allow us to easily determine the type of account opened.
41
Although not tabulated, both mortgage debt as well as credit card balances, which in Equifax are
a hybrid of current spending and revolving balances, decrease for this group.

30

chase of vehicles) when minimum wages rise. The estimates in Table 6, imply that auto
debt increases 8.6 percent in the year that the minimum wage changes (for a 10 percent
increase in the minimum wage)—with a clear reversal the following year. The auto debt
increase is slightly larger for the subprime and the young groups, 9.4 percent. The increase in auto loans is further consistent with the positive, but not always statistically
significant, relationship between minimum wages hikes and durable goods purchases (a
broader category than autos) that we documented in Section 4.2. Greater demand for
autos could partly explain the positive relationship between minimum wage changes and
lagged durable goods prices that we observe in Table 1.
We also find that minimum wage increases correlate with higher success rates at the
city level, consistent with an increase in credit availability for low-wage workers following
a minimum wage hike (see Table 7). We do not observe individuals who do not apply
for credit, but there seems to be an actual increase in credit supply since we do not
see significant changes in the share of people with credit inquiries following minimum
wage changes. That is, more people who apply for credit seem to receive it following a
minimum wage increase. The estimates in Table 7 further show that the improvement
in success rates is particularly large for the subprime-young group, and the increase in
success rates continues over time across all groups. Overall, it appears that minimum
wage increases help relax credit constraints.
Our debt-related findings are consistent with Aaronson, Agarwal, and French (2012),
which documents that debt, in particular collateralized debt tied to vehicles, increases
with minimum wages for low-income individuals.42 Our results are also consistent with
Dettling and Hsu (2017), which also uses the CCP and shows that increases in minimum
wages cause a decrease in credit card delinquency, an increase in the number of credit
42

Aaronson, Agarwal, and French (2012) also use credit bureau data, but their sample is not nationally
representative in the sense that borrowers must have a credit card to be included. Compared to their
data, the CCP is a nationally representative sample, but it lacks information on income.

31

cards, and increases in credit scores for likely minimum-wage workers—defined as individuals in census tracts where the majority of adults have less than a high school education.43
Dettling and Hsu (2017) further documents that minimum wage increases correlate with
additional direct-mail credit card offers and better credit terms for low-income individuals. The authors conclude that minimum wage increases alleviate borrowing constraints
in unsecured credit markets, improving low-income borrowers’ finances and credit scores.

5

Conclusion

While there has been much debate about the effect of minimum wage increases on the
economy, and especially employment, the estimated effects are mixed and typically small.
In this paper, we focus on the less-studied relationship between minimum wage increases
and inflation, consumption growth, consumer debt growth, and credit supply. We find
small but significant effects of minimum wage changes on prices and household spending.
Prices and consumption increase, especially in economic sectors such as food away from
home, where firms tend to employ a large number of minimum- and low-wage workers.
This finding suggests that when minimum wages rise, companies at least partially offset
their higher labor costs by increasing their prices. We also find that households increase
the quantity of food that they consume at home and away from home following minimum
wage hikes. Finally, increases in the minimum wage reduce the total debt of households
with low credit scores, potentially minimum wage workers, while increasing auto debt
growth and access to consumer credit.
Besides focusing on inflation and consumption, our research contributes to the minimum wage literature by examining the broader local aggregate outcomes associated with
minimum wage changes. The effect that minimum wage increases have on the macroe43

Dettling and Hsu (2017) find no effect on card balances or utilization.

32

conomy is likely going to become more relevant as more local governments debate raising
minimum wages. Indeed, we have already observed many states and some cities or counties starting or continuing to raise their minimum wages toward $15 per hour (or beyond).
When thinking about the impact of higher minimum wages on the overall economy, one
should keep in mind that while the estimated price and spending effects are relatively
small, these findings are based on historical changes in the minimum wage that are also
not large (averaging about 5 percent annually, conditional on a change occurring). In
addition, recent findings by Dettling and Hsu (2017) as well as our own suggest that
cost-benefit analyses of social policies such as an increase in the minimum wage should
consider interactions with credit markets and financial well-being more generally.
There is some concern that there could be so-called threshold effects associated with
increases in the minimum wage. That is, the effect of the minimum wage on the economy
will be differentially (nonlinearly) larger when the size of the change in the minimum
wage increase or the level of the minimum wage itself grows. Indeed, Jardim et al. (2017)
find some evidence of threshold effects when examining recent changes in the city-level
minimum wage in Seattle. Note as well, that so far states and other localities have
increased their minimum wages at a gradual pace. This does not mean, however, that
minimum wage changes will continue to be small. Should the changes become much
larger, the local aggregate inflation (consumption, consumer debt) implications of these
changes could be more substantial and may require more attention from policymakers.

33

References
Aaronson, Daniel. 2001. “Price Pass-Through and the Minimum Wage.” Review of
Economics and Statistics 83(1): 158–169.
Aaronson, Daniel, Sumit Agarwal, and Eric French. 2012. “The Spending and Debt
Response to Minimum Wage Hikes.” American Economic Review 102(7): 3111–3139.
Aaronson, Daniel, Eric French, and James MacDonald. 2008. “The Minimum Wage,
Restaurant Prices, and Labor Market Structure.” Journal of Human Resources 43(3):
688–720.
Allegretto, Sylvia, Arindrajit Dube, Michael Reich, and Ben Zipperer. 2017. “Credible
Research Designs for Minimum Wage Studies. A Response to Neumark, Salas, and
Wascher.” ILR Review 70(3): 559–592.
Alonso, Cristian. 2016. “Beyond Labor Market Outcomes: The Impact of the Minimum
Wage on Nondurable Consumption.” Technical Report. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Economics Department Working Paper.
Amromin, Gene, Mariacristina De Nardi, and Karl Schulze. 2017. “Household Inequality
and the Consumption Response to Aggregate Real Shocks.” Working Paper 24073.
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Awuku-Budu, Christian, Mahsa Gholizadeh, Ledia Guci, Joshua S. Ingber, Christopher A. Lucas, and Levi J. Weible. 2016. “Personal Consumption Expenditures by
State.” Survey of Current Business 96(11).
Awuku-Budu, Christian, Ledia Guci, Christopher, A. Lucas, and Carol A. Robbins.
2013. “A First Look at Experimental Personal Consumption Expenditures by State.”
Briefing. Bureau of Economic Analysis.
34

Bai, Jushan. 2009. “Panel Data Models with Interactive Fixed Effects.” Econometrica
77(4): 1229–1279.
Bartik, Timothy. 1991. Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies? Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
Basker, Emek, and Muhammad Taimur Kahn. 2016. “Does the Minimum Wage Bite into
Fast-Food Prices?” Journal of Labor Research 37(2): 129–148.
Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. 1994. “Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case
Study of the Fast-Food Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania.” American Economic
Review 84(4): 772–793.
Dettling, Lisa J., and Joanne W. Hsu. 2017. “Minimum Wages and Consumer Credit:
Impacts on Access to Credit and Traditional and High-Cost Borrowing.” Finance and
Economics Discussion Series 2017-010. Washington, DC: Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System.
Dube, Arindrajit, T. William Lester, and Michael Reich. 2016. “Minimum Wage Shocks,
Employment Flows, and Labor Market Frictions.” Journal of Labor Economics 34(3):
663–704.
Ganapati, Sharat, and Jeffrey Weaver. 2017. “Minimum Wage and Retail Price Passthrough: Evidence and Estimates from Consumption Data.” Technical Report. New
Haven, CT: Yale University Economics Department Working Paper.
Horn, Brady P, Joanna Catherine Maclean, and Michael R Strain. 2016. “Do Minimum
Wage Increases Influence Worker Health?” Working Paper 22578. National Bureau of
Economic Research.

35

Jardim, Ekaterina, Mark C. Long, Robert Plotnick, Emma van Inwegen, Jacob Vigdor,
and Hilary Wething. 2017. “Minimum Wage Increases, Wages, And Low-Wage Employment: Evidence From Seattle.” Working Paper 23532. Cambridge, MA: National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Lemos, Sara. 2004. “Minimum Wage Policy and Employment Effects: Evidence from
Brazil.” Economia 5(1): 219–266.
Lemos, Sara. 2008. “A Survey of the Effects of the Minimum Wage on Prices.” Journal
of Economic Surveys 22(1): 187–212.
Lenhart, O. 2017a. “Do Higher Minimum Wages Benefit Health? Evidence from the
UK.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 36(4): 828–852.
Lenhart, O. 2017b. “The Impact Of Minimum Wages On Population Health: Evidence
From 24 Oecd Countries.” European Journal of Health Economics 18(8): 1031–1039.
Lenze, David G. 2018. “Preview of the 2018 Comprehensive Update of the Regional
Economic Accounts.” Survey of Current Business 98(8).
Leung, Justin H. 2018. “Minimum Wage and Real Wage Inequality: Evidence from PassThrough to Retail Prices.” Technical Report. Chicago, IL: Chicago Booth School of
Business Working Paper.
MacDonald, Daniel, and Eric Nilsson. 2016. “The Effects of Increasing the Minimum
Wage on Prices: Analyzing the Incidence of Policy Design and Context.” Technical
Report 16-260. Upjohn Institue Working Papers Series.
MaCurdy, Thomas. 2015. “How Effective Is the Minimum Wage at Supporting the Poor?”
Journal of Political Economy 123(2): 497–545.

36

Meltzer, David O., and Zhuo Chen. 2011. The Impact of Minimum Wage Rates on Body
Weight in the United States, 17–34. University of Chicago Press.
Neumark, David, J.M. Ian Salas, and William Wascher. 2014. “Revisiting the Minimum
Wage-Employment Debate: Throwing Out the Baby with the Bathwater?”

ILR

Review 67(Supplement 3): 608–648.
Paciorek, Andrew. 2013. “Supply Constraints and Housing Market Dynamics.” Journal
of Urban Economics 77: 11–26.
Pesaran, M. Hashem. 2006. “Estimation and Inference in Large Heterogeneous Panels
with a Multifactor Error Structure.” Econometrica 74(4): 967–1012.
Reich, Michael, Sylvia Allegretto, and Claire Montialoux. 2017. “Effects of a 15$ Minimum Wage in California and Fresno.” Technical Report. University of California,
Berkley: Institute for Research on Labor and Employment.
Renkin, Tobias, Claire Montialoux, and Michael Siegenthaler. 2017. “The Pass-through
of Minimum Wages into US Retail Prices: Evidence from Supermarket Scanner Data.”
Technical Report. Zurich: University of Zurich Economics Department Working Paper.
Totty, Evan. 2017. “The Effect of Minimum Wages on Employment: A Factor Model
Approach.” Economic Inquiry 55(4): 1712–1737.
Wehby, George, Dhaval Dave, and Robert Kaestner. 2016. “Effects of the Minimum Wage
on Infant Health.” Working Paper 22373. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Wolff, Edward N., and Ishaq Nadiri. 1981. “A Simulation Model of the Effect of an
Increase in the Minimum Wage on Employment, Output and the Price Level.” In
Report of the Minimum Wage Study Commission, Vol. VI: The Minimum Wage and
the Macro Economy, 217–232. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
37

Table 1: Baseline: Minimum Wage Changes and Inflation
(1)
All

(2)
All
x Energy

(3)
Core

(4)
Dur

(5)
Nondur

(6)
Serv

(7)
Food
at Home

(8)
Food
Away

Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t)

0.014
(0.008)

0.013
(0.009)

0.011
(0.011)

–0.003
(0.011)

0.007
(0.006)

0.017
(0.013)

–0.002
(0.011)

0.042***
(0.011)

Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t-1)

0.010
(0.011)

0.010
(0.010)

0.010 0.034**
(0.012) (0.015)

0.011
(0.013)

0.000
(0.015)

0.001
(0.012)

0.011
(0.014)

Bartik Emp. Growth

0.044
(0.332)

0.056
(0.327)

0.047
(0.356)

0.905**
(0.393)

0.399
(0.301)

–0.332
(0.457)

0.028
(0.243)

0.112
(0.390)

0.024
[0.144]
528
0.680

0.022
[0.144]
528
0.318

0.022
[0.188]
528
0.268

0.030
[0.149]
528
0.450

0.018
[0.269]
528
0.915

0.018
[0.413]
528
0.401

–0.001
[0.949]
528
0.736

0.053
[0.006]
528
0.294

Memo:
Two-year Min. Wage Effect†
P-Value
Observations
Adjusted R2

P1
k
Notes: The estimates are based on the baseline equation ∆yi,t
= αi + νt + j=0 β(j)∆wi,t−j + ηxi,t + ei,t ,
where the dependent variable is inflation (price growth) for the CPI category indicated at the top of each
column. The annual data cover 1999–2017. The estimates include location (CPI MSA) fixed effects as well as
year effects. The percent change in the minimum wage when a CPI MSA spans different states is calculated
based on the average (population-weighted) minimum wage in each location and year as discussed in the
text. † Cumulative effect of the minimum wage change measured over two years (sum of contemporaneous
and lagged effects). Standard errors clustered by CPI MSA are in parentheses: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***
p<0.01.

38

Table 2: Minimum Wage Changes and Nominal Consumption Growth
(1)
Total
PCE

(2)
Core
PCE

(3)
Dur

(4)
Nondur

(5)
Serv

(6)
Food
at Home

(7)
Food
Away

Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t)

0.022**
(0.009)

0.012
(0.009)

0.028
(0.025)

0.029*
(0.015)

0.021***
(0.007)

0.030**
(0.012)

0.094***
(0.013)

Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t-1)

–0.007
(0.011)

–0.012
(0.011)

0.002
(0.026)

0.014
(0.013)

–0.017*
(0.009)

0.020
(0.015)

–0.005
(0.022)

Bartik Emp. Growth

0.434
(0.302)

0.344
(0.308)

3.550***
(0.610)

1.049***
(0.327)

–0.442
(0.368)

1.167**
(0.448)

–0.006
(0.426)

0.015
[0.379]
528
0.851

0.000
[0.997]
528
0.825

0.030
[0.480]
528
0.801

0.043
[0.064]
528
0.853

Memo:
Two-year Min. Wage Effect†
P-Value
Observations
Adjusted R2

0.004
0.050
0.089
[0.738]
[0.031]
[0.003]
528
528
528
0.844
0.545
0.689
P1
k
Notes: The estimates are based on the baseline equation ∆yi,t
= αi + νt + j=0 β(j)∆wi,t−j + ηxi,t + ei,t ,
where the dependent variable is the percent change in consumption growth for the expenditure category
indicated at the top of each column. The annual data cover 1999–2017. Core PCE excludes food and energy
consumption. The estimates include location (CPI MSA) fixed effects as well as year effects. The percent
change in the minimum wage when a CPI MSA spans different states is calculated based on the average
(population-weighted) minimum wage in each location and year as discussed in the text. † Cumulative
effect of the minimum wage change measured over two years (sum of contemporaneous and lagged effects).
Standard errors clustered by CPI MSA are in parentheses: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

39

Table 3: Minimum Wage Changes and Real Consumption Growth
(1)
(2)
Real PCE Real Core PCE

(3)
Dur

(4)
Serv

(5)
Food at Home

(6)
Food Away

Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t)

0.008
(0.009)

0.001
(0.012)

0.031
(0.032)

0.003
(0.011)

0.033**
(0.012)

0.052***
(0.014)

Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t-1)

–0.017
(0.011)

–0.022**
(0.010)

–0.031
(0.025)

–0.017
(0.012)

0.019
(0.019)

–0.016
(0.030)

Bartik Emp. Growth

0.390
(0.328)

0.298
(0.368)

2.645*** –0.110
(0.733) (0.378)

1.139**
(0.453)

–0.118
(0.472)

–0.008
[0.586]
528
0.723

–0.022
[0.190]
528
0.725

0.051
[0.026]
528
0.458

0.036
[0.307]
528
0.641

Memo:
Two-year Min. Wage Effect†
P-Value
Observations
Adjusted R2

0.000
[0.999]
528
0.763

–0.013
[0.458]
528
0.588

P1
k
Notes: The estimates are based on the baseline equation ∆yi,t
= αi + νt + j=0 β(j)∆wi,t−j + ηxi,t + ei,t ,
where the dependent variable is the percent change in real consumption growth for the expenditure category
indicated at the top of each column. The annual data cover 1999–2017. Core PCE excludes food and energy
consumption. The estimates include location (CPI MSA) fixed effects as well as year effects. The percent
change in the minimum wage when a CPI MSA spans different states is calculated based on the average
(population-weighted) minimum wage in each location and year as discussed in the text. † Cumulative
effect of the minimum wage change measured over two years (sum of contemporaneous and lagged effects).
Standard errors clustered by CPI MSA are in parentheses: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

40

Table 4: Robustness: Controlling for the Share of Low-Wage Workers
Panel A: Inflation Results
(1)
All

(2)
All
x Energy

(3)
Core

(4)
Dur

(5)
Nondur

(6)
Serv

(7)
Food
at Home

(8)
Food
Away

0.028***
(0.009)

0.027***
(0.008)

0.025**
(0.010)

–0.005
(0.015)

0.013
(0.010)

0.034***
(0.012)

0.014
(0.023)

0.064***
(0.016)

Heterogenous Treatment Effect [HTE] (t)

0.005*
(0.003)

0.005**
(0.002)

0.005*
(0.003)

–0.000
(0.004)

0.003
(0.003)

0.007*
(0.004)

0.003
(0.007)

0.007**
(0.003)

Bartik Empl. Growth

0.036
(0.344)

0.032
(0.341)

0.032
(0.369)

0.899**
(0.401)

0.384
(0.303)

–0.328
(0.476)

–0.056
(0.253)

0.067
(0.397)

0.038
[0.026]
0.008
[0.033]
528
0.684

0.035
[0.024]
0.008
[0.009]
528
0.330

0.037
[0.030]
0.009
[0.009]
528
0.277

0.036
[0.149]
0.003
[0.642]
528
0.448

0.034
[0.051]
0.009
[0.015]
528
0.916

0.030
[0.173]
0.008
[0.123]
528
0.404

–0.002
[0.911]
0.003
[0.524]
528
0.740

0.059
[0.002]
0.006
[0.076]
528
0.302

Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t)

Memo:
Two-year Min. Wage Effect†
P-Value
Two-year HTE†
P-Value
Observations
Adjusted R2

Panel B: Consumption Growth Results
(1)
Total
PCE

(2)
Core
PCE

(3)
Dur

(4)
Nondur

(5)
Serv

(6)
Food
at Home

(7)
Food
Away

Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t)

0.039***
(0.009)

0.026***
(0.009)

0.053**
(0.023)

0.045**
(0.017)

0.033***
(0.008)

0.038**
(0.017)

0.129***
(0.014)

Heterogenous Treatment Effect [HTE] (t)

0.006***
(0.001)

0.005***
(0.002)

0.005
(0.008)

0.005*
(0.003)

0.005***
(0.001)

0.001
(0.003)

0.011***
(0.004)

0.413
(0.324)

0.326
(0.331)

3.449***
(0.579)

1.019***
(0.357)

–0.439
(0.382)

1.153**
(0.475)

–0.065
(0.438)

0.021
[0.210]
0.005
[0.207]
528
0.852

0.004
[0.814]
0.004
[0.359]
528
0.825

0.013
[0.721]
–0.003
[0.824]
528
0.801

0.046
[0.063]
0.004
[0.404]
528
0.853

0.012
[0.303]
0.005
[0.033]
528
0.845

0.031
[0.215]
–0.008
[0.116]
528
0.547

0.100
[0.003]
0.010
[0.099]
528
0.693

Bartik Empl. Growth
Memo:
Two-year Min. Wage Effect†
P-Value
Two-year HTE†
P-Value
Observations
Adjusted R2

Panel C: Real Consumption Growth Results
(1)
Real PCE

(2)
Real Core PCE

(3)
Dur

(4)
Serv

(5)
Food at Home

(6)
Food Away

Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t)

0.011
(0.010)

0.001
(0.012)

0.058**
(0.028)

–0.001
(0.012)

0.024
(0.020)

0.065***
(0.020)

Heterogenous Treatment Effect [HTE] (t)

0.000
(0.003)

–0.000
(0.003)

0.005
(0.006)

–0.002
(0.003)

–0.001
(0.007)

0.005
(0.005)

Bartik Empl. Growth

0.377
(0.337)

0.294
(0.381)

2.550*** –0.110
(0.727) (0.386)

1.210**
(0.458)

–0.131
(0.470)

–0.017
[0.357]
–0.004
[0.528]
528
0.722

–0.034
[0.061]
–0.006
[0.305]
528
0.725

0.033
[0.206]
–0.012
[0.181]
528
0.464

0.041
[0.262]
0.004
[0.505]
528
0.639

Memo:
Two-year Min. Wage Effect†
P-Value
Two-year HTE†
P-Value
Observations
Adjusted R2

–0.023
[0.624]
–0.006
[0.631]
528
0.764

–0.018
[0.367]
–0.003
[0.594]
528
0.586

P1
k
Notes: The estimates are based on the baseline equation ∆yi,t
= αi + νt + j=0 β(j)∆wi,t−j + ηxi,t + ei,t .
where the dependent variable is inflation (top panel) or the percent change in consumption growth (panel
B, C) for the category noted at the top of each column. The annual data cover 1999–2017. The estimates
include location (CPI MSA) fixed effects as well as year effects. The percent change in the minimum wage
when a CPI MSA spans different states is calculated based on the average (population-weighted) minimum
wage in each location and year as discussed in the text. † Cumulative effect of the minimum wage change
measured over two years (sum of contemporaneous and lagged effects). Standard errors clustered by CPI
MSA are in parentheses: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

41

Table 5: Total Debt and Minimum Wage Changes

(1)
All

(2)
Sub660

(3)
Young

(4)
Sub-Prime
and Young

Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t)

–0.032 –0.208**
(0.040) (0.075)

0.023
(0.045)

–0.093
(0.059)

Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t-1)

–0.040
(0.035)

–0.159*
(0.087)

0.016
(0.051)

–0.031
(0.059)

Bartik Empl. Growth

–3.084
(3.429)

–2.306
(2.550)

–1.448
(4.102)

–1.784
(2.794)

–0.072
[0.242]
504
0.680

–0.367
[0.023]
504
0.629

0.039
[0.608]
504
0.662

–0.125
[0.243]
504
0.642

Memo:
Two-year Min. Wage Effect†
P-Value
Observations
Adjusted R2

P1
k
Notes: The estimates are based on the baseline equation ∆yi,t
= αi + νt + j=0 β(j)∆wi,t−j + ηxi,t + ei,t ,
where the dependent variable is the percent change in total debt balances for the borrower group indicated
at the top of each column. The annual data cover 2000–2017. The estimates include location (CPI MSA)
fixed effects as well as year effects. The percent change in the minimum wage when a CPI MSA spans
different states is calculated based on the average (population-weighted) minimum wage in each location
and year as discussed in the text. † Cumulative effect of the minimum wage change measured over two years
(sum of contemporaneous and lagged effects). Standard errors clustered by CPI MSA are in parentheses:
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

42

Table 6: Auto Loans and Minimum Wage Changes

(1)
All

(2)
Sub660

(3)
Young

(4)
Sub-Prime
and Young

Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t)

0.086**
(0.038)

0.094**
(0.042)

0.094**
(0.037)

0.084*
(0.046)

Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t-1)

–0.125*
(0.066)

–0.137*
(0.071)

–0.136*
(0.079)

–0.118
(0.088)

Bartik Empl. Growth

–1.508
(3.120)

–1.473
(2.485)

–0.536
(3.808)

–0.543
(3.282)

–0.039
[0.602]
504
0.744

–0.043
[0.602]
504
0.738

–0.042
[0.579]
504
0.733

–0.033
[0.696]
504
0.742

Memo:
Two-year Min. Wage Effect†
P-Value
Observations
Adjusted R2

P1
k
Notes: The estimates are based on the baseline equation ∆yi,t
= αi + νt + j=0 β(j)∆wi,t−j + ηxi,t + ei,t ,
where the dependent variable is the percent change in total debt balances for the borrower group indicated
at the top of each column. The annual data cover 2000–2017. The estimates include location (CPI MSA)
fixed effects as well as year effects. The percent change in the minimum wage when a CPI MSA spans
different states is calculated based on the average (population-weighted) minimum wage in each location
and year as discussed in the text. † Cumulative effect of the minimum wage change measured over two years
(sum of contemporaneous and lagged effects). Standard errors clustered by CPI MSA are in parentheses:
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

43

Table 7: Success in Credit Applications, the Subprime Share, and Minimum Wage Changes

(1)
Total
Sample

(2)
(3)
Success Rate
Subprime Young

(4)
Subprime
Young

(5)
Change
Subprime
Share

Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t)

0.077*
(0.039)

0.083**
(0.035)

0.112**
(0.042)

0.118***
(0.041)

–0.010*
(0.005)

Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t-1)

0.089**
(0.032)

0.118***
(0.038)

0.119**
(0.044)

0.131***
(0.043)

–0.007
(0.005)

Bartik Emp. Growth

–6.776*
(3.304)

–4.622
(2.980)

–6.667*
(3.868)

–4.309
(3.057)

–0.092
(0.170)

0.165
[0.015]
532
0.898

0.201
[0.006]
532
0.879

0.231
[0.007]
532
0.870

0.249
[0.003]
532
0.855

–0.017
[0.066]
504
0.618

Memo:
Two-year Min. Wage Effect†
P-Value
Observations
Adjusted R2

P1
k
Notes: The estimates are based on the baseline equation ∆yi,t
= αi + νt + j=0 β(j)∆wi,t−j + ηxi,t + ei,t ,
where the dependent variable is the percent change in total debt balances for the borrower group indicated at
the top of each column. The annual data cover 1999–2017. The estimates include location (CPI MSA) fixed
effects as well as year effects. The percent change in the minimum wage when a CPI MSA spans different
states is calculated based on the average (population-weighted) minimum wage in each location and year as
discussed in the text. † Cumulative effect of the minimum wage change measured over two years (sum of
contemporaneous and lagged effects). Standard errors clustered by CPI MSA are in parentheses: * p<0.10,
** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

44

Figure 1: The Effective (Nominal) Minimum Wage over Time

Minimum Wage Distributions Over Time
12.50
11.50
10.50

U.S. Dollars

9.50
8.50
7.50
6.50
5.50
4.50
3.50
2.50
1.50
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

Mean Across CPI MSAs

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

Federal Minimum

Note: The bars indicate the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles of the minimum wage across all
28 CPI MSAs, and the whiskers indicate minimum and maximum values.
Source: Minimum wage data come from Federal and State Departments of Labor and city
government websites

Figure 2: The Timing of Minimum Wage Changes

Number of MSAs with Changes to Minimum Wage

19
7
19 8
7
19 9
8
19 0
8
19 1
8
19 2
8
19 3
8
19 4
8
19 5
8
19 6
8
19 7
8
19 8
8
19 9
9
19 0
9
19 1
9
19 2
9
19 3
9
19 4
9
19 5
9
19 6
9
19 7
9
19 8
9
20 9
0
20 0
0
20 1
0
20 2
0
20 3
0
20 4
0
20 5
0
20 6
0
20 7
0
20 8
0
20 9
1
20 0
1
20 1
1
20 2
1
20 3
1
20 4
1
20 5
1
20 6
1
20 7
18

28
26
24
22
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

MSAs with a Change to Minimum Wage
Change in Federal Minimum Wage
Source: Minimum wage data come from Federal and State Departments of Labor and city governments

45

46

Share

0.00

0.04

0.08

0.12

0.16

0.20

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

2017

Source: Authors' calculations using the Current Population Survey (CPS).

Note: The box and whiskers show the interquartile range, minimum, and maximum low-wage
worker share across workers in a CPI MSA. The black line indicates the mean across 28 CPI
MSAs

1997

Over Time

Source: Authors’ calculations using Current Population Survey (CPS) data.

Average Share Across States (1997–2017)

Figure 3: Share of Low-Wage Workers

0.17 − 0.20
0.15 − 0.17
0.13 − 0.15
0.11 − 0.13
0.10 − 0.11

A

Appendix

List of Metropolitan Statistical Areas with CPI Data
(1) Anchorage, (2) Atlanta, (3) Baltimore-Columbia-Towson, (4) Boston-BrocktonNashua, (5) Chicago-Gary-Kenosha, (6) Cincinnati-Hamilton, (7) Cleveland-Akron, (8)
Dallas-Fort Worth, (9) Denver-Boulder-Greeley, (10) Detroit-Ann Arbor-Flint, (11) Honolulu, (12) Houston-Galveston-Brazoria, (13) Kansas City, (14) Los Angeles-Long BeachAnaheim, (15) Miami-Fort Lauderdale, (16) Milwaukee-Racine, (17) Minneapolis-St.
Paul, (18) New York-Northern New Jersey-Long Island, (19) Philadelphia-WilmingtonAtlantic City, (20) Phoenix-Mesa, (21) Pittsburgh, (22) Portland-Salem, (23) San Diego,
(24) San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose, (25) Seattle-Tacoma-Bremerton, (26) St. Louis,
(27) Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, and (28) Washington-Arlington-Alexandria.

47

Summary Statistics
Table A.1: Summary Statistics: Change in Minimum Wage and Share of Low-Wage Workers
across Cities

Min
Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t)
–0.412
Share of Low-Wage Workers (t-1) 5.288

Max
33.010
20.701

p50
0.260
12.126

Mean Mean|∆
sd
2.909
5.155
5.080
12.235
3.133

Table A.2: Summary Statistics: CPI Inflation and Its Components

Min
Max
p50
Mean
sd

All

All
x Energy

Core

Dur

Nondur

Serv

Food
at Home

Food
Away

–2.643
6.021
2.237
2.240
1.293

-0.716
5.349
2.078
2.120
0.894

–1.190
5.478
1.988
2.069
0.971

–5.740
8.279
–0.955
–0.943
1.605

–6.754
9.080
2.707
2.202
2.885

–1.196
8.012
2.724
2.797
1.353

–3.403
8.545
1.988
2.130
2.030

–1.715
7.826
2.667
2.760
1.210

Table A.3: Summary Statistics: PCE Growth and Its Components

Total
PCE

Core
PCE

Dur

Min
–3.162 –2.210 –13.453
Max 10.213 10.181 13.005
p50
4.348 4.397
3.941
Mean 4.414 4.450
3.203
sd
2.100 1.948
4.560

Nondur

Serv

Food
at Home

Food
Away

–6.747
12.714
4.007
3.860
3.209

–0.766
10.399
4.795
4.753
1.794

–2.711
11.289
3.690
3.675
2.151

–4.044
12.746
4.706
4.824
2.702

48

Table A.4: Summary Statistics: Debt Changes and Success Rates

Panel A: Total Debt Change
All
Min
–10.152
Max 119.995
p50
3.849
Mean 6.140
sd
11.636

Subprime

Young

Subprime Young

–23.232
130.152
1.928
3.713
13.446

–19.414
118.425
3.079
4.508
12.205

–26.052
122.804
1.283
2.539
12.768

Panel B: Auto Debt Change
All
Min
–12.842
Max 128.594
p50
6.309
Mean 7.716
sd
13.467

Subprime

Young

Subprime Young

–16.774
136.403
5.172
6.306
13.872

–17.839
128.701
5.128
6.264
13.951

–21.175
137.017
4.265
5.182
14.961

Panel C: Success Rate and Change in Subprime Share
Total
Sample
Min
Max
p50
Mean
sd
Source:

Success Rate
Subprime Young

46.035
31.776
129.708 105.773
73.979
53.554
75.422
55.444
15.145
13.474
NY Fed Consumer

Subprime
Young

44.125
35.388
132.898 109.105
71.314
58.061
73.190
59.735
15.625
13.346
Credit Panel/Equifax.

49

Change
Subprime
Share
–3.432
2.325
–0.482
–0.563
0.788

CPI Results without Bartik Employment Growth
Table A.5: Baseline: Minimum Wage Changes and Inflation. No Control for Economic
Conditions
(1)
All

(2)
All
x Energy

(3)
Core

(4)
Dur

(5)
Nondur

(6)
Serv

(7)
Food
at Home

(8)
Food
Away

Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t)

0.014
(0.008)

0.012
(0.009)

0.011
(0.010)

–0.006
(0.011)

0.006
(0.006)

0.018
(0.012)

–0.002
(0.011)

0.042***
(0.011)

Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t-1)

0.010
(0.012)

0.009
(0.010)

0.010
(0.012)

0.031*
(0.015)

0.010
(0.014)

0.001
(0.014)

0.001
(0.011)

0.010
(0.014)

0.024
[0.152]
528
0.681

0.022
[0.148]
528
0.320

0.021
[0.194]
528
0.269

0.024
[0.241]
528
0.444

Memo:
Two-year Min. Wage Effect†
P-Value
Observations
Adjusted R2

0.016
0.020
–0.001
0.052
[0.376] [0.354]
[0.939]
[0.004]
528
528
528
528
0.915
0.401
0.736
0.295
P1
k
Notes: The estimates are based on the baseline equation ∆yi,t
= αi + νt + j=0 β(j)∆wi,t−j + ηxi,t + ei,t ,
where the dependent variable is inflation (price growth) for the CPI category indicated at the top of each
column. The annual data cover 1999–2017. The estimates include location (CPI MSA) fixed effects as well as
year effects. The percent change in the minimum wage when a CPI MSA spans different states is calculated
based on the average (population-weighted) minimum wage in each location and year as discussed in the
text. † Cumulative effect of the minimum wage change measured over two years (sum of contemporaneous
and lagged effects). Standard errors clustered by CPI MSA are in parentheses: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***
p<0.01.

50

Results Allowing for Anticipatory Effects
Table A.6: Baseline: Minimum Wage Changes and Inflation, with Lead
(1)
All

(2)
All
x Energy

(3)
Core

(4)
Dur

(5)
Nondur

(6)
Serv

(7)
Food
at Home

(8)
Food
Away

Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t)

0.012
(0.008)

0.011
(0.009)

0.010
(0.010)

–0.006
(0.012)

0.007
(0.006)

0.015
(0.012)

–0.003
(0.011)

0.041***
(0.011)

Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t-1)

0.012
(0.012)

0.011
(0.010)

0.012 0.036**
(0.012) (0.014)

0.011
(0.013)

0.002
(0.015)

0.002
(0.012)

0.012
(0.014)

Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t+1)

0.012
(0.011)

0.010
(0.011)

0.010
(0.012)

0.016
(0.017)

–0.000
(0.009)

0.014
(0.016)

0.005
(0.009)

0.006
(0.008)

Bartik Emp. Growth

0.070
(0.347)

0.077
(0.336)

0.069
(0.363)

0.940**
(0.389)

0.399
(0.299)

–0.302
(0.485)

0.038
(0.249)

0.124
(0.398)

0.024
[0.140]
0.036
[0.115]
528
0.681

0.022
[0.143]
0.032
[0.138]
528
0.319

0.022
[0.186]
0.032
[0.157]
528
0.268

0.030
[0.146]
0.046
[0.054]
528
0.451

0.018
[0.269]
0.018
[0.421]
528
0.915

0.018
[0.416]
0.032
[0.285]
528
0.402

–0.001
[0.947]
0.004
[0.857]
528
0.735

0.053
[0.007]
0.058
[0.012]
528
0.293

Memo:
Two-year Min. Wage Effect†
P-Value
Total Min. Wage Effects‡
P-Value
Observations
Adjusted R2

P1
k
Notes: The estimates are based on the baseline equation ∆yi,t
= αi + νt + j=−1 β(j)∆wi,t−j + ηxi,t + ei,t ,
where the dependent variable is inflation (price growth) for the CPI category indicated at the top of each
column. The annual data cover 1999–2017. The estimates include location (CPI MSA) fixed effects as well as
year effects. The percent change in the minimum wage when a CPI MSA spans different states is calculated
based on the average (population-weighted) minimum wage in each location and year as discussed in the
text. † Cumulative effect of the minimum wage change measured over two years (sum of contemporaneous
and lagged effects); ‡ The total effect of the minimum wage change including any anticipatory effect (sum
of contemporaneous, lagged, and lead effects). Standard errors clustered by CPI MSA are in parentheses: *
p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

51

Table A.7: Minimum Wage Changes and Nominal Consumption Growth, with Lead
(1)
Total
PCE

(2)
Core
PCE

(3)
Dur

(4)
Nondur

(5)
Serv

(6)
Food
at Home

(7)
Food
Away

Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t)

0.020**
(0.009)

0.010
(0.009)

0.020
(0.025)

0.026*
(0.015)

0.020***
(0.007)

0.028**
(0.012)

0.093***
(0.013)

Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t-1)

–0.005
(0.011)

–0.010
(0.011)

0.010
(0.026)

0.017
(0.013)

–0.016**
(0.008)

0.022
(0.014)

–0.005
(0.021)

Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t+1)

0.015
(0.012)

0.014
(0.012)

0.053*
(0.028)

0.021
(0.013)

0.002
(0.011)

0.017
(0.015)

0.006
(0.024)

Bartik Emp. Growth

0.466
(0.317)

0.374 3.665***
(0.324) (0.590)

1.095***
(0.344)

–0.438
(0.381)

1.204**
(0.454)

0.008
(0.436)

0.015
[0.379]
0.030
[0.140]
528
0.852

–0.000
[0.998]
0.013
[0.481]
528
0.825

Memo:
Two-year Min. Wage Effect†
P-Value
Total Min. Wage Effects‡
P-Value
Observations
Adjusted R2

0.030
[0.477]
0.083
[0.123]
528
0.803

0.004
0.050
0.089
[0.739]
[0.031]
[0.003]
0.006
0.067
0.095
[0.688]
[0.013]
[0.008]
528
528
528
0.844
0.545
0.689
P1
k
Notes: The estimates are based on the baseline equation ∆yi,t
= αi + νt + j=−1 β(j)∆wi,t−j + ηxi,t + ei,t ,
where the dependent variable is the percent change in consumption growth for the expenditure category
indicated at the top of each column. The annual data cover 1999–2017. Core PCE excludes food and energy
consumption. The estimates include location (CPI MSA) fixed effects as well as year effects. The percent
change in the minimum wage when a CPI MSA spans different states is calculated based on the average
(population-weighted) minimum wage in each location and year as discussed in the text. † Cumulative effect
of the minimum wage change measured over two years (sum of contemporaneous and lagged effects); ‡ The
total effect of the minimum wage change including any anticipatory effect (sum of contemporaneous, lagged,
and lead effects). Standard errors clustered by CPI MSA are in parentheses: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***
p<0.01.

52

0.043
[0.064]
0.064
[0.022]
528
0.853

Table A.8: Minimum Wage Changes and Real Consumption Growth, with Lead
(1)
(2)
Real PCE Real Core PCE

(3)
Dur

(4)
Serv

(5)
(6)
Food at Home Food Away

Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t)

0.008
(0.010)

0.000
(0.013)

0.026
(0.032)

0.005
(0.011)

0.031**
(0.012)

0.052***
(0.014)

L.Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t)

–0.016
(0.011)

–0.022**
(0.011)

–0.026
(0.027)

–0.019
(0.012)

0.020
(0.019)

–0.016
(0.029)

F.Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t)

0.003
(0.013)

0.003
(0.015)

0.037
(0.033)

–0.012
(0.014)

0.012
(0.016)

0.001
(0.026)

Bartik Empl. Growth

0.395
(0.318)

0.305
(0.354)

2.724*** –0.137
(0.713) (0.381)

1.166**
(0.454)

–0.117
(0.455)

–0.008
[0.586]
–0.006
[0.770]
528
0.722

–0.022
[0.190]
–0.018
[0.353]
528
0.725

0.051
[0.028]
0.063
[0.024]
528
0.457

0.036
[0.308]
0.036
[0.349]
528
0.640

Memo:
Two-year Min. Wage Effect†
P-Value
Total Min. Wage Effects‡
P-Value
Observations
Adjusted R2

–0.000
[0.996]
0.036
[0.564]
528
0.764

–0.013
[0.462]
–0.026
[0.268]
528
0.588

P1
k
Notes: The estimates are based on the baseline equation ∆yi,t
= αi + νt + j=−1 β(j)∆wi,t−j + ηxi,t + ei,t ,
where the dependent variable is the percent change in real consumption growth for the expenditure category
indicated at the top of each column. The annual data cover 1999–2017. Core PCE excludes food and energy
consumption. The estimates include location (CPI MSA) fixed effects as well as year effects. The percent
change in the minimum wage when a CPI MSA spans different states is calculated based on the average
(population-weighted) minimum wage in each location and year as discussed in the text. † Cumulative effect
of the minimum wage change measured over two years (sum of contemporaneous and lagged effects); ‡ The
total effect of the minimum wage change including any anticipatory effect (sum of contemporaneous, lagged,
and lead effects). Standard errors clustered by CPI MSA are in parentheses: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***
p<0.01.

53

Alternative Controls for Local (Potentially Unobserved) Economic Conditions
In this section, we consider alternative controls for local economic conditions. A
potential concern with our analysis is that, while there is a lot of variation in minimum
wages across the United States, minimum wage levels and policy changes may not be
randomly distributed across states or time. States and/or regions of the country may
differ along dimensions other than their minimum wage policies, so there are potential
drawbacks to using MSA-level (or state-level) data to estimate the effects of minimum
wage changes. In particular, unobserved regional or national factors that are correlated
with inflation or consumption growth may also drive changes in minimum wages. Twoway fixed effects models (with a fixed effect for each year and for each location)—like
in our baseline specification—have been the traditional approach used in the literature
to deal with these confounding factors. However, such models do not control for any
type of pre-existing, location-specific trends in the explanatory variable of interest (for
example, employment growth). Indeed, much of the recent debate in the minimum wage
and employment literature focuses on whether one should control for pre-existing trends
in the data or whether doing so “throws away” too much valid identifying information—
see, for example, the debate between Neumark, Salas, and Wascher (2014) and Allegretto
et al. (2017). Typically, controlling for pre-trends in a two-way fixed effects model lowers
the estimated employment effect of a given minimum wage increase.
Totty (2017) approaches controlling for unobserved factors somewhat differently by
relying on factor model estimators (interactive effects as opposed to additive effects)
following the work of Pesaran (2006) and Bai (2009). In a macroeconomic setting, interactive fixed effects capture common shocks with potential heterogeneous effects on the
cross-sectional unit being analyzed. Bai (2009) estimates the common (shocks) factors
(and factor loadings) directly, and one difficulty in implementing his method is choosing

54

the correct number of factors.44 In contrast, Pesaran (2006) uses additional regressors to
proxy for the common factors. His estimator calls for the inclusion of the cross-sectional
averages of the dependent and independent variables as additional controls.
We check the robustness of our results to unobserved factors using two alternative
estimation approaches: (1) including census region-by-period fixed effects instead of just
time fixed effects in our baseline estimates; (2) using the estimator proposed by Bai
(2009).45 The results in Table A.9 Panel A incorporate region-by-period fixed effects in
our estimates, in addition to the CPI-MSA fixed effects.46 The estimated relationship
between minimum wage changes and food prices barely changes when we include these
additional controls; however, we obtain somewhat larger minimum wage effects for the
broader CPI categories (all, all excluding energy, and core) and services—more consistent
with the regressions that allowed for HTE. Nevertheless, the estimated effects of minimum
wage increases on local-aggregate prices remains small.
The results using the proposed estimator by Bai (2009) are reported in Panel B of Table A.9. We use four common factors in the regressions to avoid over-identification, but
the results are not very sensitive to the exact number of factors used (particularly for the
food inflation categories).47 The estimated cumulative relationship between a minimum
wage increase and food away inflation is of similar magnitude to our baseline result. Applying these alternative control methods to our consumption growth regressions, shown in
Tables A.10–A.11, also does not really affect our main conclusions. Indeed, both nominal
and real food consumption growth increase noticeably with a minimum wage hike.
0
In Bai (2009), the estimation model is Yit = Xit
β + uit and uit = λ0i Ft + it , where λ0i is a vector of
factor loadings and Ft is a vector of common factors. The
fixed effects model is a special case
 two-way

of this more general interactive effects model with Ft = v1t , and λi = [ α1i ] .
45
The method in Pesaran (2006) requires a large N and a large T setting, and may not be best suited
for our relatively small panel.
46
MSA or state-specific time trends are often added as well if the independent variable is in levels.
Since our independent variable (inflation or consumption growth) is already a growth rate, the MSA-level
fixed effects should capture pre-existing, MSA-specific growth trends.
47
We use the regife command in Stata to implement Bai (2009).
44

55

Table A.9: Minimum Wage Changes and Inflation. Further Robustness Analysis
(1)
All

(2)
All
x Energy

(3)
Core

(4)
Dur

(5)
Nondur

(6)
Serv

(7)
Food
at Home

(8)
Food
Away

Panel A: Region × Year Fixed Effects and CPI-MSA Fixed Effects
Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t)

0.016*
(0.010)

0.018
(0.012)

0.018
(0.014)

–0.006
(0.011)

0.004
(0.006)

0.025
(0.016)

–0.009
(0.011)

0.042***
(0.011)

Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t-1)

0.016
(0.010)

0.014
(0.010)

0.016 0.028**
(0.012) (0.012)

0.014
(0.012)

0.012
(0.014)

0.000
(0.013)

0.009
(0.013)

Bartik Emp. Growth

0.370
(0.386)

0.267
(0.378)

0.331
(0.409)

0.940**
(0.439)

0.556*
(0.288)

0.098
(0.559)

–0.009
(0.332)

–0.215
(0.423)

Memo:
Two-year Min. Wage Effect†
P-Value

0.032
[0.035]

0.032
[0.069]

0.034
[0.086]

0.022
[0.158]

0.019
[0.217]

0.037
[0.134]

–0.009
[0.613]

0.051
[0.015]

Adjusted R2

0.706

0.352

0.295

0.468

0.928

0.419

0.758

0.293

Panel B: Common Factors Model. Bai (2009)
Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t)

–0.005
(0.009)

–0.003
(0.010)

–0.009
(0.012)

–0.026*
(0.014)

–0.000
(0.012)

–0.009
(0.012)

–0.004
(0.014)

0.035**
(0.013)

Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t-1)

–0.010
(0.011)

–0.008
(0.008)

–0.009
(0.009)

0.004
(0.017)

0.016
(0.014)

–0.026*
(0.014)

–0.001
(0.015)

0.018
(0.016)

Bartik Emp. Growth

–0.221
(0.155)

–0.168
(0.214)

–0.196
(0.224)

0.283
(0.244)

0.581**
(0.213)

–0.758**
(0.366)

0.135
(0.256)

0.170
(0.161)

–0.015
[0.244]

–0.011
[0.346]

–0.018
[0.183]

–0.022
[0.395]

0.015
[0.377]

–0.035
[0.063]

–0.005
[0.844]

0.054
[0.000]

528

528

528

528

528

528

528

528

Memo:
Two-year Min. Wage Effect†
P-Value
Observations

k
∆yi,t

P1

Notes: The estimates in Panel A are based on the baseline equation
= αi +λl ×νt + j=0 β(j)∆wi,t−j +
ηxi,t + ei,t , where the dependent variable is inflation for the category noted at the top of each column, and l
denotes a census region. The annual data cover 1999–2017. The estimates include location (CPI MSA) fixed
effects as well as region × year fixed effects. The percent change in the minimum wage when a CPI MSA spans
different states is calculated based on the average (population-weighted) minimum wage in each location and
year as discussed in the text. MSA employment growth is instrumented using
P1 a Bartik instrument. The
estimates in Panel B are based on Bai’s (2009) estimator: ∆xki,t = λ0i Ft + j=0 β(j)∆wi,t−j + ηyi,t + ei,t ,
using four common factors. † Cumulative effect of the minimum wage change measured over two years
(sum of contemporaneous and lagged effects). Standard errors clustered by CPI MSA are in parentheses: *
p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

56

Table A.10: Minimum Wage Changes and Consumption. Further Robustness Analysis
(1)
Total
PCE

(2)
Core
PCE

(3)
Dur

(4)
Nondur

(5)
Serv

(6)
Food
at Home

(7)
Food
Away

Panel A: Region × Year Fixed Effects and CPI-MSA Fixed Effects
Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t)

0.026*** 0.015*
(0.007) (0.008)

0.031
(0.026)

0.038*** 0.020***
(0.010)
(0.006)

0.037***
(0.011)

0.102***
(0.011)

Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t-1)

–0.017
(0.013)

–0.022
(0.013)

–0.039
(0.025)

0.001
(0.016)

–0.018
(0.012)

0.019
(0.018)

–0.011
(0.028)

Bartik Emp. Growth

0.242
(0.349)

0.208
(0.353)

2.688***
(0.700)

0.449
(0.422)

–0.296
(0.377)

0.707
(0.544)

–0.568
(0.442)

Memo:
Two-year Min. Wage Effect†
P-Value

0.009
[0.603]

–0.007
[0.720]

–0.008
[0.851]

0.039
[0.061]

0.002
[0.896]

0.056
[0.023]

0.090
[0.007]

Adjusted R2

0.873

0.848

0.843

0.872

0.854

0.589

0.737

Panel B: Common Factors Model. Bai (2009)
Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t)

0.022**
(0.009)

0.014
(0.008)

0.011
(0.024)

0.026*
(0.014)

0.020**
(0.009)

0.039***
(0.012)

0.115***
(0.029)

Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t-1)

–0.013
(0.010)

–0.010
(0.010)

–0.012
(0.028)

0.006
(0.014)

–0.007
(0.010)

0.040***
(0.013)

0.000
(0.020)

Bartik Emp. Growth

0.122
(0.227)

0.042
(0.202)

1.504***
(0.406)

–0.025
(0.321)

0.067
(0.155)

–0.217
(0.241)

1.658***
(0.397)

0.008
[0.545]

0.004
[0.787]

–0.001
[0.982]

0.032
[0.162]

0.012
[0.453]

0.079
[0.000]

0.115
[0.003]

528

528

528

528

528

528

Memo:
Two-year Min. Wage Effect†
P-Value
Observations

k
∆yi,t

528

P1

Notes: The estimates in Panel A are based on the baseline equation
= αi +λl ×ν t+ j=0 β(j)∆wi,t−j +
ηxi,t + ei,t , where the dependent variable is the percent change in nominal consumption growth for the
category noted at the top of each column, and l denotes a census region. The annual data cover 1999–2017.
The estimates include location (CPI MSA) fixed effects as well as region × year fixed effects. The percent
change in the minimum wage when a CPI MSA spans different states is calculated based on the average
(population-weighted) minimum wage in each location and year as discussed in the text. MSA employment
growth is instrumented using a Bartik instrument. The estimates in Panel B are based on Bai’s (2009)
P1
estimator: ∆xki,t = λ0i Ft + j=0 β(j)∆wi,t−j + ηyi,t + ei,t , using four common factors. † Cumulative effect of
the minimum wage change measured over two years (sum of contemporaneous and lagged effects). Standard
errors clustered by CPI MSA are in parentheses: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

57

Table A.11: Minimum Wage Changes and Real Consumption. Further Robustness Analysis
(1)
Real PCE

(2)
Real Core PCE

(3)
Dur

(4)
Serv

(5)
Food at Home

(6)
Food Away

Panel A: Region × Year Fixed Effects and CPI-MSA Fixed Effects
Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t)

0.010
(0.011)

–0.003
(0.015)

–0.033**
(0.013)

–0.038***
(0.012)

–0.128
(0.352)

–0.123
(0.427)

1.747**
(0.669)

Memo:
Two-year Min. Wage Effect†
P-Value

–0.023
[0.278]

–0.040
[0.101]

Adjusted R2

0.756

0.741

L.Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t)

Bartik Emp. Growth

0.037
(0.032)

–0.005
(0.016)

0.046***
(0.014)

0.060***
(0.015)

0.019
(0.023)

–0.020
(0.034)

–0.394
(0.460)

0.716
(0.485)

–0.353
(0.492)

–0.030
[0.505]

–0.035
[0.205]

0.065
[0.018]

0.040
[0.345]

0.801

0.600

0.503

0.666

–0.067*** –0.030*
(0.023)
(0.015)

Panel B: Common Factors Model. Bai (2009)
Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t)

0.018*
(0.010)

0.021
(0.014)

–0.007
(0.035)

0.034**
(0.013)

0.040**
(0.016)

0.064**
(0.031)

Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t-1)

0.008
(0.013)

0.012
(0.012)

–0.081***
(0.027)

0.013
(0.013)

0.021
(0.019)

0.005
(0.025)

Bartik Emp. Growth

0.655**
(0.288)

0.999***
(0.252)

0.399
(0.651)

0.680*
(0.349)

–0.020
(0.245)

1.661***
(0.339)

0.026
[0.148]

0.033
[0.088]

–0.088
[0.094]

0.047
[0.020]

0.061
[0.007]

0.069
[0.057]

528

528

528

528

528

Memo:
Two-year Min. Wage Effect†
P-Value
Observations

k
∆yi,t

528

P1

Notes: The estimates in Panel A are based on the baseline equation
= αi +λl ×νt + j=0 β(j)∆wi,t−j +
ηxi,t + ei,t , where the dependent variable is the percent change in real consumption growth for the category
noted at the top of each column, and l denotes a census region. The annual data cover 1999–2017. The
estimates include location (CPI MSA) fixed effects as well as region × year fixed effects. The percent
change in the minimum wage when a CPI MSA spans different states is calculated based on the average
(population-weighted) minimum wage in each location and year as discussed in the text. MSA employment
growth is instrumented using a Bartik instrument. The estimates in Panel B are based on Bai’s (2009)
P1
estimator: ∆xki,t = λ0i Ft + j=0 β(j)∆wi,t−j + ηyi,t + ei,t , using four common factors. † Cumulative effect of
the minimum wage change measured over two years (sum of contemporaneous and lagged effects). Standard
errors clustered by CPI MSA are in parentheses: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

58

CPI Results Using All Available Data
Table A.12: Minimum Wage Changes and Inflation. Full Sample

Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t)

Pct. Chg. Min. Wage (t-1)
Memo:
Two-year Min. Wage Effect†
P-Value
Observations
Adjusted R2

(1)
All

(2)
All
x Energy

(3)
Core

(4)
Dur

(5)
Nondur

(6)
Serv

(7)
Food
at Home

(8)
Food
Away

0.021***
(0.007)

0.021**
(0.008)

0.019**
(0.009)

0.002
(0.010)

0.014*
(0.007)

0.026**
(0.010)

0.008
(0.013)

0.054***
(0.013)

0.011
(0.010)

0.012
(0.010)

0.017
(0.012)

0.024*
(0.013)

0.002
(0.010)

0.012
(0.013)

–0.020
(0.012)

0.015
(0.013)

0.032
[0.026]
867
0.675

0.033
[0.018]
867
0.577

0.036
[0.024]
867
0.548

0.026
[0.130]
867
0.670

0.015
0.038
–0.011
0.069
[0.274] [0.042]
[0.457]
[0.001]
867
867
867
867
0.887
0.427
0.681
0.295
P1
k
Notes: The estimates are based on the baseline equation ∆yi,t
= αi + νt + j=−1 β(j)∆wi,t−j + ηxi,t + ei,t ,
where the dependent variable is inflation (price growth) for the CPI category indicated at the top of each
column. The annual data cover 1983–2017. The estimates include location (CPI MSA) fixed effects as well as
year effects. The percent change in the minimum wage when a CPI MSA spans different states is calculated
based on the average (population-weighted) minimum wage in each location and year as discussed in the
text. † Cumulative effect of the minimum wage change measured over two years (sum of contemporaneous
and lagged effects). Standard errors clustered by CPI MSA are in parentheses: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***
p<0.01.

59

