                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE PRODUCTION RELOCATION AND PRICE EFFECTS OF U.S. TRADE POLICY: THE
                    CASE OF WASHING MACHINES

                                        Aaron B. Flaaen
                                         Ali Hortaçsu
                                        Felix Tintelnot

                                      Working Paper 25767
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25767


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2019




We are grateful to Xianglong Kong, Ari Boyarsky, and Vivi Gregorich for superb research
assistance. We thank Christine Edwards for helpful discussions about washing machine and dryer
pricing. Ali Hortacsu and Felix Tintelnot gratefully acknowledge financial support of the Becker
Friedman Institute for Economics at the University of Chicago. Suggestions by Jonathan Dingel
and Harry Li have substantially improved this paper. Any opinions and conclusions expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the Board of
Governors or its research staff. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Aaron B. Flaaen, Ali Hortaçsu, and Felix Tintelnot. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Production Relocation and Price Effects of U.S. Trade Policy: The Case of Washing Machines
Aaron B. Flaaen, Ali Hortaçsu, and Felix Tintelnot
NBER Working Paper No. 25767
April 2019
JEL No. F12,F13,F23,L23,L68

                                          ABSTRACT

We analyze several rounds of U.S. import restrictions against washing machines. Using retail price
data, we estimate the price effect of these import restrictions by comparing the price changes of
washers with those of other appliances. We find that in response to the 2018 tariffs on nearly all
source countries, the price of washers rose by nearly 12 percent; the price of dryers—
a complementary good not subject to tariffs—increased by an equivalent amount. Factoring in
the effect of dryers and price increases by domestic brands, our estimates for the 2018
tariffs on washers imply a tariff elasticity of consumer prices of between 110 and 230 percent.
The 2016 antidumping duties against China—which accounted for the overwhelming
majority of U.S. imports—led to minor price movements due to subsequent production
relocation to other export platform countries. Perhaps surprisingly, the 2012 antidumping
duties against Korea led to relocation of production to China, actually resulting in lower
washer prices in the United States. We find that our measure of the tariff elasticity of
consumer prices may differ in sign and magnitude from conventional pass-through estimates
which are based on a regression of country-specific import price changes on country-specific
tariff changes. Production relocation effects, price changes by domestic brands, and price
changes of complementary goods all contribute to the differences between these measures.

Aaron B. Flaaen                                    Felix Tintelnot
Federal Reserve Board of Governors                 Kenneth C. Griffin Department of Economics
20th and C St.                                     University of Chicago
Washington DC. 20551                               5757 South University Avenue
aaron.b.flaaen@frb.gov                             Chicago, IL 60637
                                                   and NBER
Ali Hortaçsu                                       tintelnot@uchicago.edu
Kenneth C. Griffin Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
hortacsu@uchicago.edu
1       Introduction
To an extent not seen in nearly a quarter-century, trade policy occupied the forefront of
economic policy debates in the United States in 2018. During the course of the year, the
United States imposed a series of tariffs on a wide range of goods—largely from China—
using a variety of trade policy measures that have little precedent. The economic impacts
of these tariffs on trade flows, prices, and production are highly uncertain as the magnitude
of these tariff changes is extraordinary for an advanced country integrated with the global
economy. On the one hand, tariffs, which are levied on the gross value of an imported good,
have become more punitive given the decline in the value-added share of a given country’s
exports amidst increases in production sharing across global supply chains. On the other
hand, given the prominence of multinational firms in global production, it may be easier
than ever to relocate production across country borders, undoing the effects of tariffs.
    Set against the uncertainties of how trade policy plays out in today’s particular envi-
ronment are long-standing questions of international trade theory with little or conflicting
empirical evidence. Prominent among these questions is the incidence of tariffs: whether
the amount of import taxes is passed through to consumers in the form of higher prices or
absorbed by the foreign producer by lowering their export price. As noted by Irwin (2014),
direct evidence on this question is scarce, particularly for the case of a large economy like
the United States with the potential for monopsony power. Although new tariffs offer many
possibilities for study, most of these were placed on intermediate goods where tracking the
price effects through the economy is a particular challenge. This paper focuses on a final con-
sumer good, washing machines, and provides evidence on the effects of recent trade policies
on trade flows, domestic production, and, most notably, prices.
    There are several reasons why the study of washing machines offers useful lessons for how
trade policies affect the economy. First, imports of washing machines have been subject to a
wide range of different trade policies in recent years. The contrasting effects of these policies
offer lessons for how the specific characteristics of any particular trade policy (specifically,
whether it’s multilateral or unilateral) will alter their impact. Second, the new tariffs on
washing machines in early 2018 were the first of a long string of subsequent trade policy
actions enacted by the Trump administration, and therefore the full extent of the effects
of these tariffs are evident more readily than those imposed more recently on China in the
summer and fall of 2018. Finally, features of the product in question—relatively simple means
of classification, clear channels for complementarities (washers and dryers), and reasonable
concentration of production—make this episode relatively straightforward for detailed study.1
    The first round of trade policy measures against imported washing machines took the form
of country-specific antidumping duties, targeting specific companies producing in particular
locations. The result of these antidumping duties, first on Mexican/Korean production in
2012 and later on Chinese production in 2016, was a shift in production to other countries
while keeping the overall magnitude of U.S. imports roughly the same. Such “country-
    1
     The tariffs on washing machines have received considerable attention from the media. For several
examples, see Tangel, Andrew. 2017. “Trades Test Case: Your Washing Machine.” The Wall Street Journal,
October 4., Tangel, Andrew and Josh Zumbrun. 2018. “Whirlpool Wanted Washer Tariffs. It Wasnt Ready
for a Trade Showdown.” The Wall Street Journal, July 16., Tankersly, Jim. 2019. “How Tariffs Stained the
Washing Machine Market” The New York Times, January 25., and “Will Trump’s tariffs help U.S. workers?
It could be a wash.” PBS Newshour, 2018, June 14.



                                                   2
hopping” behavior is intuitive from existing theories of tariff avoidance and models with
export platform FDI. The second round of new trade policies utilized a little-used area
of U.S. trade law, enacting “safeguard” tariffs on what amounted to virtually all source
countries for washing machine imports to the United States. Apart from notable shifts in the
timing of imports based on when these tariffs went into effect (i.e., anticipatory increases—or
frontrunning—of imports before the tariffs were first applied), the so-called section 201 tariffs
coincided with new domestic production, as both LG Electronics and Samsung Electronics
opened plants in the United States in 2018. To summarize, firms shifted production following
each new trade policy—first from Mexico/Korea to China, then to Thailand/Vietnam, and
finally to the U.S.—to avoid paying import tariffs.
    Coincident with these changes in production and trade flows were significant price move-
ments as measured by the published Consumer Price Index (CPI). In the 12 months following
the Korea/Mexico antidumping duties, the CPI for laundry equipment actually declined by
about 5 percent and continued falling thereafter. The 12 months after the China antidump-
ing duties saw a decline of about the same magnitude – roughly 5 percent. Conversely, the
index jumped in the months following the section 201 safeguard tariffs and was up by about
9 percent by February 2019.
    To more fully assess the price impacts of these tariffs, we use detailed weekly retail
price data of major appliances. A concern with comparing the prices of washing machines
before and after trade policy changes would be the presence of other shocks that changed
the price of washers independently of the trade policy under study. For example, washer
prices may respond to changes in the price of steel or general changes in retail mark-ups.
We therefore use other appliances as control products for the change in washing machine
prices. In addition, a diverse set of product features in the data allow us to remove non-tariff-
related price movements based on the life-cycle feature of product pricing and also account
for product characteristics and brand or model-specific differences in pricing. The approach
of using non-treated appliance products as controls has been used before by Ashenfelter,
Hosken and Weinberg (2013) in their study of the effects of the Maytag-Whirlpool merger
in 2006.
    The implications of the 2016 antidumping duties applied to Chinese imports were strik-
ingly different from the safeguard tariffs applied to many countries in 2018. Although China
accounted for a whopping 80 percent of washing machine imports into the United States
prior to the application of tariffs, we find that there was very little effect on retail prices
from these 2016 China-specific tariffs. This could be explained by the relative ease by which
large foreign brands (Samsung, LG) appeared to subsequently shift production to Vietnam
and Thailand, with coinciding increases in washing machine parts exports from Korea to
these countries. By contrast, we document a notable spike in washer prices in the months
following the new 2018 global safeguard tariffs: about 12 percent more than the corre-
sponding change in our control group. Moreover, we show that prices of a complementary
good—clothes dryers—also jumped at the same time by a similar magnitude, despite the
fact that these products were not subject to any new tariffs during this period.
    We contrast the tariff elasticity of consumer prices—or tariff pass-through—implied by
our results with the conventional practice of estimating this elasticity based on a regression
of tariff changes on changes in import prices (unit values from trade data). This paper
shifts the focus to measure the changes in prices encompassing the overall bundle of goods


                                               3
available to consumers (both imported and domestically produced) relative to the average
change in tax applied to these goods due to import tariffs. Although our sample of micro-
level prices does not overlap with the Korea/Mexico antidumping duties, we report evidence
– a drop in the unit values from subsequent production in China, along with declines in the
CPI index — pointing to a negative pass-through of tariffs and hence increased consumer
surplus from these tariffs. Our estimates of the tariff elasticity of consumer prices for the
country-specific antidumping duties on Chinese production, though positive, are quite small.
In contrast, the conventional approach yields elasticities implying complete pass-through of
these antidumping duties to import prices from the countries on which the duties were
levied. We argue that production relocation plays a prominent role in the differences in
these estimates. Indeed, as we show theoretically in section 2, the potential for production
relocation leads to a response of prices to tariff changes that is non-monotone.
    We find a much higher tariff elasticity of consumer prices for the global 2018 safeguard
tariffs; once accounting for the effect on dryers prices, our estimates imply a pass-through
to consumer prices of these safeguard tariffs of between 107 and 226 percent. In this case,
a comparison of this episode to estimates from the traditional approach reveals the impor-
tance of analyzing the price changes by domestic competitors as well as the price effects of
complementary goods. Our estimates indicate that the safeguard tariffs raised the median
price of washing machines and clothes dryers by about 86 USD and 92 USD per unit, respec-
tively. Using the level of shipments to construct an aggregate, we calculate that these tariffs
resulted in increased costs to consumers of just over 1.5 billion USD on an annual basis. By
comparison, the total amount of tariff revenue collected was relatively small, aggregating
to about 82 million USD annually. Absent additional factors, the reports of increases in
domestic employment attributed to this policy of roughly 1,800 workers would result in an
average annual cost to consumers of over 815,000 USD per job created (after netting out the
collected tariff revenues).
    Our analysis contributes to the literature on the incidence of tariffs. Irwin (2014) studies
the sugar price response to import tariffs from 1880 to 1930, finding a roughly 40 percent pass-
through to consumer prices of import tariff increases and a complete pass-through of import
tariff reductions. Huber (1971) and Bernhofen and Brown (2004) compare 19th century
autarky price levels of several goods in Japan with price levels after trade liberalization.
Beginning with Feenstra (1989), several papers have analyzed the response of unit values
of trade data to tariff changes from more recent policy changes (e.g., Winkelmann and
Winkelmann 1998; Trefler 2004; Broda and Weinstein 2006; Broda, Limao and Weinstein
2008; Spearot 2012; Ludema and Yu 2016). In an analysis of the 2018 trade policies enacted
by the United States, the comprehensive reviews of both Amiti, Redding and Weinstein
(2019) and Fajgelbaum et al. (2019) find complete pass-through of tariffs to import prices.
    The results of this paper highlight the advantages of domestic price data over unit val-
ues from trade data. The domestic retail prices reflect the impacts of tariffs on domestic
competitors, production relocation, and complementary goods, while unit values from trade
data would miss these channels.2 For example, we find either flat or increasing unit values
of imported washers from Korea in response to the antidumping duties in 2012, but domes-
tic prices in the United States fell as foreign production relocated to China. In addition,
  2
    Using Belgian manufacturing data, Amiti, Itskhoki and Konings (2016) document that large firms re-
spond to competitors cost changes induced by exchange rate changes.


                                                  4
export unit values (measured at the border) may reflect transfer pricing strategies to reduce
the costs of tariffs for trade between related parties. They therefore may not accurately
characterize the price change faced by consumers.3
    Our paper also contributes by providing evidence on the response of multinational firms
to tariff changes. A large literature on the proximity concentration trade-off documents that
the ratio of foreign affiliate sales to exports rises in the import tariff level (e.g., Brainard 1997;
Helpman, Melitz and Yeaple 2004). Horstmann and Markusen (1992) show that in response
to an import tariff, a foreign multinational may set up a plant in the home country which
could lead to lower domestic prices than without the tariff. Blonigen (2002) studies the tariff
jumping behavior of foreign firms to U.S. antidumping measures in the 1980s. He finds an
economically small increase in the probability that a foreign firm establish U.S. production
in response to the antidumping rulings. Consistent with the predictions of models of export
platform FDI (e.g., Yeaple 2003; Ekholm, Forslid and Markusen 2007; Tintelnot 2017),
our findings illustrate the relocation of production to third markets as export platforms in
response to bilateral tariff changes.4


2       A Simple Model of Production Relocation, Prices,
        and Tariffs
We describe a simple model of a firm’s production relocation and pricing decisions and how
these decisions respond to tariffs. The goal of this section is to illustrate theoretically that
under imperfect competition the price effect of tariffs may be non-monotone when production
relocation to third countries is taken into account.
    We assume that there is a foreign monopolist that supplies washers to the United States.
We further assume that consumer preferences for washers lead to a constant elasticity of
substitution demand function and that the foreign supplier has constant marginal cost in
each of the available production locations. Note that for simplicity we assume away any
domestic producers of washing machines, since for the foreign production relocation the
existence of domestic producers is not essential, and the graphical analysis below is easier
to convey without them. Our assumptions on demand and production cost imply that the
monopolist charges a constant mark-up over marginal cost.
    Consider first the textbook case without production relocation by the foreign monopolist.
This case is depicted in Figure 1a. If the U.S. government charges a tariff on washing machine
imports of τ per unit of washer imported, the U.S. consumers pay the foreign monopolist
price plus the tariff.5 The loss in consumer surplus is a + b, the government revenue collected
    3
      Recognizing this issue, the firm-level study of Ludema and Yu (2016) drops related-party transactions
from their sample. Transactions between related parties account for 85% of washing machine imports (see
Appendix B.1). Transfer pricing motives would typically lead to lower pass-through estimates as firms
attempt to lower the tariff / antidumping duties costs by lowering import prices.
    4
      These findings reflect a third-country effect from trade policy that has been discussed in various works
by Bagwell and Staiger (see Bagwell, Bown and Staiger 2016, for a review). Our findings are also related to
work by Ruhl (2014), who finds a large aggregate impact of U.S. antidumping policies. For a survey of the
literature on the effects of trade policy see Goldberg and Pavcnik (2016).
    5
      For simplicity we assume the importer is a perfectly competitive intermediary who in turn sells the
washers to U.S. consumers, so there is no mark-up added to the tariff. This is not critical for the example
and merely simplifies the exposition. Similarly, the analysis can be extended to ad-valorem tariffs.



                                                      5
is equal to region a, and the overall welfare loss for the United States is b.
     Next, let us consider the case of Figure 1b, in which the foreign monopolist has the
option to produce in country C or in country V . If the fixed cost to establish production
in these countries is the same, and there are no import restrictions, the foreign monopolist
chooses the production location with the lower marginal cost—here, country C. However,
under sufficiently high import tariffs against country C, the producer obtains higher profits
from producing in country V instead. This leads to an increase in the domestic price by
pV − pC ≤ τ . The consumer surplus falls by a1 and b1 , and no government revenue is being
collected. Note, however, that under the option of production relocation the effect of the
tariff on U.S. consumer prices is less than in the example of Figure 1a. The case presented
in Figure 1b is an example of trade diversion due to asymmetric tariffs across countries.6
Note that a similar response to the tariff would arise also under perfect competition if there
are multiple foreign countries in which the good can be produced.
     Finally, consider the case depicted in Figure 1c. Here, in addition to producing in country
K, the foreign monopolist has also the option of producing in country C, in which the
marginal cost of producing the good is lower than in country K. Suppose the monopolist
faces additional fixed cost F to establish production in C. If the foreign monopolist is
headquartered in country K, the assumption of higher fixed cost of foreign production is
common in the literature on multinational firms (e.g., Brainard (1997), Helpman, Melitz
and Yeaple (2004)). In the depicted figure, RK = e2 + d2 + f2 + h2 denotes the firm’s
revenue when producing in K, while the firm makes revenues of RC = h2 + f2 + g2 when
producing in country C. As the monopolist charges a constant mark-up that depends on
the demand elasticity, the monopolist’s variable profits are proportional to revenue, and
therefore in the absence of any tariffs, the firm produces washing machines in country K
if σ1 (RC − RK ) ≤ F , where σ denotes the elasticity of demand. As long as the fixed costs
of opening a plant in C are sufficiently large, or tariffs on imports from K are sufficiently
small, this inequality will still hold resulting in full pass-through of the tariffs to the prices
faced by U.S. consumers. If the tariff increase is so large, however, that the revenues under
import tariffs on K, depicted in the graph by a2 + e2 + h2 have fallen sufficiently compared to
the revenues the firm would make when producing in C, the foreign monopolist switches the
production location in response to the tariff and produces in C instead. Quite interestingly,
as a consequence, the prices U.S. consumers would pay for washing machines would fall in
response to the import restrictions on K. While no tariff revenue is being collected, the
increase in the U.S. consumer surplus is equal to e2 + d2 + c2 .
     Hence, as depicted in Figure 1d, the presence of fixed costs and production relocation
imply that the effect of tariffs on U.S. prices is non-monotone. It is important to point
out, that the example depicted in Figure 1c would not occur in a competitive market where
new firms from country C could enter on their own. In that case, in the absence of tariffs,
production would never occur in country K. Given the presence of patents on washer
technology and strong market power associated with branding, the washing machine market
is best characterized as non-competitive.
   6
     Trade diversion is often discussed in context of regional free trade agreements. The main idea being
that in response to a tariff reduction for only selected countries, one may forgo tariff revenue and purchase
the good from a producer within the regional free trade area, even though the cheapest producer (without
tariffs) would be outside the free trade area. Of course, the same logic also applies to tariff increases against


                                                       6
                          Figure 1: A Simple Model of Production Response to Tariffs
                          (a) Textbook Example                   (b) Relocation Dampens the Consumer Price Increase

     Price                                                       Price




                                                               PC + τ
    P∗ + τ
                                                                  PV                                                  SV
               a     b                        S∗                         a1        b1
           ∗
       P
                                                                  PC                                          SC

                                                 D                                                                D



                                         Quantity                                                         Quantity

               (c) Relocation Reduces the Consumer Price                                (d) Price Change in (c)

      Price                                                      Price




    PK + τ                                                     PK + τ


               a2    b2                          SK
       PK                                                         PK
                e2   d2     c2
       PC                                            SC           PC
               h2    f2     g2                   D



                                          Quantity                            τ0                           Tariff




    These examples illustrate the importance of analyzing jointly the production and price
effects from import restrictions. Motivated by these theoretical considerations, we turn to
analyzing the changes in trade flows and prices in the data.


3       Import Restrictions and Changes in Trade Flows
In this section we provide the institutional background and relevant details for the three sets
of trade policy actions affecting washing machines that we evaluate in this paper.
    Throughout the latter half of the 20th century, a series of major domestic brands of
washing machines—including Maytag, Whirlpool, G.E., and Kenmore—competed for mar-
ket share in the United States. In 2006, the Whirlpool Corporation (“Whirlpool”) cemented
its position as the dominant domestic producer after it acquired Maytag, its main competi-
tor. This merger substantially increased the concentration of both washing machines and
clothes dryers: according to research on the effects of this merger in Ashenfelter, Hosken and
Weinberg (2013), Whirlpool and Maytag together (pre-merger) accounted for 60 percent of
total revenue for washing machines, and 65 percent for clothes dryers.
    Imported washing machines occupied a small share—less than ten percent—of U.S. sales
during this time. At around the same time as the Whirlpool/Maytag merger, however, two
large South Korean electronics companies, LG Electronics and Samsung, were beginning to
enter the U.S. appliance market.7
specific countries.
   7
     Indeed, Ashenfelter, Hosken and Weinberg (2013) note that competitive forces from increased foreign
entry into this market was a significant argument by the U.S. Department of Justice in allowing the merger


                                                           7
3.1     Antidumping Investigations
Following steady gains in market share by the two Korean companies, in late 2011 Whirlpool
filed an antidumping petition (as part of section 731 of the Tariff Act of 1930) with the U.S.
International Trade Commission (USITC). In this antidumping petition, Whirlpool alleged
that imports of large residential washers from Mexico and Korea were being sold in the United
States at less than fair value and that the U.S. industry was being “materially injured or
threatened with material injury as a result.” In this form of investigation, the petitioning
firm must prove both a particular type of unfair pricing behavior as well as actual (or threat
of) material injury resulting from that behavior. Any remedial measures—which are meant
to be corrective, rather than punitive—are then applied to the U.S. imports of the importing
firm, but only on imports from the particular country in question. In February 2012, the
USITC issued a ruling that recommended antidumping measures; in July of that year, the
Commerce Department announced import duties ranging from 9.2 to 82.4 percent on several
firms (Department of Commerce (2012)).8 In the two years following the new antidumping
duties, the quantity of imports from Korea fell by roughly 75 percent (the blue line in Figure
2a).9
    Contemporaneous with the drop in imports from Korea (and to a lesser extent, Mex-
ico) was a substantial increase in imports from China (the red line in Figure 2a). In late
2015, Whirlpool filed another antidumping petition with the USITC, this time against the
imports of Samsung and LG washing machines produced in China. In February 2016, the
USITC issued another ruling in favor of antidumping measures, and final antidumping duties
announced by the Commerce Deparmtent ranged from 38.4 percent (LG) to 57.4 percent
(Samsung) (Department of Commerce (2016)).10 The results of this policy were nearly iden-
tical to the 2012 ruling: Imports from China fell from 3 million units per year in 2015 to
roughly 300,000 units in 2017. This time, imports of washing machines produced in Thailand
and Vietnam (the purple and yellow lines in Figure 2a) increased sharply, from essentially
zero in 2015 to nearly 3.3 million units (combined) in 2017.
    Another lens by which to view these changes in sourcing locations is through Korean
exports of washing machine parts, given that both Samsung and LG have their global head-
quarters in Korea. Figure 2b plots the value of Korean exports of washing machine parts
to proceed.
    8
      Preliminary antidumping duties were first applied in August of 2012; this date is identified by the first
dashed line on the left in Figure 2a and 2b.
    9
      Korea subsequently disputed these duties with the WTO. Korea argued that the method used by the
United States for the final determination of sales at less than fair value was illegal. The method used by
the United States, referred to as “zeroing”, zeros out any instances of negative dumping (when an imported
product is sold in the United States at prices higher than in the home country) in the calculation of whether
dumping has taken place. The WTO ultimately agreed that these antidumping duties were a violation of
WTO rules, a decision that was upheld by an appellate body. As of 2018, the case is still in dispute. Korea
has issued further complaints to the WTO, indicating that the United States has not taken the necessary
steps to bring the antidumping measures into conformity with WTO decisions. In annual reviews of these
duties, the U.S. Department of Commerce removed the dumping margins on LG Electronics, but retained
and increased the margins on Samsung Electronics, citing that the firm did not cooperate with the USITC
investigations. However, according to company reports, Samsung had stopped exporting to the United States
from Korea altogether.
   10
      The new antidumping duties on Chinese imports began five months later in July 2016, as identified by
the dashed line in the middle in Figure 2a and 2b.



                                                      8
Figure 2: U.S. Washing Machine Imports and Korean Washing Machine Part Exports by
          Country
                (a) Monthly U.S. Imports of Washing Machines by Country (Quantity)




                       .8
                       .6
             Quantity, million
                    .4 .2
                       0




                             2010m1   2011m1    2012m1     2013m1   2014m1   2015m1     2016m1   2017m1    2018m1   2019m1

                                       Mexico            Korea       China           Vietnam        Thailand        World



        (b) Monthly Korean Exports of Washing Machine Parts (Millions of U.S. Dollars)
                       20
                       15
             Dollars, million
                 10    5
                       0




                             2010m1   2011m1    2012m1     2013m1   2014m1   2015m1     2016m1   2017m1    2018m1   2019m1

                                         Mexico              USA             China             Vietnam          Thailand


Notes: Data from USITC and Korea Customs Service. Residential washing machines are classified under
HS8450110040, HS8450110080, HS8450200040, HS8450200080, and HS8450200090. Washing machine parts
are classified under HS845090. The seasonality adjusted version of Figure 2a is shown in the Appendix as
Figure A10.


(under HS845090) to the various countries highlighted above. Figure 2b demonstrates that


                                                                       9
shifts in Korean exports of parts follow the corresponding shifts in washing machine produc-
tion11 . Exports of parts to China jump in 2013 and 2014 before falling back in 2016 and
2017 as exports of parts to Thailand and Vietnam rise. In addition, overall Korean washing
machine parts exports (not shown) rise nearly 60 percent between 2010 and 2016, a fact
consistent with the reduced amount of parts used in Korea for washing machine production
for export. Taken together, Figures 2a and 2b are a striking illustration of the changes in
supply chains induced by U.S. tariffs.


3.2     The Global Safeguards Investigation
Following the “country hopping” response to the localized nature of the antidumping du-
ties, in 2017 Whirlpool petitioned for a global safeguard investigation into large residential
washing machines. Known colloquially by its section number of the Trade Act of 1974, a
“Section 201” global safeguard investigation has no requirement to prove unfair trade prac-
tices; rather, the USITC simply determines “whether an article is being imported in such
increased quantities that it is a substantial cause of serious injury, or threat thereof, to the
U.S. industry producing an article like or directly competitive with the imported article”
(U.S. Code: Title 19, Code 2252). Moreover, the global safeguard remedy differs from an-
tidumping and countervailing duties in that it is generally applied on a global basis.12 Use
of this trade measure has been rare; Section 201 safeguard tariffs were last implemented in
2002 on steel and steel products.
    The USITC issued a positive determination in the case in October 2017 and published
recommendations for temporary safeguard tariffs in December. The final result, published
as a presidential proclamation in January 2018, was a tariff rate quota: a tariff rate of 20
percent on the first 1.2 million imported units (per year) entering the United States, with
all subsequent units subject to a 50 percent tariff. Select imported components of washing
machines were also subject to a tariff rate quota: in the first year any imported parts above
50,000 units would be subject to an additional tariff of 50 percent. These tariff rates went
into effect in February 2018 (for washing machines and their component parts) and are
scheduled to expire after three years.13
    As shown in the far right portion of Figure 2a, imports surged in late 2017 and early
2018 as foreign producers rushed to ship washing machines to the U.S. before the tariffs
went into effect. Imports subsequently fell sharply in February and March of 2018, rising
again through September 2018 just before the quota limit of 1.2 million imported units was
reached and subsequent tariffs rose to 50 percent.14 Imports fell sharply again in October
  11
      Korea Customs Service (link) contains the monthly import and export data by country and by commod-
ity. Commodities can be queried by their HS codes up to 10 digits.
   12
      There were ultimately a few country exclusions to the section 201 safeguard tariffs. Canada was excluded,
as the final announcement indicated that Canadian imports do not account for a substantial share of the
total and do not contribute to the injury identified by the USITC. Imports from a set of developing countries
were also excluded from the tariff, provided that the country’s share of total imports remains below a certain
threshold.
   13
      The Section 201 safeguard tariffs are imposed in addition to the standard MFN rates under Chapter
84 of the tariff schedule (which, in 2019, were 1 percent for washing machines). For products subject to
antidumping duties, the dutiable value (for Section 201 tariffs) would be the value of the imported product
prior to any antidumping duties being assessed.
   14
      According to Commodity Status Reports published by the U.S. Customs Bureau, the quota limit on
washers was reached on October 22, 2018.


                                                      10
and November.15
   In Table A1 we provide a summary of the key dates associated with the three rounds of
import restrictions against washing machine imports.


3.3     Onshoring of U.S. Production
In the midst of the global safeguard investigation of 2017, both Samsung and LG announced
plans to begin U.S. production of large residential washing machines. The Samsung factory in
Newberry, South Carolina opened in January 2018 with plans to produce 1 million washing
machines that year; Samsung claims the plant will create around 1000 new jobs by 2020
(Samsung (2017)). An LG Electronic factory in Clarksville, Tennessee, is scheduled for a
late 2018 or early 2019 opening, with an advertised creation of roughly 600 new jobs (LG
Electronics (2017)). Similarly, Whirlpool reported adding 200 workers in 2018 explicitly due
to the new tariffs.


3.4     The Relation to Import Prices
Before we turn our attention to the analysis of how retail prices were affected by the tariff
changes described above, we first evaluate the evidence on the relationship between produc-
tion relocations and cost changes highlighted in the theoretical discussion above from section
2.
    While the retail price data we utilize below are the preferred conceptual benchmark and
provide the greatest detail for a general analysis of tariff pass-through to consumer prices,
we temporarily turn our attention to the unit values from publicly available trade statistics
for several reasons. Unlike the retail price data, these import unit values provide a direct
link to the location of production. Second, because they do not include retail markups, they
provide a closer proxy for the marginal costs that are the object of interest of the theory
described above. Finally, for the case of washing machines, the relative simplicity of the
product classification and widely reported quantity information imply that the unit values
are reasonably well-behaved.
    Figure 3 reports the pattern of import unit values for each major trading partner during
and after the period for which these countries were the dominant U.S. source of imports.16
Because the quantity of imports decreases substantially for those countries subject to new
tariff actions, the import unit values tend to behave more erratically in the months following
the application of new tariffs. Figure 3 reveals that unit values decreased following the
Korea/Mexico antidumping duties as production relocated to China; the unit values from
China (the red line) tend to be lower than the unit values from Korea (the black line) prior
  15
     Figure 2a actually may understate the responsiveness of import quantities to the Section 201 safeguard
tariffs, as not all washers within the selected HS product codes were included as within-scope for the in-
vestigation. At the request of Whirlpool, stacked washer/dryers, commercial washers, front-loading washers
with a controlled induction motor, top-loading washers with a belt drive train, and extra-wide front-loading
washers were excluded from the investigation. Appendix B.2 discusses results that split the quantity of U.S.
imports, and corresponding implied tariff rates, for 2018 according to the whether the imports were assessed
Section 201 safeguard tariffs.
  16
     The value used here for the calculation of unit values is exclusive of tariffs and duties.




                                                    11
                                 Figure 3: Average Unit Values by Production Location




                    800
                                                                China
                                        Korea                   Antidumping      Sec. 201
                                        China                                    Tariffs
                                        Vietnam/Thailand


                           600
                                         Mexico/Korea
              Unit Value USD

                                         Antidumping
            400     200




                       2008m6          2010m6    2012m6     2014m6     2016m6   2018m6

Notes: Data from USITC. Includes residential washing machines classified under HS8450200040,
HS8450200080, and HS8450200090. The display of country-level unit values are restricted to the peri-
ods of majority production in the data: through July 2012 for Korea, July 2016 for China, and beyond for
Thailand/Vietnam.


to the antidumping order. In contrast, the unit values tend to be roughly equivalent during
the switch from China to Vietnam/Thailand (the blue line).
    While we demonstrate the theoretical underpinnings of a negative price response to tariff
changes (or negative rate of tariff pass-through) above, the evidence from unit values for
the Korea/Mexico antidumping case is more suggestive than conclusive. Changing product
composition, transfer pricing strategies, and unaccounted for cost information may influence
the evidence from reported values and quantities used in this calculation. On the other
hand, as we show below in Figure 4, the CPI for laundry equipment declines considerably
just after the production relocation from Korea/Mexico to China in mid-2012—consistent
with the negative pass-through interpretation of the changes in unit values. At a basic level,
Figure 3 makes clear that the price effects of tariff changes are not restricted to same-country
changes in import prices. The detailed micro-level data we have available from retail stores
will prove helpful in the more comprehensive review of price responses of washer tariffs we
provide below.


4     Effects of Trade Policy Measures on Retail Prices
The overall welfare impact of tariffs depends on the extent to which they are passed on to
consumers; yet, the paucity of consumer-facing prices has limited research in this critical area
of trade policy. In this section, we exploit detailed, high-frequency microdata from retail
stores to offer a novel perspective on the effect of these tariffs on consumers and welfare.



                                                           12
4.1     Data and Price Trends of Washers and Dryers
Properly identifying the consumer price impact of the U.S. tariffs on washing machines
requires data on final point of sale prices that is both high frequency and detailed with respect
to brand, features, and retailer. We obtain data with these features from Gap Intelligence,
a market research firm that gathers data across a wide range of products and markets in
the U.S. The raw dataset contains weekly data entries of price and product characteristics
at the retailer-model level from March 2013 to December 2018.
    We have information on five major household appliances: washers, dryers, ranges, dish-
washers, and refrigerators.17 In addition to the posted retail price, we observe the brand,
model, date of first appearance in the market, and various other product characteristics such
as capacity, color, load type, and energy efficiency rating. The dataset contains records from
both brick-and-mortar and online stores (separately for those stores with both an online and
physical presence); in addition, the data contains the number of each retailers’ brick-and-
mortar stores in the U.S. in a given quarter. Gap Intelligence pays weekly visits to major
retailers in 22 metropolitan areas in the United States and records the availability and price
of each product. The company provides two price variables: the sticker price and the net
price after applying promotions or discounts. We work with the net price in our analysis
throughout. While some heterogeneity in prices across retail locations may exist, the pro-
vided weekly retailer-product specific price information is what Gap Intelligence considers
the nationally representative price.18
    We apply several sample restrictions. To account for the life-cycle effects of appliances we
calculate each product’s age from the initial debut date in our data. The initial debut date
is truncated by the first week in which the retail price data was collected. All models present
in the first week of March 2013 have their initial debut date in that week. As this introduces
large measurement error in products’ ages in dates near March 2013 and we find particularly
strong price discounts of appliances in the first few months, we start our price analysis from
mid-July 2014 onward. While some measurement error in age remains at the beginning of
the sample, this should not be an issue for the period near the China antidumping event in
2016 or the Safeguard tariffs in 2018. We remove laundry machines with both washing and
drying functions (All-in-one or Laundry Center) and focus attention on the five major brands
of washing machines: LG, Samsung, Whirlpool, Maytag, and G.E. These brands account
for more than 80 percent of the total observations on washers and dryers in the raw data.
We further concentrate our analysis on the five national retailers in the United States: JC
Penney, Best Buy, Lowes, Sears, and Home Depot, which together account for more than 50
percent of the observations in the data. In the Appendix we show results where we include
all available brands and retailers.
    As a first step to document the trends in prices of washers and dryers, we first filter out
changes in price that are accounted for by changes in the product mix, product features, and
timeline of the product life-cycle. To do so, we apply the following hedonic regression of log
  17
    The price data for dishwashers starts in November 2013.
  18
    Hitsch, Hortacsu and Lin (2017) and DellaVigna and Gentzkow (2017) report evidence suggesting uni-
form pricing in U.S. retail chains across locations.




                                                 13
prices of washers and dryers:
                                                                                                 25
                                                                                                 X
                                                                                                        a
                                      pirt = λC(i)t + Xi β + bB(i)C(i) +                               αC(i) 1(ageit = a) + γr + irt .                   (1)
                                                                                                 a=2


where subscripts i, r, t stand for model, retailer, and time (measured by week) respectively.
The notation C(i) refers to the product category (washer, dryer,...) whereas B(i) refers to
the brand (Samsung, Whirlpool, ...) of product i. The Xi term is a vector of specifications for
model i, which includes characteristics such as total capacity, energy star, smart appliance,
and load type (see Table A11 for a full list of characteristics by product category). The
λC(i)t term refers to a product category week fixed effect, while the bB(i)C(i) term captures
a brand and product category specific fixed effect.19 The term γr denotes a retailer fixed
effect. We also capture life-cycle effects of product pricing: the ageit variable captures the
age of a product measured in months. We omit a dummy variable for the first month of the
product after initial debut in our data set, and then include dummies for the following 23
months, as well as a dummy whether the product has debuted more than two years ago.

  Figure 4: Time Fixed Effects from Log Price Regression, CPI for Laundry Equipment




                                                                                                                                                    130
                                    .3




                                                                                                                                                    115
                                                  .15
                  Log price, year-week fixed effects




                                                                                                                                                    CPI
                                                                                                                                                    100
                -.15              0




                                                                                                                                                    85
                                    -.3




                                                                                                                                                    70




                                                   2010m1   2011m1   2012m1    2013m1   2014m1   2015m1    2016m1   2017m1    2018m1       2019m1

                                                                     Washers (left)              Dryers (left)               CPI (right)


Notes: We plot the year-week fixed effects for washers or dryers, averaged over each month, obtained from
estimating equation (1). We omit the week dummy for the week of April 1, 2015. In that month the CPI for
laundry equipment was close to 100 points and therefore the left and the right axis are simple to compare.
The dates of the three vertical lines are August 2012, July 2016, and February 2018, which are discussed in
the text.

    In Figure 4 we plot the λC(i)t fixed effects, which depict the trends in washer and dryer
prices during our sample period. The red line displays the washer-week fixed effect from
the log price regression in equation (1) (averaged by month), and the blue line displays the
dryer-week fixed effect (again averaged to its monthly level). These fixed effects summarize
  19
       Note that any linear age effects of washer/dryer models will be captured by the λC(i)t term.

                                                                                             14
the average (log) price level in those periods, after controlling for life-cycle factors and
product/brand characteristics. The dashed line represents the CPI for laundry equipment
from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The residualized price series patterns align well with
the CPI during our sample. For example, from July 2014 to January 2018 (shortly before the
introduction of the safeguard tariffs in February 2018), the Gap Intelligence data suggests
a decline in washer prices of about 20 percent and a decline in the price of dryers of about
7 percent. The CPI for laundry equipment (which is a price index for washers and dryers
combined) declined by about 15 percent during this period. One noticeable difference is
that our series contains more seasonality, while the CPI for laundry equipment is seasonally
adjusted. However, we find very similar seasonal patterns for all five household appliances,
so seasonality will not drive our estimates of the tariff effects discussed further below. The
product-category-time fixed effects for all five appliances are provided in Figure A11 in the
Appendix.
    Figure 4 demonstrates that prices of washing machines jump shortly after the safeguard
tariffs were applied. A more striking feature of Figure 4 however—and one that would not
be evident without the more disaggregated data at our disposal—is that the price of dryers
jumps by a similar magnitude as washers, despite not being directly affected by tariffs during
this period. We explore this feature of the data in greater detail below.


4.2    Estimating the Price Effects of Washing Machine Import Re-
       strictions
We now turn our attention to estimating the price effects of U.S. trade policy. Although
our sample is not long enough to evaluate the first antidumping duties (on Mexican/Korean
imports), we can separately assess the effects of the China antidumping duties of 2016/2017
and the safeguard tariffs of 2018.
    By leveraging the additional appliances in our data, we can account for other factors
influencing costs and demand conditions in the overall appliance market in the United States.
One important factor during this time period was new import restrictions affecting steel and
aluminum. Using the rarely invoked “Section 232” trade remedy based on national security
considerations, in March of 2018 the United States imposed tariffs of 25 percent on steel and
10 percent on aluminum. The subsequent details were complicated, as a number of countries
were successful in negotiating exclusions from these tariffs in exchange for strict quota limits
on their exports of these metals to the United States. The ultimate result of these measures,
however, was a jump in the domestic prices of steel and aluminum—which together represent
a significant input cost in U.S. production of washing machines. Our strategy allows us to
isolate the particular effects of washing machine tariffs given the fact that all appliances
were similarly affected by these changes in inputs costs (see Appendix B.3 for a discussion
of the metals content of appliance production). The product category closest to washers
and dryers with respect to steel content is ranges, and we therefore choose it as the control
product group.
    To estimate the price effect of the antidumping duties against China (effective from July
2016) and the safeguard tariffs (effective from February 2018), we regress log price on product
and brand controls, a retailer fixed effect, year-week fixed effects, and the interaction of each
product category with weekly fixed effects. As ranges are the omitted product category, all


                                               15
estimates of the interaction terms are relative to the average log price of ranges before and
after the event.
                                                     25
                                                     X
            pirt = λdC(i)t + Xi β + bB(i)C(i) +             a
                                                           αC(i) 1(ageit = a) + γr + `t + irt .     (2)
                                                     a=2


Most of the coefficients in (2) are the same as in equation (1), with the difference being
that λdC(i)t measures the product category week fixed effect relative to the week fixed effect
from ranges.20 To better illustrate our results, we estimate equation (2) twice, once with the
week effect of the antidumping duties against China (week of July 17, 2016) normalized to
zero, and again with the week fixed effect of the the safeguard tariffs (t = −1 of January 28,
2018) set to zero. The term `t absorbs shocks to prices that commonly affect all household
appliances, such as changes in the price of steel.
    Figure 5a reports the estimates of λdC(i)t for the categories of washers, dryers, refrigerators,
and dishwashers during the periods before and after the 2016 China antidumping duties.
Figure 5b report equivalent estimates for the Section 201 safeguard tariffs. We include
refrigerators and dishwashers in the analysis as placebo effects—a check for the plausibility
of our estimates. Though the patterns for both washers and dryers are striking in Figure 5b
in particular, we report 48 weeks of estimates before the policy dates to illustrate the effects
of any pre-trends in the estimates. For example, it appears that refrigerator prices (Figure
5a) were growing differentially from ranges before and after July 2016. As we know from
Figure 4, over a long horizon, the prices of washers have fallen more than the prices of dryers
or other appliances (see Figure A11 for price changes in all 5 appliances). Hence, though
the patterns evident in Figure 5 are informative, we must factor in the different trends (see,
for example, Finkelstein (2007)) to arrive at the true effect of tariff changes on prices. To do
this, we calculate the estimated change in prices after the introduction of import restrictions
relative to the change in prices prior to the import restrictions. Specifically, we calculate the
four month effect of a tariff /antidumping event as:


                ∆4m            d                                d
                                                                                            
                 event p̄C = λ̄C, -28to-20 weeks from event − λ̄C, -8to0 weeks from event
                              − λ̄dC, -8to0 weeks from event − λ̄dC, +12to+20 weeks from event
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                     (3)

and an eight month effect analogously, where we define the end points using periods -44 to
-36 weeks and +28 to +36 weeks relative to the policy date.
    As shown in Table 1, after accounting for differential pre-trends, we find only modest price
changes caused by the antidumping case against China. The estimates in columns 1 and 2—
when controlling for model characteristics—suggest a price increase of only 1.5 to 3.5 percent
for washers and dryers in the 4 and 8 months periods. In columns 3 and 4—when utilizing
model fixed effects as controls—the estimates for all four appliances increase and become
statistically significant relative to the price levels of ranges. Compared to dishwashers and
refrigerators the price increase estimates pertaining to washers and dryers are only slightly
  20
    Additional detail on the other covariates in regression 2 are available in Table A11 in the Appendix.
Standard errors are clustered by model.


                                                      16
   Figure 5: Price Effects of Safeguard Tariffs and Antidumping Duties against China
                                                 (a) Antidumping against China




                         .15
                         .1
                         .05
             Estimates
                         0
                         -.05
                         -.1




                                -48   -36        -24     -12           0     12            24   36         48

                                       Washers           Dryers            Refrigerators         Dishwashers



                                                   (b) Safeguard Tariffs 2018
                         .15
                         .1
                         .05
             Estimates
                         0
                         -.05
                         -.1




                                -48   -36        -24     -12           0     12            24   36         48

                                       Washers           Dryers            Refrigerators         Dishwashers


Notes: These figures report the regression coefficients λC(i)t from equation (2). In 5a the estimates are
relative to the week of July 17, 2016 and in Figure 5b the estimates are relative to the week of January 28,
2018. The dotted lines denote 95 percent confidence intervals for the coefficient estimates for washers and
dryers, based on standard errors clustered by model.


higher. By contrast, and consistent with the preliminary evidence from Figure 5b, the
estimated price effects of the Section 201 safeguard tariffs are much more striking. We find


                                                                  17
  Table 1: Difference-in-Difference Estimates: Price Effects of Washing Machine Tariffs

                                         with model                    with model
                                        characteristics                fixed effect
                                          as controls                  as controls
                                     4 month     8 month           4 month     8 month
                Antidumping against China
                               0.0258  0.0342*                    0.0463*** 0.0583***
                Washers
                              (0.0153) (0.0169)                    (0.0121)  (0.0128)
                               0.0163    0.0234                   0.0333*** 0.0470***
                Dryers
                              (0.0118) (0.0136)                    (0.0090)  (0.0096)
                              0.0248*    0.0083                   0.0386*** 0.0276***
                Refrigerators
                              (0.0105) (0.0128)                    (0.0066)  (0.0071)
                               0.0121   -0.0055                   0.0351*** 0.0241**
                Dishwashers
                              (0.0128) (0.0139)                    (0.0075)  (0.0081)
                Safeguard tariffs 2018
                              0.1092***            0.1151***      0.1104***      0.1185***
                Washers
                               (0.0138)             (0.0181)       (0.0111)       (0.0118)
                              0.1115***            0.1141***      0.1118***      0.1194***
                Dryers
                               (0.0126)             (0.0166)       (0.0091)       (0.0095)
                                0.0014              -0.0347*        -0.0022      -0.0180**
                Refrigerators
                               (0.0101)             (0.0150)       (0.0063)       (0.0070)
                                -0.0099              -0.0211        -0.0123        -0.0170
                Dishwashers
                               (0.0116)             (0.0179)       (0.0075)       (0.0087)
                N                           1,637,298                     1,637,298
                    Notes: The table reports estimates for ∆4m                8m
                                                               event p̄C and ∆event p̄C defined
                    in equation (3) and the text below it. The right hand side of equation
                    (3) is a linear combination of the estimates from equation (2). Standard
                    errors in parentheses. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.


that the price of washers jumps by around 11 percent in the period four to eight months
following the application of these tariffs. As noted above, equally dramatic is the relative
price series for dryers which rises simultaneously to washers by an equivalent amount. The
price effects on dryers are initially puzzling as these appliances were not subject to any new
tariffs during this time; we revisit this feature of our data in greater detail in section 4.4
below. Reassuringly, we find little evidence of any differential price effects for refrigerators
and dishwashers for the results pertaining to the 2018 safeguard tariffs.
     It is worth pointing out that some of the other appliances used in our analysis were sub-
sequently subject to new tariffs later in 2018. Included in what was a third round of tariffs
imposed on Chinese imports (from the Section 301 provision of U.S. trade law intended to
penalize unfair trade practices) were refrigerators and electric/gas ranges; household dish-
washers were not subject to new tariffs. These tariffs went into effect in September (roughly
t = 28 in Figure 5b) at a rate of 10 percent.21 Although one might wonder whether these
section 301 tariffs may affect our results, the scope of impact of these China-specific tar-
iffs on refrigerators and ranges was quite small by comparison. Prior to these tariffs, the
  21
   The tariffs were scheduled to automatically increase to 25 percent on January 1, 2019; however, the
Trump administration delayed this increased, first temporarily and then permanently.


                                                     18
Chinese import share for refrigerators was around 17 percent, leading to an increase in the
trade-weighted tariff rate of less than two percentage points. For ranges, the Chinese import
share was about 10 percent, and hence the increase in the effective tariff rate was less than
one percentage point. See Appendix B.4 for more details.
    The evidence in Table 1 demonstrate that, as a whole, washers and dryers experienced
notable price increases following the safeguard tariffs of 2018. Multiplying these estimates
by the median pre-period price of washers (749 USD per unit) and dryers (809 USD per
unit) yields the dollar increase in price attributable to these tariffs on washers and dryers
was 86 USD per unit and 92 USD per unit, respectively.
    In our baseline specification, we include controls for product characteristics and an inter-
action of brand and product category fixed effects. In columns 3 and 4 of Table 1, we present
results from an alternative specification that includes model fixed effects. When using model
fixed effects, the estimated policy effect is identified from the price changes of the products
existing before and after the policy change, while the baseline specification estimates price
effects that include the price level changes for new products.
    Because the tariffs under consideration were not evenly applied across all models in
the data, the estimates above could mask much larger price changes by foreign producers
(primarily LG and Samsung) with little to no price changes by domestic producers. To
explore this heterogeneity, we re-run specification (2) but allow for separate coefficients for
each brand. Specifically, we estimate:


                                          25
                       0             0           0                     0     0       0
                                          X
                                                 a
             pirt = λC(i)B(i)t + Xi β +         αC(i) 1(ageit = a) + γr + `B(i)t + irt ,       (4)
                                          a=2

                 0                                                                          0
    where now λC(i)B(i)t denotes a product category × brand-week fixed effect and `B(i)t
denotes the brand-specific week fixed effect that is applied to all product-categories. The
product category of ranges does not have a separate product-category × brand-week fixed
effect. We then apply a suitably modified equation (3) to arrive at price change estimates
that vary both by appliance and brand. These estimates are shown in Table 2.
    The striking feature of Table 2 is that all major brands increased prices following the
safeguard tariffs. There is no clear distinction between domestic and foreign brands in these
results, all within a range of 5 and 17 percent. Depending on the time horizon, Whirlpool
increased washer prices between 13 to 17 percent, with dryer prices increasing at least as
much. Maytag raised washer prices by about 14 percent and dryer prices between 17 to 20
percent. G.E. had lower price increases of around 7 percent for washers and about 10 percent
for dryers. LG raised prices over four months by eight percent and over 8 months by about
13 percent for both washers and dryers. Samsung increased prices by 15 to 17 percent for
washers and about 10 percent for dryers.
    Why did the price of domestic brands increase in-line with foreign brands, despite being
excluded from the additional costs of tariffs? There are a number of potential explanations,
including increasing marginal costs of domestic production. Indeed, as shown by Pierce
(2011) protected domestic plants from antidumping duties tend to exhibit increased prices
and markups, with physical productivity actually falling. One potential hypothesis for these
results is that the inclusion of new tariffs on washing machines parts (a component of the

                                                 19
Table 2: Difference-in-Difference Estimates: Brand-Specific Price Effects of Washing Ma-
         chine Tariffs
                         Whirlpool                    Maytag                             LG                     Samsung                       G.E.
                     4 month   8 month           4 month  8 month             4 month         8 month      4 month   8 month           4 month   8 month
 Antidumping against China
                -0.0306  -0.0345                 0.1420**      0.1897***        0.0098         -0.0110     0.0830*         0.0573       -0.0020        0.0235
 Washers
               (0.0283) (0.0360)                 (0.0444)       (0.0530)      (0.0387)        (0.0491)    (0.0413)       (0.0498)      (0.0180)       (0.0240)
                -0.0339  -0.0032                 0.1140**      0.1478**        -0.0081         -0.0361    0.0934**        0.0599        -0.0165        -0.0184
 Dryers
               (0.0250) (0.0336)                 (0.0373)       (0.0457)      (0.0289)        (0.0423)    (0.0361)       (0.0408)      (0.0168)       (0.0227)
                0.0075   -0.0115                  0.0313         -0.0142        0.0421          0.0356    0.1155**        0.0299        -0.0146        -0.0076
 Refrigerators
               (0.0167) (0.0240)                 (0.0494)       (0.0531)      (0.0277)        (0.0417)    (0.0371)       (0.0439)      (0.0159)       (0.0220)
                -0.0297  -0.0456                  0.0118         -0.0112       0.0116          -0.0243     0.0259         -0.0537        0.0121         0.0112
 Dishwashers
               (0.0213) (0.0276)                 (0.0434)       (0.0477)      (0.0584)        (0.0687)    (0.0614)       (0.0700)      (0.0151)       (0.0179)
 Safeguard tariffs 2018
               0.1739***          0.1292***     0.1457***       0.1365**     0.0814*** 0.1314*** 0.1528*** 0.1753***                   0.0719**        0.0507
 Washers
                (0.0328)           (0.0368)      (0.0348)       (0.0500)      (0.0216)  (0.0314)  (0.0314)  (0.0394)                   (0.0226)       (0.0312)
               0.1752***          0.1416***     0.1685***      0.2013***     0.0820*** 0.1250*** 0.1045*** 0.0989**                   0.1226***      0.1083***
 Dryers
                (0.0282)           (0.0331)      (0.0314)       (0.0469)      (0.0197)  (0.0284)  (0.0281)  (0.0345)                   (0.0231)       (0.0298)
                 0.0076             -0.0289       0.0302        0.1480**       0.0396    0.0216    0.0083   -0.0710*                   -0.0353*       -0.0640*
 Refrigerators
                (0.0234)           (0.0287)      (0.0283)       (0.0480)      (0.0215)  (0.0300)  (0.0215)  (0.0285)                   (0.0166)       (0.0258)
                 0.0409             -0.0010       0.0178         0.0094      0.1364*** 0.1577*     -0.0162   0.0536                   -0.0519**       -0.0659*
 Dishwashers
                (0.0242)           (0.0321)      (0.0289)       (0.0584)      (0.0360)  (0.0721)  (0.0240)  (0.0501)                   (0.0173)       (0.0289)
 N                          363,800                      101,586                      313,206                     320,698                      538,008
     Notes: The table reports results analogous to Table 1—based on separate estimates for each brand. Specifically, first equation (4) is estimated (with model
     characteristics as controls) and then a linear combination of these estimates is used to compute the left hand side of equation (3)—separately for each brand
     and product category. Figure A12 in the Appendix displays the corresponding weekly price estimates by brand. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.05,
     ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.




Section 201 safeguard investigation) raised the cost of domestic production, with subsequent
pass-through to retail prices of washing machines.22 On further inspection, it turns out that
the effective tariff on parts hardly changed following the Section 201 safeguard tariffs, con-
sistent with this provision being a targeted measure to prevent foreign firms from importing
semi-assembled pieces as a way of getting around the tariffs on fully assembled machines.
Further details on washing machine parts is available in Appendix B.5. Note also that the
effect of the increase in steel prices is differenced-out, as it also applies to ranges (the control
group) and the other appliances.


4.3         Robustness
We briefly discuss a number of additional results to indicate that our results from section 4.2
are robust to alternative assumptions. In Appendix Table A10 we present results analogous
to Table 1, but after including all available stores and brands in our data. Here the price
changes from the China antidumping tariff are roughly the same, while the price changes
caused by the safeguard tariffs are a touch lower. One might wonder whether any increases
of markups would be mitigated in online stores, such that the results when only considering
brick-and-mortar stores might be larger. Appendix Table A8 shows results that include all
brands but only prices collected from brick-and-mortar stores. The results are essentially the
same as before. Finally, Gap Intelligence collects price observations without attempting to
utilize sampling weights to construct an estimate of the aggregate price index of the products
they research. As such, all observations enter our analysis equally in section 4.2. Although
we lack weights on particular brands and models, our data do include the number of brick-
and-mortar stores for each retailer in the United States. Appendix Table A9 replicates our
  22
     On the other hand, it would be surprising for a petitioning firm to include a parts component to the
investigation that would subsequently increase its own costs of production.


                                                                               20
baseline results from Table 1 but for all brands, brick-and-mortar retailers, and where each
retailer receives a weight corresponding to the number of brick-and-mortar stores in the U.S.
The results are robust, with the price effect of both the China antidumping and Safeguard
tariffs increasing somewhat (at least, for the eight months estimates) than our baseline.
    Finally, Table A6 in Appendix C provides a summary of other robustness results, includ-
ing those for Figure 4 and Figure 5.


4.4     The Response in the Price of Dryers
A surprising feature of the results presented in section 4.2 is that dryers—excluded from any
tariffs during this period—experienced price changes that were nearly identical to that of
washers. This is true in the aggregate (Figure 1) as well as for each brand separately (Table
2). This section explores the relationship between these two appliances in greater detail.
    Residential washing machines are typically sold jointly (often, as paired models) with
clothes dryers. Indeed, a prominent counter-argument from respondents to the Section 201
investigation was that paired washer and dryer units are often sold at essentially identical
prices; with clothes dryers being substantially less costly to produce, considering profits on
washers alone would understate the overall margins these companies expect to make on the
laundry equipment market as a whole (see United States International Trade Commission
2017).
    For additional analysis, we identify the set of matched washer-dryer models within each
brand, as discussed in Appendix B.6. Roughly three-quarters of the washers in our data
have a matched dryer model (often with either gas or electric versions). Focusing solely
on the electric models, we find that in over 85 percent of our weekly observations, these
matched models report the exact same dollar price. Hence, the price correlation between
these matched models is very high—over 0.95—while the correlation of price changes is
0.82.23 These facts are consistent across all major brands in our data.
    For another perspective, we scrape major online retailer websites and capture the “Best
Selling” sales rank for both washers and dryers, in addition to the model name and number.
We use this data to calculate the correlations of sales rank for washer and dryers for the
major brands we study. As shown in Appendix Figure A7, the Pearson rank correlation of
sales for a brand’s washer and dryers at a given retailer is quite high, 0.9 to 0.95, depending
on the retailer, and typically lower, 0.3 to 0.9, for other appliances pairs. We describe these
calculations in greater detail in Appendix B.7.
    Taken as a whole, there is clear evidence of complementarities between washers and
dryers in our data. As such, it seems plausible that the firms in our sample chose to split the
effects of new tariffs on prices between washers and dryers, maintaining the convention of
identical prices. Nevertheless, this behavior does raise significant questions. If it is indeed the
case that dryers are significantly less costly to produce, why is it that competition (between
existing firms, or from a new one specializing in dryers) does not drive down the price?
Perhaps the aesthetics of similar design and style features of matched washer-dryer pairs is
an important component of consumer behavior in this market.
  23
    The correlation of average prices across all models within a brand/merchant is 0.87. The washer-dryer
correlation of average price changes across all models within a brand/merchant is 0.74.




                                                   21
4.5     Implications for the Tariff Elasticity of Consumer Prices
In this section we use the increases in price identified in sections 4.1 and 4.4 to calculate the
tariff elasticity of consumer prices. The conventional approach used in prior papers (dating
back to at least Feenstra 1989) is to follow the literature examining the effects of exchange
rate changes and estimate the “pass-through” of tariffs to import prices based on a regression
of changes in unit values (from trade data) on changes in tariff rates. Specifically, the typical
estimated regression is given by:

                        ∆ ln pborder
                              igt    = α0 + α1 ∆ ln(1 + τigt ) + γit + ωg + εigt ,                         (5)
    where g indicates an HS-10 level product code, i indicates an export country, and t
indicates month. As the left-hand side variable pborderigt    is usually measured exclusive of
tariffs, an estimate of α1 close to zero indicates that tariff-inclusive import prices rise by as
much as the tariff – hence a 100 percent pass-through to import prices.
    An examination of the evidence we present above would identify a number of shortcomings
of this conventional approach. First, the tight country link between tariff changes and trade
prices assumes away substitution and in particular the substitution to other countries as firms
relocate production. This methodology will then miss or misinterpret the indirect effects of
production relocation as they relate to the actual prices faced by consumers. Such effects are
particularly problematic for country-specific tariffs such as antidumping and countervailing
duties, which have increased in importance in recent decades. A second concern with the
conventional method is that it doesn’t reflect the full basket of prices available to consumers
(both domestically produced and imported products). Even for imported products, the full
effect of tariff changes on consumer products will depend on markup adjustments.24
    A third and more complicated issue arises from identifying the price impacts of com-
plementary goods not subject to tariffs. Even when these products would be included in a
pass-through regression, the impacts to import prices would likely not be reflected in the
α1 coefficient from equation (5).25 Finally, measurement from unit values faces the known
problem of whether intra-firm transactions reflect prices that are relevant for ultimate con-
sumers.
    The richer data on retail prices at our disposal allows us to calculate the tariff elasticity
of consumer prices that, at least partially, overcomes the shortcomings of the conventional
approach. Formally, let ∆t ln PC (∆τ ) denote the log change in the price index of product
category C in response to a tariff change. Then, we define the tariff elasticity of consumer
prices as

                                                      ∆t ln PC (∆τ )
                                 TECPC,t = h           iP                   ,                              (6)
                                                 MC,t−1         k       k
                                                 DC,t−1
                                                              s
                                                            K C,t−1  ∆τ C,t

  where MC,t−1 and DC,t−1 are aggregate imports and consumption of product category C,
measured in the period t − 1 before tariffs are applied. The term skC,t−1 are lagged import
  24
     This can be seen easily when writing down the retail price PtR as PtR = PtI (1 + τt )mt , where PtI is the
import unit value, τ is the tariff, and mt is the markup. Fully differentiating this expression with respect to
                        dP R  dP I
the tariff rate yields: dτt = dτt + 1 + dmdτ .
  25
     Admittedly, our approach above does not reveal any systematic method—apart from the value of a
careful review at the micro-level—to identify such complementarities in the data.


                                                      22
shares of country k to apply to the country-specific tariff rate changes (∆t τCk ).26 Equation (6)
will more accurately capture the indirect price effects of tariffs by measuring the aggregate
price and tariff changes separately, while using lagged import weights to reflect the effective
tariff burden facing firms and therefore applicable to the initial price level. The focus on
the overall prices paid by consumers—made possible by our data—and adjustment for the
                                                                MC,t−1
share of domestic production facing no tariff changes (the DC,t−1      term in the denominator)
ensures that the measure reflects an overall elasticity for products consumed. Finally, the
measure allows one to identify the product category C to assess whether broader categories
of products experience price changes.
    To implement equation (6) in our data, we require two adjustments. First, as a measure
of the price index, we replace the numerator with the average log change in price we observe
in our data. As shown in Figure 4, this estimate actually mirrors the CPI quite well. Second,
to capture the causal impact on prices (what is defined as ∆t ln PC (∆τ ) above), we follow
                                                              \8m
our approach from Section 4.2 and utilize our estimates ∆      t p̄C in equation (3), which uses
a set of control group (J) products. The control category is meant to subtract out other
factors that could be influencing consumer prices for product category C during this time
period, apart from tariffs. The modified expression we use is written as:


                                                              \8m
                                                             ∆ t p̄C
                 TECP
                 \ C,t = h                 iP                      h       i                                  (7)
                                  MC,t−1            k         k      MJ,t−1 P    k         k
                                  DC,t−1        KC sC,t−1 ∆t τC − DJ,t−1     KJ sJ,t−1 ∆t τJ


    There are a number of complications with implementing equation (7) on our data. First,
calculating the statutory tariff rate change is complicated for both antidumping cases and
for the Section 201 safeguard, but for different reasons. For the two antidumping cases
where the application of antidumping duties is firm-specific, in aggregate data one is forced
to apply some sort of averaging. For the Section 201 safeguard case, there were a number of
product-level exclusions (within HS-10 codes), but we are unable to identify these excluded
products in the retail price data (see Appendix B.2). To illustrate this latter issue, one can
separate out imports of the washing machines by the rate provision code reported by U.S.
Customs. Appendix Figure A3 compares the average effective tariff rate for all imports of
these products, to the rate implied by only imports subject to Section 201 Safeguard Tariffs.
While the imports identified under the Section 201 rate provision code display an applied
tariff rate that matches those specified in the statute, the average effective tariff rate across
all washer imports is significantly lower. Because it is unclear why these codes were excluded,
and to what products they belong, we adopt the conservative convention and simply apply
the statutory rate in our calculations in equation (7).
    A second complication relates to the fact that the Section 201 safeguard measure was
a tariff-rate quota, and therefore exhibits multiple tariff rates during the sample period we
study. As mentioned above, the quota of 1.2 million units subject to the lower additional
tariff rate was reached in October 2018, and all relevant units thereafter paid a higher rate
of 50 percent. These rates reset in February 2019, where the statutory rates decline to 18
  26
    These lagged weights are important when evaluating tariffs affecting a small number of country sources.
For a global tariff change such as the Section 201 safeguard tariffs, the weights have little effect as the ∆t τCk
apply to all source countries.


                                                        23
percent (in quota) and 45 percent (out of quota). Put differently, in addition to accounting
for heterogeneity across products, we must also consider how to account for heterogeneity in
tariff rates over time. If firms are forward-looking with a rough idea of what fraction of their
goods would be subject to the lower (20 percent) and higher (50 percent) rates, then the
trade-weighted average of these rates over time would be the relevant object for how these
firms would consider the adjustment of prices in response to tariffs. An alternative would
be to simply use the maximum applicable rate during the period we study.
    Finally, a third issue is how to account for the price changes of dryers, which had no
tariff change during this period. Although typically the change in price is only measured
for the good subject to the given tariff, we find above that prices of dryers rose in line with
washers, consistent with evidence for broader complementarities between these products. It
seems likely that firms spread out the increase in prices across both washers and dryers in
an effort to keep the retail prices similar between matching models sold as pairs. To add
the dryer effect to equation (7), we modify the product category C to include both washers
and dryers. Because we estimate the price change to be nearly identical (the numerator)
the main difference arises in a smaller average tariff rate change (a smaller denominator,
reflecting zero tariff rate change for dryers).
    Panel C of Table 3 presents the estimates of the price elasticity of consumer prices for the
three tariff changes we study. (We separate out the numerator and denominator components
in Panels A and B, respectively.) We use the statutory tariff changes and report estimates
separately for washers and washers including dryers. Although we lack detailed micro-level
retail prices for the first Korea/Mexico antidumping duties, we provide an estimate of price
changes using the published CPI for laundry equipment relative to other appliances.27 For
the Section 201 safeguard tariffs, we report estimates separately based on whether we use
the trade-weighted average or maximum value of the tariff rate applied during the 12-month
period following tariffs being implemented.
    What is evident in Table 3 is a wide range of this consumer elasticity of tariffs. Our
suggestive estimate for the 2012 antidumping duties against Korea and Mexico indicates a
decline in prices, and hence a negative elasticity, consistent with the theory shown in Figure
1c . On the other hand, the small price increase we estimate for the 2016 antidumping duties
against China results in a modest elasticity of 0.23 to 0.35. Finally, the estimates for the
section 201 safeguard tariffs are considerably higher: 1.25 to 2.26 using the trade weighted
average tariff increase, or 0.57 to 1.07 if we only use the maximum possible rate.

4.5.1   Comparison to Conventional Tariff Pass-Through Calculations
To explore how these estimates compare to those using the conventional method, we estimate
tariff pass-through regressions for each of the tariff changes affecting washing machines. We
estimate equation (5) and follow Amiti, Redding and Weinstein (2019) in using 12-month log
changes, country-by-year fixed effects, and sample periods that include the 12 months before
and 12 months after each tariff episode.28 We use all relevant HS-codes from the appliance
  27
     Specifically, we use series CUSR0000SS30021 (laundry equipment) and CUSR0000SEHK02 (other ap-
pliances). We utilize the same methodology as equation (3).
  28
     We also follow the convention of Amiti, Redding and Weinstein (2019) and drop observations with a
ratio of unit values in t relative to t-12 of greater than 3 or less than 1/3.



                                                 24
              Table 3: Calculation of the Tariff Elasticity of Consumer Prices


                                          Antidumping                   Safeguard Tariffs1
                                         Korea &                     Trade-Weighted
                                         Mexico   China                 Average     Maximum
                                           (1)     (2)                     (3)         (4)

    A: Avg Consumer Price Change2
       Washers Only              N/A                     3.4%              11.5%              11.5%
       Washers and Dryers       -7.0%                    2.9%              11.5%              11.5%

    B: Pre-Period Trade-Weighted Avg. Statutory Tariff Rate Change
       Washers Only               12.5%      14.8%           9.2%                             20.1%
       Washers and Dryers          6.9%       8.3%           5.1%                             10.7%

    C: Tariff Elasticity of Consumer Prices
       Washers Only                 N/A                   0.23               1.25              0.57
       Washers and Dryers           -1.02                 0.35               2.26              1.07

   Notes: Panels A and B follow the numerator and denominator of equation (7) respectively. The
   denominator calculates import shares in a pre-period defined as July to December 2011, July to
   December 2015, and February to August 2017 for the Korea/Mexico antidumping, China antidump-
   ing, and safeguard tariffs, respectively. Statutory tariff rate changes for antidumping duties use the
   preliminary rates (see Appendix Table A2)
   1
     The two columns pertaining to the Section 201 safeguard tariffs correspond to the method of ac-
   counting for the heterogeneity in tariff rates over time. The “Trade-Weighted Average” uses import
   shares as weights during the period of study, whereas the “Maximum” column uses the maximum
   (50 percent) rate.
   2
     Columns (2), (3), and (4) in Panel A are calculated based on estimates presented in column 2 of
   Table 1, where the estimates for washers and dryers is the simple average of the two coefficients.
   Column (1) is calculated using changes in the CPI for “laundry equipment” relative to “other ap-
   pliances” during the relevant period (following equation (3)).



categories in section 4.1 (washing machines, dryers, ranges, refrigerators, and dishwashers).
    We report the α1 estimates from these regressions, along with the translated pass-through
elasticity to import prices, in columns (1) an (2) of Table 4. For comparison to our method,
column (3) displays the tariff elasticity of consumer prices estimates from Table 3 above. Ta-
ble 4 demonstrates that the results from the unit-value based regression often differ markedly
from those using the alternative metric. The elasticity based on unit values implies full
pass-through (increases) to import prices following the Korea/Mexico antidumping duties,
whereas the evidence cited above shows that prices to consumers actually fell during this pe-
riod. A similar pattern applies to the China antidumping duties: The conventional approach
using unit values overstates the increase in prices relative to our estimates based on detailed
retail prices. On the other hand, for the Section 201 safeguard tariffs where tariffs affected
nearly all imports, the elasticity estimates shown in this paper are actually higher than what
would be implied from the method using unit values. This pattern of comparison suggests
that the production relocation response to country-specific tariffs may exert an upward bias
on the tariff pass-through estimates using the conventional approach; changes in domestic


                                                    25
            Table 4: Tariff Pass-Through and Tariff Elasticity of Consumer Prices


                                                 Tariff Pass-Through            Tariff Elasticity
                                                              Implied            of Consumer
                                                Coefficient Elasticity          Prices (Table 3)
                                                   (1)          (2)                    (3)

                                                    0.06
           Korea/Mexico Antidumping                               1.06                -1.02
                                                   (0.16)

                                                  0.32**
           China Antidumping                                      1.32                 0.35
                                                  (0.15)

                                                    0.13
           Section 201 Safeguard Tariffs                          1.13            1.07 to 2.26
                                                   (0.16)

       Notes: Column (1) reports the α1 estimates from equation (5), and column (2) converts this to
       the implied elasticity (1+α1 ). Column (3) provides, for comparison, the corresponding estimates
       from Table 3.


prices and to complementary goods could exert a downward bias.


4.6      An Estimate of the Consumer Cost Per Domestic Job Created
When evaluating the effects of a policy such as the import safeguards, a common metric
combines the effects on consumer prices with the added domestic employment into an esti-
mate of the consumer cost per domestic job created. As indicated above, foreign producers
advertised new jobs on the order of 1,600 following new production plans in the United
States; Whirlpool, on the other hand, indicated they hired 200 additional workers as a result
of the safeguard tariffs.
    To translate the price effects we estimated in Section 4.2 into a dollar value, we multiply
the overall dollar value increase in washer/dryer prices by the annual level of shipments of
both washers and dryers. We use the average level of shipments between 2017 and 2018,
recognizing reports based on Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers (AHAM) data
that sales of washing machines fell in 2018 (Tankersly (2019)). These numbers are roughly
10 million washing machines and 7.7 million clothes dryers.29 The result is an increase of
1.542 billion USD in consumer costs per year.30
    Set against these cost increases is the additional tariff revenue coming from the Section
201 safeguard tariffs. To arrive at an estimate of the tariff revenues generated by these
tariffs, we turn to records kept by the USITC. According to data available on their website,
calculated duties from February 2018 to January 2019 amounted to just under 82 million
USD for washing machines, and about 355,000 USD for washing machine parts. Hence, a
total annual tariff revenue of 82.2 million USD from these tariffs.
    Combining these numbers together reveals a consumer cost per job of roughly 817,000
  29
    For the 2017 shipments numbers from the AHAM, see here.
  30
    Hence, 86 USD × 9.7 million ≈ 841 million USD plus 92 USD × 7.7 million ≈ 710 million USD. Together,
equal to 1.552 billion USD.


                                                     26
USD annually. This number is of the same order of magnitude as other similar exercises.
Hufbauer, Lowry et al. (2012) calculate such a metric from the section 421 tariffs on Chinese
tire imports, finding a cost of roughly 900,000 USD per job.
    All these calculations are made in partial equilibrium. There are a number of other
factors that could be added to this analysis; unfortunately, data limitations prevent a full
treatment on all of these channels. One might suggest that upstream linkages to domestic
suppliers would create a multiplier effect on the number of domestic jobs created from this
policy. Although we lack information on such linkages, the main assembly operations of
Whirlpool produce in a foreign trade zone (see Appendix B.9), suggesting that imported
components are an important piece of their U.S. operations. Downstream linkages could go
in either direction. On the one hand, domestic transportation, packaging, and warehousing
services could see positive spillovers. However, higher prices of appliances at retail stores
may also reduce available income for expenditures on other goods, leading to job losses in
other industries.


5     Conclusion
Conventional international trade models provide a powerful set of tools for policymakers to
understand the effects of tariffs on welfare. A key metric in these calculations is the degree of
tariff pass-through to consumer prices. Using a string of U.S. trade policies affecting washing
machines from 2012 to 2018, we find a number of complications to the traditional analysis
of tariff rate pass-through focused on import prices.
    Two sets of antidumping duties against producers in Korea/Mexico and China led to
large subsequent shifts in trade and production patterns. Using detailed micro-level data on
retail prices, we find that the 2016 antidumping duties on Chinese production had little effect
on consumer prices. We sketch out some simple theory whereby the endogenous firm-level
response to targeted country-specific tariffs is to relocate production, hence moderating the
effects of the trade policy to consumer prices. Indeed, if the tariff induces the firm to shift
to a location with overall lower costs of production, consumer prices could actually decrease
(amounting to a negative tariff rate pass-through). We provide evidence that this was the
case following the antidumping duties on Korea and Mexico in 2012.
    For the more global-oriented safeguard tariffs applied in 2018, we find large effects on
consumer prices. However, the full impact to consumer prices is only realized once we account
for the equivalent and simultaneous increase in the price of dryers, a complementary good
not subject to tariffs. Taking the effects on both goods together, the overall tariff elasticity
of consumer prices is above 100 percent for the 2018 safeguard tariffs. Despite the increase
in domestic production and employment, the costs of these 2018 tariffs are substantial: in
a partial equilibrium setting, we estimate increased annual consumer costs of around 1.5
billion USD, or roughly 820,000 USD per job created.
    With the increased use of trade policies by the United States there is a greater need for
further research into the interactions between firm-level decisions and the effects of import
restrictions on the domestic economy.




                                               27
References
Amiti, Mary, Oleg Itskhoki, and Jozef Konings. 2016. “International Shocks and
 Domestic Prices: How Large Are Strategic Complementarities?” National Bureau of Eco-
 nomic Research Working Paper 22119.

Amiti, Mary, Stephen J. Redding, and David Weinstein. 2019. “The Impact of the
 2018 Trade War on U.S. Price and Welfare.” Center for Economic Policy Research Working
 Paper DP-13564.

Ashenfelter, Orley C., Daniel S. Hosken, and Matthew C. Weinberg. 2013. “The
 Price Effects of a Large Merger of Manufacturers: A Case Study of Maytag-Whirlpool.”
 American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5(1): 239–261.

Bagwell, Kyle, Chad P. Bown, and Robert W. Staiger. 2016. “Is the WTO Pass?”
 Journal of Economic Literature, 54(4): 1125–1231.

Bernhofen, Daniel M., and John C. Brown. 2004. “A Direct Test of the Theory of
 Comparative Advantage: The Case of Japan.” Journal of Political Economy, 112(1): 48–
 67.

Blonigen, Bruce A. 2002. “Tariff-jumping Antidumping Duties.” Journal of International
  Economics, 57(1): 31–49.

Brainard, S Lael. 1997. “An Empirical Assessment of the Proximity-Concentration Trade-
 off between Multinational Sales and Trade.” American Economic Review, 87(4): 520–544.

Broda, Christian, and David E. Weinstein. 2006. “Globalization and the Gains From
 Variety.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(2): 541–585.

Broda, Christian, Nuno Limao, and David E. Weinstein. 2008. “Optimal Tariffs and
 Market Power: The Evidence.” American Economic Review, 98(5): 2032–2065.

DellaVigna, Stefano, and Matthew Gentzkow. 2017. “Uniform Pricing in US Retail
 Chains.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 23996.

Department of Commerce. 2012. “Commerce Preliminarily Finds Dumping of Imports
 of Large Residential Washers from Mexico and the Republic of Korea.”

Department of Commerce. 2016. “Commerce Preliminarily Finds Dumping of Imports
 of Large Residential Washers from the People’s Republic of China.”

Ekholm, Karolina, Rikard Forslid, and James R. Markusen. 2007. “Export-Platform
 Foreign Direct Investment.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 5(4): 776–795.

Fajgelbaum, Pablo D., Pinelopi K. Goldberg, Patrick J. Kennedy, and Amit K.
  Khandelwal. 2019. “The Return to Protectionism.” National Bureau of Economic Re-
  search Working Paper 25638.

Feenstra, Robert C. 1989. “Symmetric Pass-through of Tariffs and Exchange Rates un-
  der Imperfect Competition: An Empirical Test.” Journal of International Economics,
  27(1): 25 – 45.

                                           28
Finkelstein, Amy. 2007. “The Aggregate Effects of Health Insurance: Evidence from the
  Introduction of Medicare.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1): 1–37.

Goldberg, Pinelopi, and Nina Pavcnik. 2016. “Chapter 3 - The Effects of Trade Policy.”
 In . Vol. 1 of Handbook of Commercial Policy, , ed. Kyle Bagwell and Robert W. Staiger,
 161 – 206. North-Holland.

Grant, Matthew. 2017. “Why Special Economic Zones? Using Trade Policy to Discrimi-
 nate Across Importers.” Working Paper.

Helpman, Elhanan, Marc J Melitz, and Stephen R Yeaple. 2004. “Export Versus
 FDI with Heterogeneous Firms.” American Economic Review, 94(1): 300–316.

Hitsch, Guenter, Ali Hortacsu, and Xiliang Lin. 2017. “Pricing in US Retail Chains.”
 Chicago Booth Working Paper 17-18.

Horstmann, Ignatius J., and James R. Markusen. 1992. “Endogenous Market Struc-
 tures in International Trade (Natura Facit Saltum).” Journal of International Economics,
 32(1): 109 – 129.

Huber, J. Richard. 1971. “Effect on Prices of Japan’s Entry into World Commerce after
 1858.” Journal of Political Economy, 79(3): 614–628.

Hufbauer, Gary Clyde, Sean Lowry, et al. 2012. “U.S. Tire Tariffs: Saving Few Jobs
 at High Cost.” Policy Brief, , (12-9).

Irwin, Douglas A. 2014. “Tariff Incidence: Evidence from U.S. Sugar Duties, 1890-1930.”
  National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 20635.

LG Electronics. 2017. “LG Electronics to Build U.S. Factory for Home Ap-
 pliances in Tennessee.” Press Release, https://www.lg.com/us/press-release/
 lg-electronics-to-build-us-factory-for-home-appliances-in-tennessee.

Ludema, Rodney D., and Zhi Yu. 2016. “Tariff Pass-through, Firm Heterogeneity and
 Product Quality.” Journal of International Economics, 103(1): 234–249.

Pierce, Justin R. 2011. “Plant-level Responses to Antidumping Duties: Evidence from
  U.S. Manufacturers.” Journal of International Economics, 85(1): 222–233.

Ruhl, Kim J. 2014. “The Aggregate Impact of Antidumping Policies.” 25.

Samsung. 2017. “Samsung to Expand U.S. Operations, Open $380 Million Home Appliance
  Manufacturing Plant in South Carolina.” Press Release, https://news.samsung.com/us/
  samsung-south-carolina-home-appliance-manufacturing-plant-investment-newberry/.

Spearot, Alan C. 2012. “Firm Heterogeneity, New Investment and Acquisitions.” Journal
  of Industrial Economics, 60(1): 1–45.

Tankersly, Jim. 2019. “How Tariffs Stained the Washing Machine Market.” The
  New York Times, B1. https://www.nytimes.com/2019/01/25/business/economy/
  how-tariffs-stained-the-washing-machine-market.html.

                                           29
Tintelnot, Felix. 2017. “Global Production with Export Platforms.” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 132(1): 157–209.

Trefler, Daniel. 2004. “The Long and Short of the Canada-U. S. Free Trade Agreement.”
  American Economic Review, 94(4): 870–895.

United States International Trade Commission. 2017. “Large Residential Washers.”
 USITC, Investigation No: TA-201-076 Report 4745.

Winkelmann, Liliana, and Rainer Winkelmann. 1998. “Tariffs, Quotas and Terms-of-
 trade: the Case of New Zealand.” Journal of International Economics, 46(2): 313–332.

Yeaple, Stephen Ross. 2003. “The Complex Integration Strategies of Multinationals and
 Cross Country Dependencies in the Structure of Foreign Direct Investment.” Journal of
 International Economics, 60(2): 293–314.




                                          30
Appendix

A      Extended Detail on Timeline

           Table A1: Important Event Dates Relative to Three Cases of Tariff

Date            Event
Antidumping against Korea and Mexico
Dec 2011        Whirlpool files antidumping petition
Feb 2012        USITC issues initial report
Jul 2012        Department of Commerce announces affirmative preliminary determination of AD/CvD duties
Aug 2012        Firms are required to post cash bonds for imports of affected washers
Dec 2012        Department of Commerce announces final determinations of AD/CvD duties
Feb 2013        Final duties go into effect (Perhaps this is when the posted cash bonds (from August 2012 forward)
                are now taken as duties, and duties are taken immediately on others going forward.)
Antidumping against China
Dec 2015        Whirlpool files antidumping petition
Feb 2016        USITC issues preliminary report
Jul 2016        Department of Commerce announces AD/CvD import duties
Jul 2016        Tariffs first applied
Dec 2016        Department of Commerce released its final antidumping determination
Jan 2017        USITC released its final determination
Feb 2017        Department of Commerce issued the final order
Safeguard tariffs 2018
May 2017        Whirlpool files petition for global safeguard investigation
Oct 2017        USITC issues preliminary report (link)
Jan 2018        Executive office issues new import duties (link)
Feb 2018        Tariffs first applied
Oct 2018        Quota limit reached, second tier of tariffs applied
HS codes
Washers         HS8450200040, HS8450200080, HS8450200090, HS8450110040, HS8450110080
Washer parts    HS8450902000, HS8450906000
Chapter 99      HS99034501 (washers within quota), HS99034502 (washers beyond quota)
                HS99034505 (washer parts within quota) and HS99034506 (washer parts beyond quota)




                         Table A2: Extensive Detail on Antidumpings

               Rate(%)    Effective date    Period of review                  Note
Antidumping against Korea
Daewoo         79.11      08/03/2012        10/01/2010    to   09/30/2011     Preliminary determination
               82.41      12/26/2012        10/01/2010    to   09/30/2011     Final determination
               79.11      02/14/2013        10/01/2010    to   09/30/2011     Order issurance
               79.11      09/16/2015        08/03/2012    to   01/31/2014     Deposit rate change
LG             12.15      08/03/2012        10/01/2010 to 09/30/2011          Preliminary determination
               13.02      12/26/2012        10/01/2010 to 09/30/2011          Final determination
               13.02      02/14/2013        10/01/2010 to 09/30/2011          Order issurance
                                                                                 Continued on next page
                                                    31
                                    Table A2: Continued
             Rate(%)   Effective date   Period of review               Note
             1.38      09/16/2015       08/03/2012 to 01/31/2014       Deposit   rate   change
             1.62      09/12/2016       02/01/2014 to 01/31/2015       Deposit   rate   change
             0         09/12/2017       02/01/2015 to 01/31/2016       Deposit   rate   change
             0.64      01/31/2018       02/01/2016 to 01/31/2017       Deposit   rate   change
Samsung      9.62      08/03/2012       10/01/2010   to   09/30/2011   Preliminary determination
             9.29      12/26/2012       10/01/2010   to   09/30/2011   Final determination
             9.23      02/14/2013       10/01/2010   to   09/30/2011   Order issurance
             82.35     09/16/2015       08/03/2012   to   01/31/2014   Deposit rate change
All others   11.36     08/03/2012       10/01/2010 to 09/30/2011       Preliminary determination
             11.86     12/26/2012       10/01/2010 to 09/30/2011       Final determination
             11.8      02/14/2013       10/01/2010 to 09/30/2011       Order issurance
Antidumping against Mexico
Electrolux   33.3      08/03/2012       10/01/2010   to   09/30/2011   Preliminary determination
             36.52     12/27/2012       10/01/2010   to   09/30/2011   Final determination
             36.52     02/14/2013       10/01/2010   to   09/30/2011   Order issurance
             6.22      09/15/2015       08/03/2012   to   01/31/2014   Deposit rate change
             2.47      09/12/2016       02/01/2014   to   01/31/2015   Deposit rate change
             3.67      07/12/2017       02/01/2015   to   01/31/2016   Deposit rate change
             72.41     03/19/2018       02/01/2016   to   01/31/2017   Deposit rate change
Samsung      72.41     08/03/2012       10/01/2010 to 09/30/2011       Preliminary determination
             72.41     12/27/2012       10/01/2010 to 09/30/2011       Final determination
             72.41     02/14/2013       10/01/2010 to 09/30/2011       Order issurance
Whirlpool    72.41     08/03/2012       10/01/2010 to 09/30/2011       Preliminary determination
             72.41     12/27/2012       10/01/2010 to 09/30/2011       Final determination
             72.41     02/14/2013       10/01/2010 to 09/30/2011       Order issurance
All others   33.3      08/03/2012       10/01/2010 to 09/30/2011       Preliminary determination
             36.52     12/27/2012       10/01/2010 to 09/30/2011       Final determination
             36.52     02/14/2013       10/01/2010 to 09/30/2011       Order issurance
Antidumping against China
LG           49.88     07/26/2016       04/01/2015   to   09/30/2015   Preliminary determination
             32.12     12/15/2016       04/01/2015   to   09/30/2015   Final determination
             32.12     12/15/2016       04/01/2015   to   09/30/2015   Deposit rate change
             38.43     02/03/2017       04/01/2015   to   09/30/2015   Order issurance
Samsung      111.09    07/26/2016       04/01/2015 to 09/30/2015       Preliminary determination;
                                                                       amendment.
             52.51     12/15/2016       04/01/2015 to 09/30/2015       Final determination
             57.37     02/03/2017       04/01/2015 to 09/30/2015       Order issurance
All others   80.49     07/26/2016       04/01/2015 to 09/30/2015       Preliminary determination;
                                                                       amendment
             44.28     12/15/2016       04/01/2015 to 09/30/2015       Final determination
             49.72     02/03/2017       04/01/2015 to 09/30/2015       Order issurance



                                              32
      Table A3: Extensive Detail on Countervailing Duties against Korea

             Rates   Effective date   Period of review           Notes
Daewoo       70.58   06/05/2012       01/01/2011 to 12/31/2011   Preliminary determination
             72.3    02/14/2013       10/01/2010 to 09/30/2011   Order issurance
             81.91   09/16/2015       08/03/2012 to 01/31/2014   Deposit rate change
Samsung      1.2     06/05/2012       01/01/2011 to 12/31/2011   Preliminary determination
             1.85    02/14/2013       10/01/2010 to 09/30/2011   Order issurance
             34.77   09/16/2015       08/03/2012 to 01/31/2014   Deposit rate change
All others   1.2     06/05/2012       01/01/2011 to 12/31/2011   Preliminary determination
             1.85    02/14/2013       10/01/2010 to 09/30/2011   Order issurance




                                              33
B      Additional Results
B.1      Intra-Firm vs Arms-length Imports
Firms are required to report whether a particular import transaction is at arms-length or
between related parties. An import transaction is defined as between related parties if “any
person, directly or indirectly owns, controls, or holds power to vote 5 percent or more of
the outstanding voting stock or shares” of the other party. See Section 402(e) of the Tariff
Act of 1930. This distinction matters for our calculations of tariff pass-through, as the
decision to adjust prices in response to tariffs may involve how the firm decides to change
the allocation of profits across subsidiaries. The U.S. Census Bureau publishes aggregates
of trade according to this split; the most disaggregated data available for our purposes is
NAICS 335224: “all household laundry equipment.”
    As shown in Table A4, a very large share of U.S. imports of this category occurs between
related parties. Figure A1 shows these related-party shares by country and year; the patterns
evident in this figure align with the shifts in production by these major firms shown in other
figures.

Table A4: Related-Party Share of 2016 U.S. Imports by Country, NAICS 335224: House-
          hold Laundry Equipment

                               Country           Related Party      Import
                                                     Share           Share

                               Mexico                    .99          0.37
                               China                     .76          0.36
                               South Korea               .90          0.06
                               Thailand                  .79          0.06
                               Vietnam                   .99          0.06

                               World                   .85           1.00
Source: U.S. Census Bureau.
Notes: Imports are defined as related-party if “any person, directly or indirectly owns, controls, or holds
power to vote 5 percent or more of the outstanding voting stock or shares” of the other party. See Section
402(e) of the Tariff Act of 1930. The most disaggregated data available split out by related-party includes
all household laundry equipment; thus, the import shares are not directly comparable to other tables/figures
in this paper.




B.2      Application of Section 201 Tariffs
As shown in Figure A2, the calculated duties before the global safeguard tariffs in 2018
were negligible. Interestingly, the figure shows that duties didn’t jump until roughly May of
2018, despite the fact that announcements indicated duties would be collected beginning in
February.
    The Section 201 Import Safeguard tariff included a number of exclusions, such that not
all imports of the relevant HS product codes were subject to new tariffs in early 2018. In

                                                    34
Figure A1: Related Party Share of Household Laundry Equipment Imports to U.S., Se-
           lected Countries 2010-2016




Source: U.S. Census Bureau.
Notes: Imports are defined as related-party if “any person, directly or indirectly owns, controls, or holds
power to vote 5 percent or more of the outstanding voting stock or shares” of the other party. See Section
402(e) of the Tariff Act of 1930. The most disaggregated data available split out by related-party includes
all household laundry equipment; thus, the import shares are not directly comparable to other tables/figures
in this paper.



addition to excluding washing machine imports from Canada and a number of developing
countries, the initial petition identified a number of products to be out of the scope of
the investigation. Among these excluded products were stacked washer-dryers, commercial
washers, and the following presumably specialty washers:

    • Front loading washers with a permanent split capacitor and belt drive train;

    • Top loading washers with a controlled induction motor and belt drive train;

    • Front loading washers with a cabinet width greater than 28.5 inches.

    It is unclear why these specialty washers were excluded from the scope. From the in-
vestigation documents, we learn that the respondents (LG and Samsung) requested these
excluded articles be included within the scope of the investigation, whereas Whirlpool and
G.E. urged against amending the scope (see USITC 2017, page 9). We can see the effects of
these exclusions by splitting the publicly available import quantities by the applicable rate
provision code. Section 201 rates are classified under “69 –Chapter 99” of the Harmonized
Tariff Schedule of the United States; other rate provisions include “61 – Dutiable HS Chap-
ters 1-87” (MFN rates) and others associated with preferential trade agreements. Figure A3
illustrates the differences between the statutory tariff rates and the average effective tariff
rate – defined as the actual tariffs applied to the relevant HS codes divided by overall value.

                                                    35
      Figure A2: Calculated Duties on U.S. Imports of Washing Machines 2010-2018




Source: USITC.
Notes: Includes HS8450110040, HS8450110080, HS8450200040, HS8450200080, and HS8450200090.

     Figure A3: Effective Tariff Rates of Washing Machines: by Rate Provision Code
                       .5




                                       Statutory Rates
                                       Effective Rates


                                     Section 201
                       .4




                                     Tariffs
             Effective Tariff Rate
                 .2    .1
                       0   .3




                          2018m1          2018m4         2018m7       2018m10            2019m1

Notes: Data from USITC. Includes residential washing machines classified under HS8450110040,
HS8450110080, HS8450200040, HS8450200080, and HS8450200090. Section 201 safeguard tariffs are classi-
fied under rate provision code “69 – Dutiable HS chapter 99.” The average effective tariff rate is defined as
the actual tariffs applied to these imports divided by the tariff-exclusive import value.




                                                         36
   Further detail on the timing and shifts of imports can be seen by also splitting out
country-level detail of the rate provision codes. Figure A4 illustrates a number of other
patterns in the data.

      Figure A4: Imports and Responses to Section 201 Tariffs, Washing Machines
(a) Quantity Washer Imports Subject to Sec-         (b) Quantity Washer Imports Excluded from
    tion 201                                            Section 201




                                                    (d) Cumulative Import Quantities since Feb
     (c) Effective Tariff Rate by Country
                                                        2018




Source: USITC.
Notes: Includes HS8450110040, HS8450110080, HS8450200040, HS8450200080, and HS8450200090. Section
201 tariffs are classified under rate provision code “69 – Dutiable HS chapter 99.”

    Figures A4b and A4a split the quantity of imported washers by whether or not Section
201 duties applied. The figures demonstrate that the Section 201 tariffs were not applied
uniformly across origin countries. Nearly all imports from Vietnam and Thailand were
subject to these duties, whereas imports from Korea were only partially affected. In contrast,
as shown in Figure A4b, washers from China and Mexico were unaffected. Given that the
section 201 ruling did not provide for country-level exclusions for these cases, the most likely
explanation is that the composition of products imported from these countries (entirely) fell
under the set of excluded products identified above.
    Another way of seeing the differential application of the tariffs across countries is to

                                               37
calculate the average effective tariff rate paid on imported washers. Figure A4c does this by
dividing the calculated duties of these imports by the value of imports. Consistent with the
fact that all imports from Thailand and Vietnam were subject to the safeguard duties, the
average effective rate for these countries aligns with the statutory rates announced by the
U.S. Department of Commerce (20 percent, increasing to 50 percent). The average effective
rate paid by Korean imports reflects the fact that only some portion were subject to the new
duties. The timing of the rate jump to 50 percent for Thailand/Vietnam in October 2018
is consistent with that shown in Figure A4d showing the cumulative amounts of imports
for the period subject to Section 201 duties. While Figure A4d confirms that Section 201
imports reached the 1.2 million-unit quota in October of 2018, it also demonstrates that the
quantity of imports excluded from the scope is still substantial.


B.3    Steel Content of Appliances
The inclusion of other appliances in our analysis of price changes following the Section 201
Safeguard tariffs serves to account for any price changes attributed to higher input costs
coming from the Section 232 “national security” tariffs on steel and aluminum. Although
we do not have a detailed breakdown of the various cost components of appliance produc-
tion, Table A5 summarizes the average steel content (in pounds) in individual appliances,
according to a recent study performed by the Steel Recycling Institute and the Association
of Home Appliance Manufacturers. As is clear in the table, the steel content of washing
machines is indeed quite close to the appliance used as our control of electric/gas ranges
(average of 90 lbs vs 127.5 lbs). The other appliances—refrigerators and dishwashers—have
steel content that is slightly higher and lower, respectively.

                    Table A5: Steel Content of Appliance Production

                      Appliance Description               Steel Weight
                      Side by side refrigerator               152.5 lb
                      Ranges (gas)                            149.4 lb
                      Ranges (electric)                       106.8 lb
                      Clothes dryers (gas)                    100.4 lb
                      Clothes dryers (electric)                107 lb
                      Clothes washers, top load               94.5 lb
                      Clothes washers, front load             84.2 lb
                      Top/bottom refrigerator                  79.0 lb
                      Room air conditioners                    35.6 lb
                      Microwave ovens                          28.8 lb
                      Dishwashers (steel interior)             26.7 lb
                      Dishwashers (plastic interior)          27.6 lb

                         Source: Steel Recycling Institute and Association of
                         Home Appliance Manufacturers.




                                               38
B.4     Section 301 Tariffs on Other Household Appliances
A concern with our interpretation of evidence using other appliances in the context of washing
machines is that subsequent tariffs on Chinese imports—part of the Section 301 provision
of enforcing U.S. trade agreements—affected a range of other appliances. Among the set
of products included under the third round of Section 301 tariffs against Chinese goods
put into place in September 2018 were household refrigerators and gas/electric stoves and
ranges. Household dishwashers, the other major appliance in our data, were never subject to
additional tariffs during the period we study. The additional rates applied to these goods was
substantially smaller (only 10 percent) than other trade provisions put into place in 2018.
Apart from differences in the rate and timing of these tariffs, the other obvious difference
with the Section 201 tariffs was that these tariffs were targeted at China alone. Prior to
the Section 301 tariffs, the Chinese share of total imports for refrigerators, ranges, and
dishwashers was 18 percent, 10 percent, and 30 percent, respectively.
    As shown in Figure A5 the average effective tariff rate against all imported refrigerators
and ranges (the blue lines) moved up only slightly beginning in October of 2018. Dishwashers
were unaffected by any new tariffs.


B.5     Tariffs on Washing Machine Parts
In addition to large residential washers, the Section 201 Safeguard investigation included
certain washer parts, including “(i) all cabinets, or portions thereof, designed for use in
washers; (ii) all assembled tubs designed for use in washers which incorporate, at a minimum,
a tub and a seal; (iii) all assembled baskets designed for use in washers which incorporate,
at a minimum, a side wrapper, a base, and a drive hub; and (iv) any combination of the
foregoing parts or subassemblies.” (USITC 2017) This description makes clear that these
additional inclusions are better described as sub-assemblies of washers than indivisible parts.
    To determine whether these additional tariffs could have played a role in the price changes
of washers—particularly those domestic brands—we split the publicly available trade data
for the relevant product groups (HS84509020 and HS84509060) based on the assigned rate
provision code of imports. The evidence, shown in Figure A6 demonstrates that although
the tariff rate of washer parts imports subject to Section 201 tariffs (the blue line) did indeed
jump in mid-2018, the average tariff rate across all washer parts (shown in the red line) was
essentially unchanged. Hence, the share of washer parts affected by these Section 201 tariffs
was trivial—less than 1 percent of the total—and therefore this provision of the section 201
investigation was more likely put into place as a preventative measure to guard against the
avoidance of the washer tariffs themselves.


B.6     Matched Washers and Dryers
Many washers are produced and sold with matching dryers. In this section, we match the
washers with the dryers of the same brand in the Gap Intelligence data with the following
procedure

  1. For each brand, observe the pattern of model part numbers. In general, the same

                                               39
      product family has the same numerical part of the part number.

  2. Match washers by the numerical part, debut date, and base color.

  3. For the rest unmatched washers, match again by the numerical part and base color.
     We allow for matched models to have different debut date.

   We find that among the washers of the five major brands (LG, Samsung, Whirlpool,
Maytag, G.E.), 75.3 percent of the 571 models have matching dryers. In general, within the
matched group, one washer can be matched with two dryers: one gas dryer and one electric
dryer. Gas dryers are usually priced higher than the electric dryers. After excluding the
gas dryers and comparing only the electric washers and electric dryers within the matched
group, we find the price correlation between washers and dryers is 0.967. In addition, for 86.3
percent of the matched observations, the washer has exactly the same price as the matching
dryer.


B.7     Correlations Using Sales Rank
We scrape retailer websites for washers and dryers, obtaining the sales rank of each model
based on the “Best Selling” indicator on the site. We also collect the model number and
name. The data is then cleaned to extract brand names from the product name. Because
this data yields unequal samples (for instance, some sites may list more LG washers than
LG dryers) in order to calculate correlations we pool the data by retailer and create pairs
by matching on brand ranking.
     Specifically, for each product and for each retailer we calculate a “brand ranking” from the
overall sales rank. For instance, for a specific retailer the highest ranked Whirlpool washer is
given a brand rank of 1, the highest ranked LG washer for this retailer is also given a brand
rank of one, the second highest ranked Whirlpool washer for this retailer is given a brand
rank of two, and so on for each product and each retailer. Then, for each retailer we merge
together each product matching on brand and brand rank. For example, this procedure
will pair the highest ranked Whirlpool washer with the highest ranked Whirlpool dryer,
refrigerator, dishwasher, and range. The second highest ranked product will be matched
with other second highest ranked products. We do an “outer join” matching such that if a
product has no brand rank match in another product we simply assign null values to the
other product. That is, if there is no 10th LG dryer to match with the 10th LG washer, we
simply assign a null value to the LG dryer. This way if there is a 10th LG refrigerator it will
still be matched with the 10th LG washer such that we maximize the number of observations
when calculating each correlation.
     Using this data, we compute the Pearson correlation coefficient for every pair of products
in each retailer. In all calculations, we compute a 95 percent confidence interval using
standard errors obtained from the Fisher Z transformation which is given by z = arctanh(r),
where r is the correlation coefficient.
     The results are shown in Figure A7. As is clear in the matrix of correlations, there is
an especially tight connection between washers and dryers among the set of appliances for
these retailers.


                                               40
B.8      Changes to Export (to U.S.) Unit Values
We divide values by unit quantities to assess changes in the unit values of of imported prod-
ucts. We first restrict attention to only those imports categorized under the rate provision
“69 –Chapter 99” of the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States. As shown in
Figure A4a, the imports primarily affected were from Thailand and Vietnam. Figure A8
shows these washing machine unit values for these affected imports, where January 2018 is
indexed to be equal to 100. Although prices increase briefly for two of the countries, by
the time tariffs are actually assessed (in April/May, see Figure A4c) these prices fall back;
averaging between 5 and 10 percent lower than before tariffs were applied.31


B.9      Foreign Trade Zone Production
One important feature of U.S. imports of washing machines is the use of foreign trade
zone (FTZ) production in the United States. Created at the request of a U.S. firm to
the U.S. Department of Commerce, a manufacturing facility in an FTZ operates outside
of the customs border of the United States.32 The intent, as the case in many developing
countries, is to allow for processing production for re-export without incurring tariffs on the
imported components. Hence, for the case of washing machines, an FTZ would allow a U.S.
manufacturer to import the components of washing machines with little or no associated
tariffs.
    In general, any imported good will be recorded twice: first as a “general import” when it
arrives at the border, and then again as an “import for consumption” after it passes through
customs. Typically the differences in the data between these two definitions are small and
reflect idiosyncratic timing in customs clearance as well as time spend in temporary storage in
bonded warehouses. FTZ production introduces another potential discrepancy between these
two definitions, as FTZ production exists outside the customs border of the United States.
Specifically, in FTZ production the imported component parts will enter the country recorded
as “general imports,” but will not be recorded as an “import for consumption” because they
are processed inside the FTZ and therefore never cross the U.S. customs border.33 Another
discrepancy can occur if the final good produced by the FTZ ends up entering the U.S.
market.
    Apart from removing tariffs on imported components of production for re-export, another
motivation for FTZ production is to exploit differences in the tariff rates between imported
components and the final product. If the finished product of an FTZ enters the United States
for domestic consumption, then the firm must then pay duties on the value of the imported
parts. However, the FTZ firm is allowed to choose whether they pay the tariff rate of the
finished product (washing machine) or the imported components (various washing machine
parts). As the tariff rate on the finished product is lower, the firm records the import for
consumption under the final product code classification (as a washing machine).
  31
     One likely explanation for the brief increase in average prices is a shift in the composition of imports
towards higher-priced models, as firms rushed to move imports into the U.S. before the tariff increase.
  32
     Foreign trade zones exert a large influence on economic activity more generally. According to research
by Grant (2017), foreign trade zones account for roughly one-sixth of U.S. manufacturing value-added, and
one-eighth of the value of U.S. imports.
  33
     Or, in the language of U.S. Customs Bureau, they remain as “Foreign Status” goods.


                                                     41
    The increasing importance of FTZs for washing machine production destined for the
U.S. market is evident in Figure A9. As shown in Figure A9a, a large gap emerges between
imports for consumption and general imports in 2014; Figure A9b demonstrates that roughly
all of this discrepancy owes to a jump in the Cleveland Customs District.




                                           42
Figure A5: Effective Tariff Rate of Refrigerators and Ranges: All Imports vs Section 301
           Imports
                                      (a) Refrigerators




                                         (b) Ranges




Source: USITC.
Notes:   Refrigerators include products listed in HS8418100020, HS8418100030,     HS8418100040,
HS8418100045, HS8418100055, HS8418100065, HS8418100075, HS8418100090,             HS8418210020,
HS8418210030, HS8418210090, HS8418220000, HS8418290000, HS8418291000,             HS8418292000,
HS8418300000, HS8418400000.     Ranges include products listed in HS7321113000,   HS7321113010,
HS7321113020, HS7321113050, HS8516604074, HS8516604078, HS8516604080,             HS8516604082,
HS8516604086.

                                             43
      Figure A6: Effective Tariff Rate of Washer Parts: Statutory vs Effective Rates




Source: USITC.
Notes: Includes HS codes listed under HS8450902000 and HS8450906000. Section 201 tariffs are classified
under rate provision code “69 – Dutiable HS chapter 99.”




                                                  44
                                     Figure A7: Sales Rank Correlations across Retailers
 (a) Home Depot Appliance Sales Rank Corre-
     lation
                                                                                                                   (b) JC Penny Appliance Sales Rank Correla-
                                                                                                                       tion




                                                                                                               )
                                                                                                           ric




                                                                                                                                                                                                       s
                                                                                                                                                                                  rs




                                                                                                                                                                                                      or
                                                                                                        ct
                                                                                   )
                                                                                 as




                                                                                                                                                                               he
                                                              s
                                          rs




                                                                                                     le




                                                                                                                                                                                                    at
                                                            or




                                                                               (G
                                        he




                                                                                                                                                                              s
                                                                                                  (E




                                                                                                                                                                                                  er




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      s
                                                          at




                                                                                                                                                                           wa
                                                                                                                                                     s




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ge
                                                                                                                                                                                                rig
                                      as




                                                        er




                                                                                                                                                   er
                                                                           s




                                                                                                s




                                                                                                                                                                           h
                        s




                                                                          ge




                                                                                             ge




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 an
                                                     rig




                                                                                                                                                 ry




                                                                                                                                                                                             ef
                                    hw
                     er




                                                                                                                                                                        is
                                                                     an




                                                                                          an




                                                                                                                                                                                                                R
                                                                                                                                            D




                                                                                                                                                                                            R
                                                                                                                                                                       D
                   ry




                                                   ef
                                  is
                  D




                                                  R




                                                                    R




                                                                                         R
                                 D




   Washers       0.92           0.64             0.49              0.61                  0.69                           Washers            0.96                       0.92                 0.53                0.9
             (0.877,0.946) (0.426,0.780) (0.306,0.631) (0.423,0.753) (0.543,0.792)                                                   (0.942,0.976)               (0.826,0.960)         (0.263,0.719)       (0.853,0.938)



                   Dryers       0.74             0.75               0.7                  0.69
                            (0.594,0.839) (0.675,0.817) (0.544,0.803) (0.559,0.788)                                                               Dryers              0.87                 0.71                0.92
                                                                                                                                                                 (0.742,0.938)         (0.512,0.834)       (0.879,0.944)


                            Dishwashers          0.73              0.91                  0.83
                                             (0.579,0.832) (0.843,0.945) (0.722,0.895)
                                                                                                                                                                   Dishwashers             0.71                0.89
                                                                                                                                                                                       (0.458,0.860)       (0.768,0.945)
                                             Refrigerators         0.67                  0.74
                                                              (0.506,0.784) (0.631,0.827)


                                                                                                                                                                                        Refrigerators          0.61
                                                             Ranges (Gas)                0.91                                                                                                              (0.368,0.771)
                                                                                    (0.848,0.941)




                                               (c) Best Buy Appliance Sales Rank Correlation
                                                                                                                                            s
                                                                                                                    rs




                                                                                                                                            or
                                                                                                                   he




                                                                                                                                          at
                                                                                                              s




                                                                                                                                        er




                                                                                                                                                                  s
                                                                                                           wa
                                                                                s




                                                                                                                                                                 ge
                                                                                                                                   rig
                                                                             er




                                                                                                          h




                                                                                                                                                            an
                                                                           ry




                                                                                                                                   ef
                                                                                                       is




                                                                                                                                                           R
                                                                          D




                                                                                                                                  R
                                                                                                     D




                                                 Washers                  0.9                       0.59                      0.27                       0.33
                                                                  (0.8610,0.931)           (0.4436,0.706)                (0.0871,0.427)            (0.1547,0.481)




                                                                                Dryers              0.62                      0.36                       0.49
                                                                                           (0.5048,0.718)                (0.2321,0.471)            (0.3682,0.587)




                                                                                                Dishwashers                   0.74                       0.79
                                                                                                                         (0.6711,0.801)            (0.7250,0.836)




                                                                                                                            Refrigerators                  0.9
                                                                                                                                                   (0.8796,0.918)




Notes: Correlations are Pearson’s R. Confidence intervals in parentheses.




                                                                                                            45
               Figure A8: Average Import Unit Value for Section 201 Imports




Source: USITC.
Notes: Includes HS8450110040, HS8450110080, HS8450200040, HS8450200080, and HS8450200090. For
countries Thailand and Vietnam only. See section B.2 for more discussion of the application of tariffs across
countries and products.




                                                     46
Figure A9: Annual 2010-2017 Quantity of Washing Machine Imports: Total and Cleveland
           Customs District
                                                            (a) Total


                                           Imports for Consumption
                     10,000
                                           General Imports
           Units (in Thousands)
               5,000 0




                                    2010   2011    2012   2013    2014    2015   2016   2017   2018



                                                  (b) Cleveland Customs District
                     6,000




                                           Imports for Consumption
                                           (Cleveland Customs District)
                                           General Imports
                                           (Cleveland Customs District)
             Units (in Thousands)
           2,000     0      4,000




                                    2010   2011    2012   2013    2014    2015   2016   2017   2018


Source: USITC.
Notes: Includes HS8450110040, HS8450110080, HS8450200040, HS8450200080, and HS8450200090.




                                                                 47
C      Robustness Figures and Tables
In this section, we include the results from a variety of robustness checks on our analysis
on washing machine price changes following recent trade policy actions. These robustness
checks are summarized in Table A6 below.
                                        Table A6: Summary of Robustness Results

                                                                                       Robustness for:
    Robustness                                                      Figure 4           Figure 5        Table 1         Table 2
    With model fixed effects                                     Figure A13 Figure A14                        -        Table A7
    All brands, only offline stores                              Figure A15 Figure A16                Table A8              -
    All brands, offline stores
                                                                 Figure A17 Figure A18                Table A9              -
    (weighted by number of stores)
    All brands, all stores (unweighted) Figure A19 Figure A20 Table A10                                                     -


Figure A10: Monthly U.S. Imports of Washing Machines by Country (Quantity), Season-
            ality Adjusted
                       .8
                       .6
             Quantity, million
                    .4 .2
                       0




                             2010m1   2011m1    2012m1     2013m1    2014m1   2015m1    2016m1   2017m1   2018m1   2019m1

                                       Mexico            Korea        China        Vietnam         Thailand        World


Notes: Data from USITC. Residential washing machines are classified under HS8450110040, HS8450110080,
HS8450200040, HS8450200080, and HS8450200090.


                                                                       48
Figure A11: Time Fixed Effects from Log Price Regression (All 5 Appliances), CPI for
            Laundry Equipment




                                                                                                                                                          130
                                      .3




                                                                                                                                                          115
                    Log price, year-week fixed effects
                                                   .15




                                                                                                                                                          CPI
                                                                                                                                                          100
                    -.15            0




                                                                                                                                                          85
                                      -.3




                                                                                                                                                          70
                                                    2010m1     2011m1    2012m1    2013m1   2014m1    2015m1        2016m1    2017m1    2018m1   2019m1

                                                                          Washers                         Dryers                 Refrigerators
                                                                          Dishwashers                     Ranges                 CPI




Table A7: Difference-in-Difference Estimates: Brand-Specific Price Effects of Washing Ma-
          chine Tariffs
                               Whirlpool                                       Maytag                        LG                    Samsung                     G.E.
                           4 month   8 month                              4 month  8 month        4 month          8 month    4 month   8 month         4 month   8 month
 Antidumping against China
                0.0375   0.0463                                           0.0634*      0.0859*      0.0183          0.0458      0.0669*      0.0514       0.0246      0.0228
 Washers
               (0.0228) (0.0271)                                          (0.0314)     (0.0340)   (0.0265)         (0.0259)    (0.0303)     (0.0349)     (0.0146)    (0.0184)
               0.0353*  0.0512*                                           0.0688**     0.0805**    -0.0023          0.0304     0.0599*       0.0330       0.0098      0.0113
 Dryers
               (0.0169) (0.0200)                                          (0.0250)     (0.0290)   (0.0210)         (0.0217)    (0.0233)     (0.0255)     (0.0109)    (0.0145)
               0.0264*   0.0220                                           0.0648**     0.0649*      0.0187         0.0449*    0.1178***      0.0408      0.0152*      0.0146
 Refrigerators
               (0.0107) (0.0112)                                          (0.0232)     (0.0259)   (0.0179)         (0.0197)    (0.0203)     (0.0221)     (0.0075)    (0.0089)
                0.0168   0.0113                                            -0.0009      -0.0115     0.0397         0.0657*     0.0781**      0.0269     0.0289***    0.0216*
 Dishwashers
               (0.0140) (0.0153)                                          (0.0281)     (0.0248)   (0.0270)         (0.0284)    (0.0291)     (0.0362)     (0.0081)    (0.0100)
 Safeguard tariffs 2018
               0.1799***                                     0.1464***   0.1427***     0.0913* 0.0537*** 0.0807*** 0.1420***               0.1544***    0.0885*** 0.0859***
 Washers
                (0.0244)                                      (0.0265)    (0.0301)     (0.0397)  (0.0160)  (0.0167)  (0.0265)               (0.0288)     (0.0175)  (0.0176)
               0.1683***                                     0.1394***   0.1632***    0.1516*** 0.0530*** 0.0672*** 0.1121***              0.1250***    0.1156*** 0.1112***
 Dryers
                (0.0191)                                      (0.0203)    (0.0271)     (0.0356)  (0.0144)  (0.0133)  (0.0199)               (0.0232)     (0.0136)  (0.0142)
                 0.0082                                        -0.0104     0.0334      0.0655*    -0.0010   -0.0151   -0.0252              -0.0767***     -0.0112   -0.0082
 Refrigerators
                (0.0147)                                      (0.0164)    (0.0217)     (0.0257)  (0.0156)  (0.0116)  (0.0148)               (0.0186)     (0.0086)  (0.0088)
                 0.0304                                         0.0250     0.0170      0.0673*   0.0461**   -0.0068 -0.0433**                -0.0272    -0.0287**   -0.0150
 Dishwashers
                (0.0167)                                      (0.0195)    (0.0226)     (0.0330)  (0.0164)  (0.0176)  (0.0161)               (0.0240)     (0.0106)  (0.0114)
 N                                                       363,800                  101,586                  313,206                     320,698                  538,008
     Notes: The table reports results analogous to Table 1—based on separate estimates for each brand. Specifically, first equation (4) is estimated (with model
     fixed effect as controls) and then a linear combination of these estimates is used to compute the left hand side of equation (3)—separately for each brand and
     product category. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.




C.1           List of Product Characteristics
Table A11 describes the additional product characteristic variables included in the Gap
Intelligence data.




                                                                                                     49
Figure A12: Price Effects of Safeguard Tariffs and Antidumping Duties against China: by
            Brand, with Model Characteristics as Controls
  (a) Antidumping against China - Whirlpool                                                                        (b) Safeguard Tariffs 2018 - Whirlpool
             .3




                                                                                                             .3
             .2




                                                                                                             .2
             .1




                                                                                                             .1
 Estimates




                                                                                                 Estimates
             0




                                                                                                             0
             -.1




                                                                                                             -.1
             -.2




                                                                                                             -.2
                   -48   -36        -24   -12      0     12            24   36         48                          -48      -36        -24   -12      0     12            24   36         48

                          Washers         Dryers       Refrigerators         Dishwashers                                     Washers         Dryers       Refrigerators         Dishwashers




              (c) Antidumping against China - Maytag                                                                     (d) Safeguard Tariffs 2018 - Maytag


                                                                                                             .3
             .3




                                                                                                             .2
             .2




                                                                                                             .1
             .1
 Estimates




                                                                                                 Estimates
                                                                                                             0
             0




                                                                                                             -.1
             -.1
             -.2




                                                                                                             -.2




                   -48   -36        -24   -12      0     12            24   36         48                          -48      -36        -24   -12      0     12            24   36         48

                          Washers         Dryers       Refrigerators         Dishwashers                                     Washers         Dryers       Refrigerators         Dishwashers




                    (e) Antidumping against China - LG                                                                     (f ) Safeguard Tariffs 2018 - LG
             .3




                                                                                                             .3
             .2




                                                                                                             .2
             .1




                                                                                                             .1
 Estimates




                                                                                                 Estimates
             0




                                                                                                             0
             -.1




                                                                                                             -.1
             -.2




                                                                                                             -.2




                   -48   -36        -24   -12      0     12            24   36         48                          -48      -36        -24   -12      0     12            24   36         48

                          Washers         Dryers       Refrigerators         Dishwashers                                     Washers         Dryers       Refrigerators         Dishwashers




                                                                                            50
Figure A12: Price Effects of Safeguard Tariffs and Antidumping Duties against China: by
            Brand, with Model Characteristics as Controls (Continued)
        (g) Antidumping against China - Samsung                                                                       (h) Safeguard Tariffs 2018 - Samsung
              .3




                                                                                                               .3
              .2




                                                                                                               .2
              .1




                                                                                                               .1
  Estimates




                                                                                                   Estimates
              0




                                                                                                               0
              -.1




                                                                                                               -.1
              -.2




                                                                                                               -.2
                    -48    -36        -24   -12      0     12            24   36         48                          -48     -36        -24   -12      0     12            24   36         48

                            Washers         Dryers       Refrigerators         Dishwashers                                    Washers         Dryers       Refrigerators         Dishwashers




                    (i) Antidumping against China - G.E.                                                                   (j) Safeguard Tariffs 2018 - G.E.
              .3




                                                                                                               .3
              .2




                                                                                                               .2
              .1




                                                                                                               .1
  Estimates




                                                                                                   Estimates
              0




                                                                                                               0
              -.1




                                                                                                               -.1
              -.2




                                                                                                               -.2




                    -48    -36        -24   -12      0     12            24   36         48                          -48     -36        -24   -12      0     12            24   36         48

                            Washers         Dryers       Refrigerators         Dishwashers                                    Washers         Dryers       Refrigerators         Dishwashers




C.2                       Total Number of Available Models
Figure A21 illustrates the number of available models by brand across the periods we study.




                                                                                              51
Figure A13: Time Fixed Effects from Log Price Regression - with Model Fixed Effect as
            Controls




                                                                                                             130
                            0.3       0.15




                                                                                                             115
             Log price, fixed effects




                                                                                                             100
                                                                                                             CPI
                        0   -0.15




                                                                                                             85
                            -0.3




                                                                                                             70
                                       2010m1 2011m1 2012m1 2013m1 2014m1 2015m1 2016m1 2017m1 2018m1 2019m1

                                                    Washers (left)           Dryers (left)     CPI (right)


Notes: We plot the year-week fixed effects for washers or dryers, averaged over each month, obtained from
estimating equation (1). We include model fixed effects instead of model characteristics as controls. We omit
the week dummy for the week of April 1, 2015. In that month the CPI for laundry equipment was close to
100 points, and therefore the left and the right axis are simple to compare. The dates of the three vertical
lines are August 2012, July 2016, and February 2018, which are discussed in the text.




                                                                        52
Figure A14: Price Effects of Safeguard Tariffs and Antidumping Duties against China -
            with Model Fixed Effect as Controls
                                                 (a) Antidumping against China




                         .15
                         .1
                         .05
             Estimates
                         0
                         -.05
                         -.1




                                -48   -36        -24     -12           0     12            24   36         48

                                       Washers           Dryers            Refrigerators         Dishwashers




                                                   (b) Safeguard Tariffs 2018
                         .15
                         .1
                         .05
             Estimates
                         0
                         -.05
                         -.1




                                -48   -36        -24     -12           0     12            24   36         48

                                       Washers           Dryers            Refrigerators         Dishwashers




Notes: These figures report the regression coefficients λC(i)t from equation (2). We also use model fixed
effects instead of model characteristics as controls. In 5a the estimates are relative to the week of July 17,
2016 and in Figure 5b the estimates are relative to the week of January 28, 2018. The dotted lines denote
95 percent confidence intervals for the coefficient estimates for washers and dryers, based on standard errors
clustered by model.


                                                                  53
Figure A15: Time Fixed Effects from Log Price Regression - All Brands and Only Brick
            and Mortar Stores




                                                                                                                   130
                                .3




                                                                                                                   115
              Log price, year-week fixed effects
                                             .15




                                                                                                                   100
                                                                                                                   CPI
              -.15            0




                                                                                                                   85
                                -.3




                                                                                                                   70
                                             2010m1 2011m1 2012m1 2013m1 2014m1 2015m1 2016m1 2017m1 2018m1 2019m1

                                                          Washers (left)           Dryers (left)     CPI (right)


Notes: We plot the year-week fixed effects, which are averaged over each month, from the product-by-product
regression with life cycle variables, model characteristics controls, brand fixed effects, retailer fixed effects,
and year-week fixed effects. We include all brands available in the data but only restrict to the brick and
mortar stores of all retailers. Three vertical date lines are August 2012, July 2016, and February 2018, which
are discussed in the text.




                                                                              54
Figure A16: Price Effects of Safeguard Tariffs and Antidumping Duties against China -
            All Brands and Only Brick and Mortar Stores
                                             (a) Antidumping against China




                     .15
                     .1
                     .05
             Estimates
                     0
                     -.05
                     -.1




                            -48   -36        -24     -12           0     12            24   36       48

                                   Washers           Dryers            Refrigerators        Dishwashers




                                               (b) Safeguard Tariffs 2018
                     .15
                     .1
                     .05
             Estimates
                     0
                     -.05
                     -.1




                            -48   -36        -24     -12           0     12            24   36       48

                                   Washers           Dryers            Refrigerators        Dishwashers




Notes: These figures report the regression coefficients λC(i)t from equation (2). We include all brands
available in the data but only restrict to the brick and mortar stores of all retailers. In A16a the estimates
are relative to the week of July 17, 2016 and in Figure A16b the estimates are relative to the week of January
28, 2018. The dotted lines denote 95 percent confidence intervals for the coefficient estimates for washers
and dryers, based on standard errors clustered by model.


                                                              55
Table A8: Difference-in-Difference Estimates: Price Effects of Washing Machine Tariffs -
          All Brands and Only Brick and Mortar Stores

                                       with model                    with model
                                      characteristics                fixed effect
                                        as controls                  as controls
                                   4 month     8 month           4 month     8 month
              Antidumping against China
                            0.0311*   0.0340                     0.0357**       0.0446**
              Washers
                            (0.0149) (0.0176)                    (0.0129)       (0.0145)
                             0.0201   0.0173                     0.0223*        0.0290*
              Dryers
                            (0.0128) (0.0149)                    (0.0105)       (0.0114)
                            0.0267*   0.0159                    0.0354***       0.0289**
              Refrigerators
                            (0.0124) (0.0146)                    (0.0084)       (0.0091)
                             -0.0082 -0.0332*                     0.0055         -0.0107
              Dishwashers
                            (0.0144) (0.0164)                    (0.0102)       (0.0107)
              Safeguard tariffs 2018
                            0.0868***            0.0908***      0.0843***       0.1022***
              Washers
                             (0.0141)             (0.0182)       (0.0118)        (0.0128)
                            0.0972***            0.0823***      0.0976***       0.1012***
              Dryers
                             (0.0131)             (0.0175)       (0.0103)        (0.0116)
                             0.0258*               0.0198         -0.0032         -0.0141
              Refrigerators
                             (0.0116)             (0.0161)       (0.0085)        (0.0094)
                            0.0345**              0.0402*       0.0270**        0.0425***
              Dishwashers
                             (0.0122)             (0.0173)       (0.0097)        (0.0124)
              N                           1,288,914                     1,288,914
                  Notes: The table reports estimates for ∆4m                 8m
                                                              event p̄C and ∆event p̄C defined
                  in equation (3) and the text below it. The right hand side of equation
                  (3) is a linear combination of the estimates from equation (2), in which
                  we include all brands available in the data but only restrict to the offline
                  stores of all retailers. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.05, **
                  p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.




                                                    56
Figure A17: Time Fixed Effects from Log Price Regression - All Brands and Brick and
            Mortar Retailers Weighted by the Number of Stores




                                                                                                                   130
                                .3




                                                                                                                   115
              Log price, year-week fixed effects
                                             .15




                                                                                                                   100
                                                                                                                   CPI
              -.15             0




                                                                                                                   85
                                -.3




                                                                                                                   70
                                             2010m1 2011m1 2012m1 2013m1 2014m1 2015m1 2016m1 2017m1 2018m1 2019m1

                                                          Washers (left)           Dryers (left)     CPI (right)


Notes: We plot the year-week fixed effects, which are averaged over each month, from the product-by-product
regression with life cycle variables, model characteristics controls, brand fixed effects, retailer fixed effects,
and year-week fixed effects. We include all brands available in the data but only restrict to the brick and
mortar retailers, which are further weighted by the number of stores. Three vertical date lines are August
2012, July 2016, and February 2018, which are discussed in the text.




                                                                              57
Figure A18: Price Effects of Safeguard Tariffs and Antidumping Duties against China - All
            Brands and Brick and Mortar Retailers Weighted by the Number of Stores
                                             (a) Antidumping against China




                     .15
                     .1
                     .05
             Estimates
                     0
                     -.05
                     -.1




                            -48   -36        -24     -12           0     12            24   36       48

                                   Washers           Dryers            Refrigerators        Dishwashers




                                               (b) Safeguard Tariffs 2018
                     .15
                     .1
                     .05
             Estimates
                     0
                     -.05
                     -.1




                            -48   -36        -24     -12           0     12            24   36       48

                                   Washers           Dryers            Refrigerators        Dishwashers




Notes: These figures report the regression coefficients λC(i)t from equation (2). We include all brands
available in the data but only restrict to the brick and mortar retailers, which are further weighted by the
number of stores. In A16a the estimates are relative to the week of July 17, 2016 and in Figure A18b
the estimates are relative to the week of January 28, 2018. The dotted lines denote 95 percent confidence
intervals for the coefficient estimates for washers and dryers, based on standard errors clustered by model.


                                                              58
Table A9: Difference-in-Difference Estimates: Price Effects of Washing Machine Tariffs -
          All Brands and Brick and Mortar Retailers Weighted by the Number of Stores

                                       with model                    with model
                                      characteristics                fixed effect
                                        as controls                  as controls
                                   4 month     8 month           4 month     8 month
              Antidumping against China
                             0.0359*   0.0441*                   0.0520** 0.0585***
              Washers
                             (0.0181) (0.0200)                   (0.0159)  (0.0157)
                             0.0307*  0.0467**                   0.0352** 0.0550***
              Dryers
                             (0.0152) (0.0172)                   (0.0130)  (0.0133)
                            0.0437***  0.0292                   0.0577*** 0.0413***
              Refrigerators
                             (0.0132) (0.0154)                   (0.0099)  (0.0102)
                              -0.0035 -0.0345*                    0.0115    -0.0087
              Dishwashers
                             (0.0150) (0.0165)                   (0.0107)  (0.0111)
              Safeguard tariffs 2018
                            0.0894***            0.1367***      0.0909***      0.1310***
              Washers
                             (0.0164)             (0.0217)       (0.0138)       (0.0155)
                            0.0988***            0.1311***      0.1004***      0.1285***
              Dryers
                             (0.0151)             (0.0188)       (0.0121)       (0.0133)
                              0.0141               -0.0026        -0.0122        -0.0169
              Refrigerators
                             (0.0131)             (0.0160)       (0.0103)       (0.0108)
                              0.0171              0.0420*         0.0003        0.0267*
              Dishwashers
                             (0.0149)             (0.0182)       (0.0119)       (0.0127)
              N                           1,288,914                     1,288,914
                  Notes: The table reports estimates for ∆4m                8m
                                                             event p̄C and ∆event p̄C defined
                  in equation (3) and the text below it. The right hand side of equation
                  (3) is a linear combination of the estimates from equation (2), in which
                  we include all brands available in the data but only restrict to the brick
                  and mortar retailers that are further weighted by the number of stores.
                  Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.




                                                   59
Figure A19: Time Fixed Effects from Log Price Regression - All Brands and All Retailers




                                                                                                                   130
                                .3




                                                                                                                   115
              Log price, year-week fixed effects
                                             .15




                                                                                                                   100
                                                                                                                   CPI
              -.15            0




                                                                                                                   85
                                -.3




                                                                                                                   70
                                             2010m1 2011m1 2012m1 2013m1 2014m1 2015m1 2016m1 2017m1 2018m1 2019m1

                                                          Washers (left)           Dryers (left)     CPI (right)


Notes: We plot the year-week fixed effects, which are averaged over each month, from the product-by-product
regression with life cycle variables, model characteristics controls, brand fixed effects, retailer fixed effects,
and year-week fixed effects. We include all available brands and retailers in the data. Three vertical date
lines are August 2012, July 2016, and February 2018, which are discussed in the text.




                                                                              60
Figure A20: Price Effects of Safeguard Tariffs and Antidumping Duties against China -
            All Brands and All Retailers
                                             (a) Antidumping against China




                     .15
                     .1
                     .05
             Estimates
                     0
                     -.05
                     -.1




                            -48   -36        -24     -12           0     12            24   36       48

                                   Washers           Dryers            Refrigerators        Dishwashers




                                               (b) Safeguard Tariffs 2018
                     .15
                     .1
                     .05
             Estimates
                     0
                     -.05
                     -.1




                            -48   -36        -24     -12           0     12            24   36       48

                                   Washers           Dryers            Refrigerators        Dishwashers




Notes: These figures report the regression coefficients λC(i)t from equation (2). We include all available
brands and retailers in the data. In A20a the estimates are relative to the week of July 17, 2016 and in
Figure A20b the estimates are relative to the week of January 28, 2018. The dotted lines denote 95 percent
confidence intervals for the coefficient estimates for washers and dryers, based on standard errors clustered
by model.


                                                              61
Table A10: Difference-in-Difference Estimates: Price Effects of Washing Machine Tariffs -
           All Brands and All Retailers

                                       with model                    with model
                                      characteristics                fixed effect
                                        as controls                  as controls
                                   4 month     8 month           4 month     8 month
              Antidumping against China
                             0.0231  0.0406**                   0.0285**        0.0486***
              Washers
                            (0.0126) (0.0145)                    (0.0102)        (0.0116)
                             0.0141   0.0228*                   0.0203**        0.0375***
              Dryers
                            (0.0095) (0.0111)                    (0.0076)        (0.0084)
                             0.0122    0.0018                   0.0159***        0.0113*
              Refrigerators
                            (0.0077) (0.0095)                    (0.0048)        (0.0055)
                             -0.0004  -0.0178                     0.0025          -0.0068
              Dishwashers
                            (0.0090) (0.0107)                    (0.0056)        (0.0065)
              Safeguard tariffs 2018
                            0.0695***            0.0807***      0.0760***        0.0949***
              Washers
                             (0.0114)             (0.0137)       (0.0096)         (0.0095)
                            0.0741***            0.0765***      0.0825***        0.0929***
              Dryers
                             (0.0103)             (0.0126)       (0.0078)         (0.0078)
                              -0.0115             -0.0230*      -0.0148**       -0.0254***
              Refrigerators
                             (0.0079)             (0.0108)       (0.0049)         (0.0053)
                              -0.0023              -0.0073        0.0019           0.0087
              Dishwashers
                             (0.0088)             (0.0123)       (0.0060)         (0.0074)
              N                           3,955,951                      3,955,951
                  Notes: The table reports estimates for ∆4m               8m
                                                            event p̄C and ∆event p̄C defined in
                  equation (3) and the text below it. The right hand side of equation (3)
                  is a linear combination of the estimates from equation (2), in which we
                  include all available brands and retailers in the data. Standard errors in
                  parentheses. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.




                                                    62
                          Table A11: List of Product Characteristics

Washers
Total capacity           Dummies for less than 3.0, 3.0-4.0, 4.0-5.0, more than 5.0 cu. ft.
Steam                    Dummy for steam
Energy star              Dummy for energy star
Smart appliance          Dummy for smart appliance
Load type                Dummy for top load
Color                    Dummy for white
Digital display          Dummy for digital display
Chrome trim              Dummy for chrome trim
Cycles                   Dummies for less than 7 cycles, each of 8-14 cycles, 15 cycles or more
Washing mechanism        Dummy for agitator
Dryers
Total capacity           Dummies for less than 4.0, 4.0-5.1, 5.9-6.8, 7.0-7.8, no less than 8.0 cu. ft.
Steam                    Dummy for steam
Energy star              Dummy for energy star
Smart appliance          Dummy for smart appliance
Electric/gas             Dummy for gas
Color                    Dummy for white
Digital display          Dummy for digital display
Chrome trim              Dummy for chrome trim
Cycles                   Dummies for less than 7 cycles, each of 8-14 cycles, 15 cycles or more
Dishwashers
Width                    Dummy for 23 inches or more
Place setting capacity   Dummies for less than 10, 12-13, 14, 15, 16 or more, cu. ft.
Energy star              Dummy for energy star
Cycles                   Dummies for 1-4 cycles, 5 cycles, 6 cycles, 7 or more cycles
Color                    Dummies for black, white, stainless steel
Tub material             Dummy for stainless
Refrigerators
Width                    Dummies for less than 30, 30-35, 35-36, 36 or more inches
Total capacity           Dummies for less than 18, 18-20, 20-23, 23-27, 27 or more cu. ft.
Freezer capacity         Dummies for less than 5, 5-7, 7-9, 9 or more cu. ft.
Exterior dispenser       Dummy for exterior water and ice dispenser
Color                    Dummies for white, black, and stainless steel
Product type             Dummies for top freezer, bottom freezer, side by side, and french door
Number of doors          Dummy for 3 or more doors
Ranges
Cooktop elements         Dummies for 4 or less, 5, 6 or more
Oven capacity            Dummies for no more than 3.4, 3.5-4.45, 4.5-5.5, 5.6-6.5, no less than 6.6 cu. ft.
Cleaning type            Dummy for self-cleaning
Fuel type                Dummies for gas, electric, dual, and induction
Griddle                  Dummy for griddle
Double ovens             Dummy for double ovens
Convection               Dummy for convection
Fan                      Dummy for fan convection type
Color                    Dummies for stainless, white, black
Range type               Dummy for freestanding




                                                    63
                  Figure A21: Total Number of Available Models by Brand
                                               (a) Washers


            60
            40
            20
            0




             2013w1       2014w1      2015w1       2016w1        2017w1      2018w1    2019w1

                         Whirlpool        Maytag            LG            Samsung       GE




                                               (b) Dryers
            100
            80
            60
            40
            20
            0




             2013w1       2014w1      2015w1       2016w1        2017w1      2018w1    2019w1

                         Whirlpool        Maytag            LG            Samsung       GE




Notes: We count the number of models that appeared in a given week. 5 major retailers are included in the
count. Two vertical date lines are July 26, 2016 and February 6, 2018, which are discussed in the text.




                                                   64
