NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GIRLS, BOYS, AND HIGH ACHIEVERS
Angela Cools
Raquel Fernández
Eleonora Patacchini
Working Paper 25763
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25763

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2019

The authors thank Mike Gilraine, Ilyana Kuziemko, Núria Rodríguez-Planas, and Martin
Rotemberg for helpful suggestions. Fernández thanks the CV Starr Center for financial support.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Angela Cools, Raquel Fernández, and Eleonora Patacchini. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Girls, Boys, and High Achievers
Angela Cools, Raquel Fernández, and Eleonora Patacchini
NBER Working Paper No. 25763
April 2019
JEL No. I21,J16
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the effect of exposure to female and male “high-achievers” in high school on
the long-run educational outcomes of their peers. Using data from a recent cohort of students in
the United States, we identify a causal effect by exploiting quasi-random variation in the
exposure of students to peers with highly educated parents across cohorts within a school. We
find that greater exposure to “high-achieving” boys, as proxied by their parents' education,
decreases the likelihood that girls go on to complete a bachelor's degree, substituting the latter
with junior college degrees. It also affects negatively their math and science grades and, in the
long term, decreases labor force participation and increases fertility. We explore possible
mechanisms and find that greater exposure leads to lower self-confidence and aspirations and to
more risky behavior (including having a child before age 18). The girls most strongly affected are
those in the bottom half of the ability distribution (as measured by the Peabody Picture
Vocabulary Test), those with at least one college-educated parent, and those attending a school in
the upper half of the socioeconomic distribution. The effects are quantitatively important: an
increase of one standard deviation in the percent of “high-achieving” boys decreases the
probability of obtaining a bachelor's degree from 2.2-4.5 percentage points, depending on the
group. Greater exposure to “high-achieving” girls, on the other hand, increases bachelor's degree
attainment for girls in the lower half of the ability distribution, those without a college-educated
parent, and those attending a school in the upper half of the socio-economic distribution. The
effect of “high-achievers” on male outcomes is markedly different: boys are unaffected by “highachievers” of either gender.
Angela Cools
Cornell University
angelacools2010@gmail.com
Raquel Fernández
Department of Economics
New York University
19 West 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
raquel.fernandez@nyu.edu

Eleonora Patacchini
Cornell University
Uris Hall
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
ep454@cornell.edu

1

Introduction

The gender composition of a class, or of a group of competitors, or of a team has
been shown to affect both individual and group outcomes. These findings point to
potentially important consequences for issues ranging from effective teaching, to the
optimal structuring of teams, or to how best design evaluations in a variety of environments.
In this paper we attempt to move beyond the question of gender per se and instead focus
on investigating a particular characteristic: “high-achievers” of a given gender, which is
the term we use to refer to students with very highly-educated parents. Does greater
exposure to “high-achievers” of the same or different gender matter? To whom does it
matter? And why?
We investigate these questions in the context of high-school education using the
National Longitudinal Survey of Adolescent to Adult Health (Add Health) which was
designed to be a nationally representative sample of students in grades 7-12 in the US.
We make use of a predetermined student characteristic – whether at least one of their
parents has some post-college education – to proxy for a bundle of student characteristics.
Aggregating this number across students at the grade level by gender allows us to use
plausibly exogenous variation across grades within the same school in the proportions of
“high achievers” of each gender. Our main focus is on the longer-run education effects
of this variation. We find a very strong asymmetric gender effect: the proportion of
“high-achieving” boys has a statistically and economically significant negative effect on the
probability that girls will end up with a bachelor’s degree some 14 years later. There is
no similar asymmetric gender effect in the proportion of “high-achieving” girls: a greater
proportion of these does not affect outcomes for either gender and, furthermore, boys
are not affected by the proportion of male “high-achievers.” These results are robust
to a wide variety of controls and alternative specifications, including the proportion of
females in the class, the rank of the student, and the proportion of students of different
races/ethnicities.
We investigate potential heterogeneity and non-linear effects. Performing various
cuts of the data, we find that the negative effect of “high-achieving” boys on girls is
concentrated in the lower half of the ability distribution (as measured by a student’s
Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test score), among those with a (at least) college-educated
parent, and in the upper half of the socio-economic distribution of schools (as measured by
the fraction of students that are performing at or above grade level). We show that girls
exposed to a higher proportion of boys with highly-educated parents tend to have a lower
math and science grades in high school and to substitute away from a four-year college
degree into a two-year college. Furthermore, they have lower labor force participation
and higher fertility by the ages of 26-32.
We are especially interested in understanding the mechanisms that drive the asymmetric

1

gender results. Using questions in Add Health administered in the baseline year, we
show that a larger proportion of “high-achieving” boys is associated with lower selfconfidence/ambition in girls, an increase in their risky behavior, and a higher chance of
becoming a mother before age 18. The data does not permit us to identify the exact
mechanism by which this occurs. Although we call these students (and their parents)
“high achievers” a complex mix of their characteristics, and responses these, could be
responsible for the outcomes. For example, it could be that teachers pay less attention to
girls when faced with boys who perform well in school. Alternatively, it could be that
girls are more likely to feel discouraged in the face of competition from boys. Nor can
we rule out that their parents interact differently with schools, although this must occur
in such a way that is detrimental to girls. Thus, although we cannot isolate different
potential mechanisms, we do provide suggestive evidence regarding the pathways at work
as they affect girls’ propensity to engage in risky behavior and reduce their aspirations.
Our analysis relies on variation in the proportions of boys and girls that are “highachievers” across grades within the same school. As the baseline grade-level data is a
“snapshot” of a school (grades) in 1994, we also conduct our analysis with an alternative
definition of the main variable – the number of high achievers – as the proportion may
vary in a systematic fashion due to dropouts. We show the results are robust to this
alternative specification. In addition to a school-specific time trend, the paper conducts
a variety of checks to make sure that the variation obtained is “as good as random.” As
in Lavy and Schlosser (2011), we conduct Monte Carlo simulations in which we randomly
generate the post-college status of each student’s parents and compare the simulated vs
empirical standard deviation in each school. We also show that variation in the key peer
explanatory variables is not related, within a school, to a number of important individual
characteristics. Lastly, as suggested by Athey and Imbens (2017), we examine the extent
to which the results could have been obtained by chance by reassigning to each individual
the proportion of “high-achieving” peers from another grade within the same school,
keeping all other variables as in the data and then comparing the results of these placebo
tests with the estimated treatment coefficients.
Our paper is related to a growing literature on asymmetric gender effects in a variety
of contexts. Asymmetric gender effects have been identified, for example, in a series
of experiments by Niederle, Segal, and Vesterlund (2013). They show that in addition
to female subjects being less likely to enter competitive situations (tournaments) than
male subjects, the gender composition of the other competitors matters. Women are
markedly more likely to participate when the competition consists solely of other women.
Bordalo, Coffman, Gennaioli, and Shleifer (2018) show that, controlling for ability, a
female subject’s belief about the probability she answered a question correctly is more
affected by the gender stereotype about the category in which a question is asked (e.g.,
cars and sports vs cooking and art) than a male subject’s. Furthermore, when subjects
2

play a cooperative game with a partner in which each needs to decide how willing they
are to answer for the group, female subjects’ beliefs become even more stereotyped if their
partner is known to be male, leading them to decrease the probability with which they
are answer and reducing the overall performance of their group. Our results suggest that
the decline in self-confidence may be accentuated when faced with a signal of individual
performance, a conjecture that would be of interest to confirm in the lab.
In the school setting there is also evidence that gender composition matters. The
literature in this area, like ours, has mainly relied on quasi-random variation across cohorts
or grades within a school to study topics ranging from the effect of immigrant peers in 5th
grade on high-school outcomes in Israel (Gould, Lavy, and Paserman, 2009), to gender
roles and their intergenerational perpetuation (Olivetti, Patacchini, and Zenou, 2018;
Rodrı́guez-Planas, Sanz-de Galdeano, and Terskaya, 2018) to the long-run educational and
labor-market consequences of disruptive peers in elementary school in Florida (Carrell,
Hoekstra, and Kuka, 2018).1 Hoxby (2000b) exploits idiosyncratic variation in gender
and race composition of adjacent cohorts in Texas public schools and finds that a greater
share of female peers improves reading and mathematics test scores for both genders.
Using Israeli data and relying on variations in the proportion of female students across
adjacent cohorts within the same school, Lavy and Schlosser (2011) find that a greater
proportion of girls is associated with positive high-school outcomes for both sexes. On
the other hand, Black, Devereux, and Salvanes (2013), using Norwegian administrative
data, find that there are asymmetric gender effects: a larger proportion of females among
ninth-grade peers reduces males’ long-run educational attainment whereas it decreases
women’s rates of becoming a teenage mother and increases the likelihood that as adults
they work full time and their earnings. As the studies are based in different countries and
use different specifications, the difference in results could stem from a variety of sources
including short vs longer-run effects.
The papers closest to ours are Mouganie and Wang (2017) and Feld and Zölitz (2018)
as they too are concerned with both the gender of a peer and distinguishing its effect by
gender as well.2 Mouganie and Wang (2017) study high-school students in China and
1

See the excellent review of the literature in Handbook of Education chapter by Sacerdote (2011).
How high or low performing students affect various outcomes is the focus of a large literature. It
does not, however, distinguish necessarily between male and female peers nor on their differential gender
effects. The results of this literature are mixed. See, e.g., Imberman, Kugler, and Sacerdote (2012) that
finds that high school students in the top of the student distribution benefit most from the arrival of
high-performing peers (Katrina evacuees) and are the hurt by the arrival low-achieving peers whereas
Angrist and Lang (2004) find no significant impact of low-performing students from the Metropolitan
Council for Educational Opportunity desegregation program in Boston. Carrell, Fullerton, and West
(2009) find that higher-ability peers at the US Air Force Academy provide greater positive peer effects for
lower-ability students than for middle-ability students. Bifulco, Fletcher, Oh, and Ross (2014) study the
effects of the greater exposure to school peers with a college-educated mother, also using Add Health data.
Interestingly, they do not find any significant long-run effect on education but this may well be a result of
not distinguishing between male and female peers with a college educated mother. Lastly, Fischer (2017)
examines the impact of relatively high-achieving peers in an introductory chemistry classes at a large
2

3

find that high-performing male peers (defined by their performance on a national exam
in mathematics prior to their entry in high school which occurs in 10th grade) reduce
women’s likelihood of choosing a science track (relative to an arts track) for the remainder
of high school whereas high-performing female peers have the opposite effect. Feld and
Zölitz (2018) exploit the random assignment of first-year students within compulsory
courses to teaching sections in a Dutch business school. They show that having male
peers with higher pre-assignment GPA is associated with men taking more mathematical
courses. Women, on the other hand, choose to take fewer mathematical courses and are
less likely to choose a mathematically intensive major. Our analysis adds to these finding
by showing that greater exposure to “high-achieving” males not only influences women’s
fields of study but also their overall educational attainment. It has the advantage not
only of being nationally representative but also of showing that these effects are already
present in high school and have long-term consequences. Furthermore, and perhaps most
importantly, the nature of our data set allows us to explore some of the pathways by
which these effects occur (self-confidence and risk) and identify the characteristics of those
girls who are most likely to be negatively affected.
Our paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we present the data and sample selection.
In Sections 3 and 4, we detail the construction of the main variables and our identification
strategy. Section 5 is devoted to the main regression analysis. We explore possible
pathways for the effects in Section 6. Sections 7 explores heterogeneity in the results and
examines additional long-term consequences. In Section 8 we perform several robustness
checks and conclude in Section 9.

2

Data and Sample Selection

This analysis uses data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Adolescent to
Adult Health (Add Health).3 Add Health is a school-based longitudinal survey designed
to be nationally representative of students in grades 7-12. It examines students at a
representative set of 132 schools in the United States, beginning in the 1994-1995 school
year.4 Add Health contains both in-school and in-home survey components. First, between
public university. She finds that being in a chemistry class with more high-ability peers decreases the
likelihood that women complete a STEM degree whereas men are not affected. In this case as well, there
is no differentiation in the gender of these peers.
3
This research uses data from Add Health, a program project directed by Kathleen Mullan Harris and
designed by J. Richard Udry, Peter S. Bearman, and Kathleen Mullan Harris at the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, and funded by grant P01-HD31921 from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, with cooperative funding from 23 other federal
agencies and foundations. Special acknowledgment is due Ronald R. Rindfuss and Barbara Entwisle for
assistance in the original design. Information on how to obtain the Add Health data files is available on
the Add Health website (http://www.cpc.unc.edu/addhealth). No direct support was received from grant
P01-HD31921 for this analysis.
4
To select schools, Add Health used a stratified sampling design. High schools were chosen from strata
based on the following characteristics: region, urbanicity, school type, ethnicity, and size. If a school

4

September 1994 and April 1995, an in-school survey was issued to students in each of
the sample schools. Every student in attendance on the school’s survey day was asked to
complete an in-school questionnaire which included basic questions about the student’s
demographics (sex, age, race, nativity status) and information about the characteristics
including educational attainment of a mother figure (biological mother, stepmother, foster
mother, or adoptive mother) and father figure (biological father, stepfather, foster father, or
adoptive father) living in the student’s household (henceforth called “residential” parents).
A total of about 90,000 students completed this in-school questionnaire.
Following the conclusion of the in-school surveys, Add Health randomly selected a
subsample of 20,000 students from the roster of the sample schools for more detailed
interviews in the in-home sample. Approximately 17 male and 17 female students from
each grade level in each school were chosen for the core in-home sample.5 The core was
then supplemented with oversamples for particular populations of interest, defined by
ethnicity, presence of siblings in the sample, adoption status, and disability. Interviews
with the core and supplemental students took place between April and December 1995
in the students’ homes (Wave I).6 They included questions on parents’ background for
both residential parents (the mother and father figures living in the same household as
the student) and biological parents.
Wave I also include questions on students’ academic performance, attitudes, criminal
behavior, and other sensitive topics. At the beginning of the Wave I survey, students
were also asked to complete an abbreviated version of the Peabody Picture Vocabulary
Test (PVT), a test widely used to measure verbal ability.7 Interviewers also issued a
survey to the student’s residential parent, asking questions about attitudes and family
income, among other topics.8 Those individuals selected for the Wave I in-home sample
were re-interviewed in 1996 (Wave II), 2001-2002 (Wave III), and 2008 (Wave IV). In
these follow-up interviews, individuals were asked questions about their living situation,
health behaviors, daily activities, and, importantly, level of educational attainment to date.
refused to participate in the survey, another school from the same stratum was selected. Participating
high schools then assisted in the identification of feeder schools, typically a middle school, whose students
tend to attend the sample high schools.
5
At 2 large schools and 14 small schools, in-home interviews were administered to all students to
achieve a saturated sample.
6
The majority (92 percent) of Wave I interviews for individuals in our sample took place between April
1995 and August 1995. For these students, Wave I responses and information on peer characteristics are
from the same school year. For those interviewed between September and December, Wave I responses
are from the following school year. We include, therefore, an indicator for this in any regression with a
Wave I outcomes.
7
The Add Health PVT is a condensed version of the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test–Revised
(PPVT), a standard assessment of verbal ability used in the United States. Scores are standardized by age to a mean of 100 and standard deviation of 15 for each age group, and neither the
student nor the interviewer is made aware of the results of the test. For more information, see
http://www.cpc.unc.edu/projects/addhealth/design/wave1.
8
The interviewers attempted to interview the student’s resident mother. If unavailable, they interviewed
another adult in the household. Overall, 93 percent of parent interviews took place with a female parent.

5

Our analysis uses both Wave I (in-school and in-home survey) and Wave IV information.
All the information on school peers is obtained from the in-school survey. In addition
to information on educational attainment, our data also provides rich information on
behaviors and perceptions in adolescence, which enable us to inspect several mechanisms
for our results. Throughout the analysis we use Wave I in-home information on residential
rather than biological parents for consistency with the in-school sample (which only
collects information on residential parents).
After dropping students who were not followed through Wave IV and those that cannot
be matched with peer characteristics we also eliminated particular grades/schools (e.g.,
an all-male school, 7th and 8th graders from a school that doubles in size between 8th
and 9th grade) the final sample consists of 10,853 students (5899 females and 4954 males)
and 118 schools.9 Summary statistics for the Wave IV-weighted sample are reported by
sex in Table 1. On average, the students are almost 16 years old in July of 1995. About
two-thirds of our sample is Non-Hispanic White, 15-17 percent is Black, 10 percent is
Hispanic/Latino, and the remainder is Asian or other races. By the time of the Wave IV
survey (2008), the vast majority of students in our sample (94 percent of females and 91
percent of males) have achieved a high school diploma or GED, and about one third (35
percent of females and 28 percent of males) have completed a bachelor’s degree. Data
from the 2008 American Community Survey (ACS) that is re-weighted to match the age
distribution of the Add Health sample is also presented in Table 1.10 As shown, the Add
Health population is broadly similar to the U.S. population as calculated from the ACS.

3

The Main Variables

The objective of this paper is to study the impact of “high-achieving” girls and boys
on the long-run educational outcomes of their peers. In order to do so, we require a
variable that is plausibly exogenous to a student’s experience. This prevents one from
using grades as an outcomes as, for example, a high-ability student may encourage her
peers to study harder and thus raise their grades. In this case of reverse causality, an
association between peers’ achievement and an individual’s long-run outcomes may be due
to the individual’s own ability. We therefore turn to a measure that is determined before
individuals meet and interact with their fellow students at school: residential parents’
education.
9
See the Appendix for the exact details. The robustness section examines whether attrition is a
function of the main variables introduced in the next section and concludes that this is not a problem.
10
We exclude those from the ACS sample who immigrated to the United States after 1994 as immigrants
since 1994 would not have been in the Add Health sample.

6

3.1

Defining “High Achievers”

Parents’ educational attainment is usually determined before students enter school
and the literature finds a strong, positive relationship between an individual’s academic
achievement and the educational attainment of his or her parents.11 We next document
this link for individuals in our sample in two ways: via a student’s GPA and via a student’s
ability as measured by their PVT score. It is important to reiterate here that parental
education is not only a proxy for a student’s achievement but is also correlated with a
bundle of other characteristics. Thus, we cannot disentangle which features associated
with parental education are playing a critical role. Nonetheless, we think it is useful to
document the correlation between parental education and student achievement.
To measure achievement using a student’s GPA, we average a student’s self-reported
grades in the four subjects that are asked (English, History, Mathematics, and Science)
obtained during the Wave I interview.12 Table 2 shows the results of an OLS regression in
which the dependent variable is GPA and the main independent variables are indicators
of residential parental education.13 A residential parent’s education is coded as less
than high school, high school graduate (including a GED), some college if there is any
education past high school that does not result in college graduation, college graduate,
and post college if “any professional training beyond a four-year college or university.”
Students who do not know or refuse to answer are included via a dummy variable for
the presence of a missing value. If there is no residential mother (equivalently father),
all education dummies are given a value of zero and we include a dummy variable for
“mother (equivalently father) not in household.”
The first four columns of Table 2 are for girls; the last four are equivalent specifications
for boys. Columns (1)-(3) (respectively, (5)-(7) for males) include increasing number
of individual and family controls – first only residential parental education categories
(including a category for missing), then age, race, and family income, and lastly the
11

See, e.g., Davis-Kean (2005); Reardon (2011); and van Tetering, de Groot, and Jolles (2018).
For each subject, the student was asked to report the following grade categories: A, B, C, D or
lower, subject was not graded that way, or did not take this subject. We set A=4.0, B=3.0, C=2.0, D or
lower=1.0 and averaged across the four subjects. If the student reported that the subject was not graded
in this manner or did not take this subject (approximately 10 percent of the students), we do not include
that subject in the calculation of the student’s GPA.
13
Information on parental education is from the student’s responses in the Wave I survey. Students
were asked, for each residential parent, to select how far the parent went in their education: never went
to school; eighth grade or less; more than eighth grade, but did not graduate from high school; went to
a business, trade, or vocational school instead of high school; high school graduate; completed a GED;
went to a business, trade, or vocational school after high school; went to college, but did not graduate;
graduated from a college or university; professional training beyond a four-year college or university;
doesn’t know what level; doesn’t know if he/she went to school.
12

7

,

student’s PVT score as a control for individual ability.14 15 All specifications include
grade and school fixed-effects to control for different grading philosophies across schools
and also across grades. Lastly, specification (4) (respectively, (8) for males) includes
a school-specific linear time trend to account for trends in grading practices or student
composition at the school level.
As shown, having highly-educated residential parents is associated with a higher GPA
for both girls and boys. For girls, a mother with a post-college education – defined as
any education past college graduation – is associated with a GPA that is about 0.3-0.5
points higher relative to the baseline group of a mother without a high school degree.
A father with a post-college education is associated with a GPA that is 0.3-0.4 points
higher relative to the baseline group of a father without a high school degree. The results
are similar for boys: a mother with a post-college education is associated with a GPA
that is 0.2-0.4 points higher than the baseline group whereas a father with a post-college
education is associated with a GPA that is about 0.4-0.5 points higher than the baseline
group. These are sizable effects: ceteris paribus, they increase a girl’s GPA from a mean
of 2.9 to 3.2-3.4 and a boy’s GPA from a mean of 2.7 to 2.9-3.2.
Although we have included several individual controls in the regressions of student
achievement, note that if what one is interested is how other students react to high
achievers, it is not clear that these controls are relevant. That is, other students will not
care necessarily if a student is a high-achiever after controlling for, say, family income.
Nonetheless, it is of interest to note that the correlation between parental education and
achievement exists both with and without controls.
We next consider whether a parent with a post-college education predicts achievement
more strongly than any other levels of parental education. For both girls and boys, a
post-college mother is quantitatively more important than simply college. A post-college
rather than only-college father is also highly predictive for boys but not for girls. For the
latter, a college versus a post-college father is associated with roughly the same increase
in GPA. To show this rigorously, we perform F-tests for equality between the coefficients
on parents with post-college education and parents with only a college education. We
focus on two sets of coefficients: mother with college versus mother with post-college,
and father with college versus father with post-college. The equality p values are shown
14

Using information on the student’s month and year of birth, we create a variable for age in months
that reflects each student’s age in July 1995. Race controls include dummies for Black, Latino, Asian,
and other races. Students are classified as Latino if they report any Hispanic/Latino ethnicity. They are
classified as other races if they report more than one race (White, Black, Asian) or being of another race
outside of these three categories.
15
The Add Health parent survey asks the following question to collect family income information:
“About how much total income, before taxes did your family receive in 1994? Include your own income,
the income of everyone else in your household, and income from welfare benefits, dividends, and all other
sources.” The number is given in thousands and thus multiplied by 1000 before inclusion in the regression.
If family income is missing, we impute it at the average of that reported by parents of other Wave I
in-home survey students at their school and include a dummy for missing family income.

8

at the bottom of the table. The values are under 0.05 for mother post-college versus
mother college, and are under 0.01 for father post college versus father college for boys.
Consequently, we define a student as a “high-achiever” if at least one of their parents has
a post-college education.16
We can repeat this exercise using a larger sample – the in-school sample – but in that
case losing the information on household income and the student’s PVT score. In Table
3 we examine the predictive power of parental education on student achievement for this
sample. As can be seen from this table, the results are similar to those obtained for the
in-home sample: either parent post-college is the quantitatively most important education
level for a student’s GPA.
As a final check, in Table 4, we return to our main sample and examine the relationship
between a proxy for a student’s ability – their PVT score – and parental education. The
results are similar to the ones obtained for GPA. In this case, a girl with a post-college
mother is associated with a PVT score that is 7-9 points higher (more than half a standard
deviation of PVT scores as these are normalized to have a standard deviation of 15); a
boy with a post-college father has a 5-7 point higher PVT score.

3.2

Construction of the Main Variables

As discussed in the previous section, we call a student a “high achiever” if at least
one parent has a post-college education. Next, we construct a composite measure for the
extent to which a student faces or interacts with this type of student. A natural measure
to use for this is the fraction of students in the same grade who are “high achievers,” i.e.,
who have residential post-college parents. We use the in-school survey which records the
student’s response to the highest level of education attained by their residential father and
residential mother and create a dummy variable P Ci for student i that takes the value
one if either the residential mother or the residential father of student i has a post-college
education, i.e., obtained any education beyond a four-year college degree, and takes the
value of 0 otherwise. If a student either does not have a residential father/mother or
the information is missing, we impute that parent’s level of education using the other
parent’s education. For example, if the residential father’s education is missing, but the
residential mother has a high-school education, we impute a value for father post-college
by taking the average value of father post-college among students of the same gender and
and in the same school who also have a residential mother with a high-school education.17
We measure the fraction of male and female high achievers separately. Specifically,
we define the variables:
16

Not only is this variable a stronger predictor of high achievement than college graduate but its
interpretation is also clearer since the latter does not explicitly distinguish between a two and four-year
college whereas a parent is only classifed as post-college if they have gone beyond a four-year college.
17
See the Appendix for further details.

9

M Figs

n
1 X
=
P Cjgs ,
n
j(i)=1

F Figs

q
1 X
=
P Ckgs
q

(1)

k(i)=1

where j(i) = 1, ..., n indexes student i’s male peers and k(i) = 1, ..., q indexes student i’s
female peers in grade g and school s. Thus, M Figs (respectively, F Figs ) is the fraction of
male peers (respectively, female peers) in the same school and grade as i with at least one
post-college parent. Both M Figs and F Figs are the sample moments of the leave-one-out
distribution of students with a post-college parent belonging to a specific gender, grade,
and school. That is, for each student i, these variables capture the proportion of students
of each gender with a post-college parent computed from the school-grade distribution of
students by gender after eliminating student i from the distribution.

4

Empirical Model and Identification Strategy

This section presents the benchmark regression model and conducts several tests. In
particular, it reports the variation that exists once in the main variables net of fixed effects
and school time trends. It performs Monte Carlo simulations and balance tests.

4.1

The Regression Model

In Wave IV we observe individuals at ages 26-32, by which point individuals are likely
to have completed a substantial portion of their education.18 Hence, the main long-run
outcome that we are interested in studying and that is feasible given the nature of the
data is completion of a bachelor’s degree. We create a variable for “bachelor’s degree”
which equals 1 if the individual reports any of the following degrees: bachelor’s degree,
certificate from a 1- or 2-year post-baccalaureate academic program, master’s degree, PhD
degree or equivalent (EDD, DrPH, etc.), or professional doctorate (MD, JD, LLB, DDS,
etc.). The variable “bachelor’s degree” is set equal to 0 if the individual does not report
any of these degrees.
We estimate the following regression model:
yigs,t+1 = αg + βs + δs g + φ1 M Figs + φ2 F Figs + θXi,t + γZigs,t + εi,t+1

(2)

where i denotes a student, g denotes grade or cohort, s denotes school, and t denotes
time. yigs,t+1 is a dummy variable taking value 1 if, as of Wave IV (t + 1), the student has
obtained a bachelor’s degree. αg is a grade fixed effect, βs is a school fixed effect, and δs g
is a school-specific linear time trend (which is equivalent to a linear trend in grade level).
18

To the extent that younger individuals may still go on to finish college, this is controlled for by the
grade fixed effect.

10

The linear time trend is implemented by creating dummy variables by school that are set
equal to the student’s grade if they attend the given school, and 0 otherwise. We also
include a vector of controls for individual characteristics, Xi , and a vector of other peer
characteristics Zigs,t , as measured in Wave I. Finally, εi,t+1 are i.i.d., mean 0 innovations.
Our empirical strategy exploits idiosyncratic variation in exposure to high achievers
across different cohorts of high-school students within a given school, a common approach
in the literature.19 The grade fixed-effects control for initial differences across cohorts
whereas the school fixed-effects control for unobserved differences in average student
characteristics across schools as well as for aspects of school quality that are constant
across cohorts within a school. The main assumption we make is the usual one: we
assume that while parents may make decisions based on overall characteristics of a school,
they do not do so based on the specific characteristics of their child’s cohort within the
school. Thus, the variation due to differences in cohorts across schools can be treated as
quasi-random. To deal with the possibility that the average characteristics of a school may
be changing over time/grade, and thus that there may also be changes in selection over
time, we include a school linear time trend in all specifications. Thus, the quasi-random
variation is obtained from the deviation from this trend, rather than simply from the
deviation around the average cohort in the school.

4.2

Evidence in Support of the Identification Strategy

Our ability to exploit this identification strategy relies on there being sufficient residual
variation in the main variables. Table 5, panel (a), reports variation in the fraction of
male (female) “high achievers” (always using the leave-one-out distribution as described
earlier) by sex. As shown in the first row, the average of M F is 0.145 for females and
0.143 for males (that is, about 14.3-14.5 percent of male peers have a post-college parent),
and the standard deviation is about 0.10. After removing grade fixed effects and the
school time trend, the residual variation is about 0.02, accounting for just under one-fifth
of the overall raw variation for both genders. The average of F F is slightly lower, about
0.12, and the standard deviation is approximately 0.10.20 The residual variation in F F of
0.02 accounts for about one-fifth of the overall variation as well.
Next, to test whether the variation we observe in our main variables is “as good
as random” we perform Monte Carlo simulations.21 Specifically, for each student i in
our sample we randomly generate the post-college status of i’s parents using a binomial
19

See, e.g., Hoxby (2000a, 2000b); Angrist and Lang (2004); Gould et al. (2009); Lavy and Schlosser
(2011); Lavy, Paserman, and Schlosser (2011); Olivetti et al. (2018); and Merlino, Steinhardt, and
Wren-Lewis (2019).
20
This could be due to girls with more-educated parents having a greater tendency to attend all-girls
schools.
21
See, e.g., Lavy and Schlosser (2011) and Rodrı́guez-Planas et al. (2018).

11

distribution function with p equal to the fraction of students of the same gender as i who
have post-college parents in that student’s school. We then compute the within-school
standard deviation, by gender, using the residuals from regressions of M F and F F on
school fixed effects, grade fixed effects, and school-specific time trends. We repeat this
process 1,000 times to obtain an empirical 90 percent confidence interval for the standard
deviation in M F and F F by gender, for each school.22
Figure 1 shows the simulated standard deviation of M F and F F for females (panels
a and c) and males (panels b and d). The upper and lower edges of the bars represent
the 5th and 95th percentiles of the simulated standard deviation. The dot represents the
empirical standard deviation. As shown in the figure, about 90 percent of our schools have
a standard deviation of M F and F F within the 90 percent confidence interval obtained
from our simulations for both males and females.23
Following Lavy and Schlosser (2011), we next investigate the validity of the identification strategy by examining whether the variation in the main variables is related to
the variation in a number of predetermined student characteristics. We consider family
income, family social structure (as captured by whether the mother/father lives with
the student), the student’s ability (as measured by the Picture Vocabulary Test), race
(whether or not the student is Black), and age in months. We run separate regressions with
each of these as alternate dependent variables and the main variables as the independent
variables, always including grade and school fixed effects and time trends. Note that there
is a mechanical negative correlation between girls’ F F (boys’ M F ) and own parent’s
post-college status as a result of the leave-one-out strategy. For example, a girl with a
post-college parent will have a lower F F than her peers without a post-college parent
since the former’s parents are not included in the grade average of F F . To eliminate this
source of bias, we control for own parent’s post-college status in the regression with girls
and F F (respectively, boys and M F ). As shown in Table 6, only one of the estimated
correlations is significantly different from zero at the five percent level, which is slightly
less than what would be expected by chance. This evidence mitigates concerns regarding
systematic differences due to sorting across grades within the same school along observable
22

We perform this exercise only for schools with at least 3 grades (71 schools); for those with fewer
grades, the variation in our main variables is absorbed by the school fixed effect and its time trend.
Specifically, M F necessarily takes the same value for all girls in the same grade and school; likewise for
boys and F F . As a result, variation in M F for females and F F for males will be completely absorbed by
the school fixed effect and the time trend in schools with fewer than three grades. M F for males and F F
for females take on separate values for students in the same grade and school due to the leave-one-out
nature of the variable construction.
23
Specifically, 96 percent (females) and 90 percent (males) of schools have a standard deviation of M F
falling within the estimated 90 percent confidence interval, and 90 percent (females) and 92 percent
(males) have a standard deviation of F F falling within the estimated 90 percent confidence interval.

12

students’ characteristics.24,25 Taken together, the results in Tables 5 and 6, along with
Figure 1 lend support to the identification strategy.

5

Results

This section presents the benchmark results. In response to the potential concern that
the main results could be driven by dropouts, it then explores an alternative measure of
exposure that relies on numbers rather than proportions. Lastly, to assess the likelihood
that the results could have occurred by chance, it conducts a simulation exercise.

5.1

The Benchmark Results

Table 7 reports the estimation results of the model in equation (2), with the completion
of a bachelor’s (four-year college) degree as the dependent variable. The results are shown
with increasing controls and all specifications include grade fixed-effects, school fixedeffects, and a school time trend.26 Standard errors are clustered at the school level. The
first six columns are for girls; the last six are for boys.
In column (1), we include only grade and school fixed effects and linear time trends.
In column (2), we add controls for individual characteristics and parental background.
We include age in months, an indicator for foreign born, race, the student’s PVT score,
parental education (coded as discussed previously), an indicator for mother or father
not in the household, and the log of household income. Looking across columns, note
that, conditional on student grade and school, age in months is negatively associated
with attainment of a bachelor’s degree. This may in part reflect students who have been
held back as these tend to complete college at lower rates (or students who have skipped
grades could be completing at higher rates). An individual’s foreign-born status has a
positive association with college completion.
As expected, both higher parental education and higher parental income increase the
likelihood of completing college, as does a higher PVT score. In column (3) (respectively,
column (9) for males) we include the PVT percentile rank of the student in addition to
24

Altonji, Elder, and Taber (2005) suggest that the degree of selection on observables can provide a
good indicator of the degree of selection on unobservables. In light of this argument, the evidence of no
correlation from Table 6 support the notion that our model specification identifies an exogenous source of
variation.
25
We can also examine whether the residual variations in M F and F F are related. To test this, we
regress the fraction of females with a post college parent on the fraction of males with a post college
parent, as well as grade and school fixed effects, and linear time trends. The correlation between the two
variables is 0.12 and statistically insignificant.
26
All specifications include a dummy for whether the Wave I interview was completed between April
and August 1995 (the 1994-1995 school year) or between September and December 1995 (the 1995-1996
school year). Since the in-school survey was completed during the 1994-1995 school year, this dummy
accounts for whether students answer the in-home survey with respect to contemporaneous peers or the
peer composition in the prior school year.

13

their PVT score, where the rank is calculated relative to the other students in the in-home
sample from the same grade and school as only these students have PVT reported. The
PVT rank has been shown in previous literature to affect educational attainment and
career aspirations [see Elsner and Isphording (2017, 2018)].27 As can be seen, the PVT
rank is positively and significantly associated with college graduation for women (but
not for men which may be a function of the sample size over which rank is calculated).
The coefficients on the main variables are unaffected by its inclusion. In column (4)
(respectively, column (10) for men), we include the fraction of peers who are female as the
literature has tended to find that students perform better when the fraction of boys is
smaller (see, e.g., Lavy and Schlosser, 2011) and that long-run educational attainment
increases with the fraction of same-gender peers (Black et al., 2013). The results here
are in agreement with (Black et al., 2013): a higher fraction of girls increases long-run
education outcomes for girls and decreases them for boys. In column (5) (respectively,
column (11) for men), we include other peer variables: the fractions foreign born, Black,
Asian and Latino.28 These fractions are calculated in the same “leave-one-out” fashion
described earlier for the main variables.
Finally, in column (6) (respectively, column (12) for males), we remove the individual’s
PVT score but keep all other control variables. The PVT score is generally viewed as a
measure of innate ability and the convention in the literature is to include it in the set
of baseline individual controls.29 However, to the extent that PVT measures content or
skills learned in the classroom, it could be an endogenous outcome and should thus be
excluded. We thus show the results without the PVT score to allay possible concerns
about its endogeneity. Note that once it is omitted, the coefficient on foreign born is
insignificant, as would be expected if the test requires proficiency in English.
As can be seen clearly in this table, across specifications there is a great deal of stability
in the magnitude of the estimated coefficients on all variables. Across all specifications, a
greater fraction of “high-achieving” male peers decreases the likelihood of a girl completing
a bachelor’s degree. The effect is sizable: using the most complete specification (column
27

We follow Elsner and Isphording (2017, 2018) and first calculate the absolute rank of each student
relative to others in her grade and school (with the worst-performing student having a value of 1) before
converting into a percentile to render the measure comparable across samples of different sizes. To
convert absolute rank to a percentile rank, the following formula is used: Percentile Rank=(Absolute
Rank-1)/(Number of Students in the Same Grade and School -1). Thus, the percentile rank ranges from
0 (the worst student) to 1 (the best student).
28
Students report their race and ethnicity in the in-school survey. Individuals are classified as Hispanic
if they report their ethnicity as Hispanic/Latino. Individuals are given a race/ethnicity of other if they
report multiple races, do not report a race, or report an “other” race (not Black, White, or Asian). There
are a number of students who do not report their foreign born status. To construct the fraction of peers
who are foreign born, we impute the missing values by using the average fraction foreign born among
students of the same race/ethnicity in the same grade and school. Bifulco, Fletcher, and Ross (2011)
find that a higher fraction of Black and Hispanic peers is associated with worse reported student-teacher
relationships and an increase in disruptive behaviors.
29
See, e.g., Bifulco et al. (2011); Elsner and Isphording (2017); Olivetti et al. (2018).

14

5), an increase in M F by a standard deviation (2.0 percentage points) is associated with
a 2.2 percentage point decrease in the probability that these girls go on to complete a
four-year college degree by Wave IV.30 The effect of female high-achievers, on the other
hand, while positive is statistically insignificant. The results are radically different for
males. The effect of the fraction of “high-achieving” males on males’ college completion,
while positive for the most part, is not statistically different from zero. The effect of
“high-achieving” female peers again is positive and insignificant.
As shown in columns (6) and (12), excluding the PVT score as an individual control
leaves the results unchanged.31 Since the results do not differ substantially with or without
the PVT score, we follow the convention in the literature and focus on specification (5).
Furthermore, as shown previously in Table 6, there is no evidence that the PVT score
covaries with M F or F F .

5.2

Alternative Measure of Exposure to “High Achievers”

The results above show that “high-achieving” boys have a negative influence on girls’
long-run education outcomes. This is a strong and intriguing result since, if anything,
one might expect their effect to be positive. A potential concern is that the variation
in the fraction of high achievers could be driven by variation in the number of dropouts
across grades in a school. Dropouts tend to have parents with relatively lower levels
of education, and therefore a higher-than-average number of dropouts in a grade would
mechanically generate a disproportionately high fraction of “high achievers.”32 A high
value of M F (or F F ) could thus reflect a high number of “bad boys” (or “bad girls”) in
previous years rather than a high number of “good boys” (or “good girls”). In that case,
the correct interpretation of the result would be the opposite of the conclusion we offered:
it would be that having been previously in a grade with a disproportionately large number
of future male dropouts is bad for girls. We deal with this important concern in a variety
of ways.
First, to the extent that the dropout rate results in linear trend in the main variables,
this issue is taken care of in the school time trend. To the extent that it does not, we
can eliminate the ambiguity introduced by relying on proportions and use the number of
“high achievers” rather than the fraction of these. The number of “high achievers” is not
affected by variation in the number of dropouts. Thus, we define, for each student i in
grade g and school s, the number of “high achievers” of a given sex (i.e, the number of
30

Whenever the effect of a standard deviation change in a variable is considered, it is the standard
deviation net of fixed effects and of time trend.
31
The sample size increases as there were around 250 observations, by gender, dropped because of
missing PVT scores.
32
For example, among ninth graders in our sample interviewed before September 1995, all those with a
post-college parent are in school the following year. In contrast, 96.7% of those without a post-college
parent are in school the following year.

15

students of a given gender with a post-college parent):
M Nigs =

n
X

P Cjgs ,

F Nigs =

q
X

P Ckgs

(3)

k(i)=1

j(i)=1

where j(i) = 1, ..., j indexes student i’s male peers and k(i) = 1, ..., q indexes i’s female
peers. Therefore, M Nigs (equivalently, F Nigs ) is the number of male peers (equivalently,
female peers) in the same school and grade as i who are high achievers. As before, both
M Nigs and F Nigs are the sample moments of the leave-one-out distribution of the students
with a post-college parent belonging to a specific grade and school. Table table:variation,
panel(b) reports variation in the number of male (female) “high achievers” (always using
the leave-one-out distribution as described earlier).
To facilitate the interpretation of the coefficients on the main variables, we perform an
inverse hyperbolic sine transformation on M N and F N . This allows the coefficients φ1
and φ2 to be interpreted as measuring the effect of a percentage change in M N or F N ,
respectively, and, unlike logs, be defined at zero.33 We use:
yigs,t+1 = αg + βs + δs g + φ1 IHS(M Nigs ) + φ2 IHS(F Nigs ) + θXi,t + γZigs,t + εi,t+1 (4)
where all variables are as defined previously. The identification tests (the Monte Carlo
simulation and the check on the balance in other peer variables) for M N and F N are in
the Appendix and provide evidence that the variation in these variables is random after
controlling for fixed effects and time trends.
Table 8 reports the estimation results of regression model (4) using M N and F N as
the main explanatory variables and the completion of a bachelor’s degree as the dependent
variable. As noted, we use the inverse hyperbolic sine of M N and F N – our main
explanatory variables – and consequently of all peer variables such as the number of
Asians, Blacks, and Hispanics.34 The table follows the same format as Table 7: the first
six columns report the results for females; the last six columns do the same for males. As
before, all columns include grade fixed effects, school fixed effects, and school linear time
trends. Standard errors are clustered at the school level.
Analogously to the results in Table 7, we find that “high-achieving” males reduce
females’ college completion. Across the columns, the effect of M N on the proportion of
girls who graduate from college stays remarkably constant. Different from Table 7, we
now find a statistically significant positive effect of the number of “high-achieving” girls
33

The inverse hyperbolic sine of x is defined as: log(x + (1 + x2 )0.5 ) [see, e.g., Burbidge, Magee, and
Robb (1988)].
34
We use number rather than fraction for the same reason that we turned to numbers to measure
“high-achieving” peers, i.e., the concern that the results may be driven by selection into dropping out/being
absent. The only exception is for percent female. We kept this as a percent as including the number of
girls would transform our main variable into a percentage again.

16

on the outcomes of other girls. Interestingly, the coefficient on the fraction of girls in the
grade becomes insignificant. As before, the effect of own-parent education, household
income, and PVT score are positive and significant, as expected, as is (for girls) the
PVT rank. For boys, the impacts of both M N and F N are positive but statistically
insignificant.
The magnitudes implied by the estimated coefficients on M N for girls are again
substantial. On average, a one standard-deviation increase in the number of “highachieving” boys (2.7) from a mean of 16.4 is associated with about a 1.4 percentage point
decrease in women’s college graduation. Since roughly 35 percent of women in our sample
complete a bachelor’s degree, a one standard-deviation increase in M N is associated with
about a 4 percent decrease in the proportion of women who attain bachelor’s degrees.
Lastly, in addition to demonstrating that the results are robust to the use of numbers,
rather than fractions, of “high achievers” one can also test directly whether the variation
in M F and F F is driven by dropouts. One way to do this is to examine the correlation
between the fraction of boys with post-college parents, net of fixed effects and school
time trend, and the number of boys in the grade (again net of fixed effects and time
trend). If higher levels of M F were driven by higher dropout-rates of boys with lesseducated parents, we would expect a negative and significant relationship between these
two variables. Instead, the correlation is 0.13. The same exercise but for fraction of
girls with post-college parents and the number of girls yields a correlation of 0.05. This
exercise provides further evidence that the variation in the main variables is not driven by
variation in dropouts.
Since the results are robust to using the main variables expressed both as fractions
and as numbers and given that there is not a negative correlation between the proportion
of “high achievers” of a given gender and the total number of individuals of the same
gender, we henceforth restrict the remainder of the analysis to M F and F F .

5.3

Placebo Tests

We next use a simulation exercise, as described in Athey and Imbens (2017), to study
the likelihood that the results obtained could have occurred by chance. For both the
fraction and number specifications of the main variables, we calculate the likelihood of
obtaining the observed treatment effects by chance by generating randomness in the
exposure of individuals to “high-achieving” students. We do this by re-assigning to each
individual in the sample the M F of a random grade within the same school, keeping all
other variables (both own and those of one’s peers) at their true levels. We repeat this
procedure 1,000 times, and run the fullest specification of Table 7 using M F and F F as
the key explanatory variables.
The distributions of the estimated coefficients on M F and F F , by gender, are shown

17

in Figure 2. The vertical line in each graph indicates the estimated treatment effect we
obtained in Table 7. The share of estimates that is larger in absolute value than the
dashed line (actual treatment) represents the randomization-based p-value. As can be
seen in the figure, the estimated coefficient of M F for girls is larger in absolute value
than any of the randomization-based estimates, providing evidence that this is unlikely to
have occurred by chance. The share of estimates of F F that is larger in absolute value
than the line (actual treatment) is 0.27. For boys, the share of estimates that is larger in
absolute value than the estimated coefficient for M F is 0.66 and of F F is 0.46.35

6

Exploring Possible Mechanisms

We next explore mechanisms that may be responsible for our most striking result: the
negative effect of “high-achieving” boys on their female peers’ probability of graduating
from college. Although we cannot determine the exact mechanism (e.g., do teachers
pay more attention to “high-achieving” boys to the detriment of girls? Are girls more
discouraged when they face greater competition from “high-achieving” boys? etc.), we are
able to explore various pathways that lead to girls achieving a worse long-run education
outcome.

6.1

Two vs Four-Year College

Having established that girls exposed to greater levels of “high-achieving” boys are
less likely to graduate with a bachelor’s degree, we next ask what level of education they
attain. A natural possibility is that they obtain a different type of post-secondary degree
such as a vocational or associate’s degree. The latter is a two-year post-high-school
degree, usually obtained from a community college. These degrees represent a level of
education greater than a high-school degree but less than a bachelor’s degree.
In Table 9, column (1) (respectively, column 3 for men), we use the most complete
specification of Table 7 but with the dependent variable equal to 1 if the individual has
a vocational or associate’s degree as her highest level of education. This implies that
the individual reported that they had a “certificate or degree from a 1-, 2-, or 3-year
vocational/technical program (after high school)” or an associate’s degree.36 As shown,
girls exposed to “high achievers” are more likely to compete a vocational or associate’s
degree, substituting this for a bachelor’s degree basically one for one as the absolute
35

Repeating this exercise for M N and F N , the results by gender are shown in Figure 3. The results
for M N for females are similar to those obtained for M F : the estimated treatment coefficient is larger in
absolute value than any of the placebo estimates. For F N , the estimated treatment coefficient is larger in
absolute value than about 96% of the placebo estimates. As expected, the randomization-based estimates
of the treatment effects for both M N and F N for boys are likely to be obtained by chance.
36
The variable is coded as 0 if the individual reports a degree from a vocational program lasting less
than 1 year.

18

magnitude is similar and the sign is opposite to that obtained for the completion of a
bachelor’s degree. This indicates that “high-achieving” males influence the decision about
the type of degree to pursue rather than the decision to pursue any education after high
school.
Finally, we can consider the impact of “high achievers” on the probability of high-school
completion. In column (2) (respectively, column (4) for males), the dependent variable
is set equal to 1 if the individual reports their highest level of education as “high-school
graduate” or greater. As shown, there is no impact of either the proportion of “high
achievers” on high-school completion for either girls or boys.

6.2

GPA

Why should greater exposure to “high-achieving” boys lead girls to switch from a
bachelor’s to a junior college degree? One possibility is that greater exposure to these
boys may reduce girls’ grades. This may happen mechanically if teachers conform to
a fixed grade distribution and, for example, only give out grades of “A” to some fixed
percent of the class. In that case, however, we would expect a symmetric effect on boys
from greater exposure to “high-achieving” girls. Alternatively, the presence of these boys
may direct teachers’ attention away from female students or simply discourage the latter’s
efforts, resulting in lower grades.
In column (1) of Table 10 (respectively, column (5) for boys), we repeat the main
specification with the student’s average GPA in Wave I as the dependent variable. As
shown, “high-achieving” males are associated with a negative but statistically insignificant
impact on GPA for girls whereas “high-achieving” females have a positive and statistically
insignificant effect. For boys, the signs of these two variables are positive, but they are
both insignificant at conventional levels.
Turning to subject-specific grades, we find that “high-achieving” boys have a significant
negative effect on girls’ math and science grades, with a one standard-deviation increase
in M F decreasing female math grades by 0.05 points, or 5 percent of a standard deviation.
These boys also negatively impact females’ science grades, with a similar magnitude
associated with a one-standard deviation increase in their proportion as for math grades.37
There is no statistically significant effect of either peer variable on boys’ grades in math
or science.
The results above are suggestive of findings in Bordalo et al. (2018). Their set of
experiments show that, for a given level of difficulty, the greater the average performance
gender gap in a domain, the less confident girls are that their answers are correct. Boys,
on the other hand, are not affected. In our setting, a similar phenomenon may be taking
37
Students may not be taking all subjects, but we do not find a significant effect of M F on girls’
probability of taking any of the four subjects.

19

place. Faced with a greater proportion of “high-performing” boys, girls may become less
self-confident about their own ability in traditionally male-dominated fields such as math
and science. More generally, these high-school girls may become more discouraged or
think themselves less competent which could then affect their actual performance.
Our results also complement those in Feld and Zölitz (2018) and Mouganie and
Wang (2017) that find that high-performing male peers reduce females’ completion of
mathematics and/or science courses. Feld and Zölitz (2018) study outcomes of random
assignment of students to sections in the first year of study in a Dutch business school,
finding that women in sections with men with a higher average GPA (as measured prior
to the start of the course) tend to choose a mathematical type major less frequently.
Being in a section in which women have a high average GPA does not affect either men or
women’s choice of major, on the other hand. Mouganie and Wang (2017) study high-school
students in China and find that high-performing male peers in tenth grade (defined as
those scoring in the top 20 percent in the national high-school-entrance mathematics
exam) reduce girls’ likelihood of choosing a science track relative to an arts track for the
remainder of high school.

6.3

Self Confidence and Aspirations

We next turn to psychological mechanisms such as self-confidence and aspirations/ambition
more directly related to college attendance. For this, we can use three questions in Add
Health. First, from the question “On a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 is low and 5 is high, how
much do you want to go to college?”, we create the variable “Want College”, which equals
1 if the student reports that they want to go to college as a 5 and equals 0 otherwise.38
Second, from the question “On a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 is low and 5 is high, how likely
is it that you will go to college?” we create the variable “College likely” which equals 1 if
the student says the likelihood that they go to college is a 5 and equals 0 otherwise.39
Finally, from the question “Compared with other people your age, how intelligent are
you?” (answers are: moderately below average, slightly below average, about average,
slightly above average, moderately above average, extremely above average), we create
the variable “Very intelligent” which equals 1 if the student reports that their intelligence
level is “moderately above average” or “extremely above average” relative to others their
own age and equals 0 otherwise.40
Since the above indicators of confidence and motivation are highly correlated, we use
38

In our sample, 75 percent of girls and 68 percent of males rate the amount that they want to go to
college as a 5.
39
In our sample, 61 percent of girls and 50 percent of boys answer 5. We also tried classifying the
dependent variable as 1 if the individual answers either 4 or 5 for this question, with similar results.
40
The results are similar with a dependent variable equal to 1 only if the individual answers that she is
“extremely above average”. Overall, 33 percent of females and 35 percent of males in our sample rate
their intelligence as “moderately above average” or “extremely above average”.

20

factor analysis to reduce the dimensionality of the dependent variables.41 We perform
factor analysis separately for males and females on the set of variables described above
and use the first factor (the only one with an eigenvalue greater than 1) as an index of
confidence and motivation. Table 11 shows the variance explained by the first two factors,
their eigenvalues, and the factor loadings. As shown, the measures of desire to attend
college and likeliness of attending college load most strongly. By construction, the index
has a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1.
Column (1) in Table 12 reports the results of using the main specification with the
confidence index as the dependent variable. As shown in the table, a one standard
deviation increase in the proportion of “high-achieving” boys decreases girls’ confidence
and motivation by about 3 percent of a standard deviation; it has no effect on boys.42
The effect of “high-achieving” girls is positive but statistically insignificant for both boys
and girls irrespective of the specification of the main variable.

6.4

Risky Behavior

Another channel that can affect the ability and desire to attend and graduate from
college is the extent to which students engage in risky behavior. As shown by Elsner and
Isphording (2018), students with lower-ranked PVT scores relative to their peers are more
likely to engage in risky behavior.43 We can use behavioral questions asked in Wave I
to examine whether “high achievers” influence the extent to which individuals engage in
risky behavior such as drug and alcohol use, unprotected sex, and smoking among others.
Since many of the indicators of risky behavior are highly correlated, we use factor
analysis to reduce the dimensionality of the dependent variables. Using behavioral
questions from Wave I, we consider the following outcomes: “any alcohol”, which equals
1 if the individual has ever had more than a “couple of sips” of alcohol and equals 0
otherwise; “any cigarettes,” which equals 1 if the individual has ever smoked cigarettes
and equals 0 otherwise; “any marijuana,” which equals 1 if the individual has smoked any
marijuana in the past 30 days and equals 0 otherwise; “binge drinking,” which equals 1 if
the individual has had 5 or more drinks “in a row” in the past year and equals 0 otherwise;
“drunk,” which equals 1 if the individual reports being drunk in the past year and equals
0 otherwise; “fight,” which equals 1 if the individual reports getting in a “serious physical
fight” in the past year and 0 otherwise; “unprotected sex,” which equals 1 if the individual
did not use any form of birth control the most recent time she had sex and 0 otherwise;
41

Factor analysis is an orthogonal transformation that converts a set of correlated variables into a fewer
number of orthogonal variables. Each of the confidence and motivation outcomes is then viewed as a
function of the “latent” variables reflected in the factors.
42
The results for each of the variables in the index separately are shown in Appendix Table 2.
43
The authors did not distinguish effects by gender either of the individual or their peers. As can be
seen, both the gender of the individual and her peers seems to matter – only “high-achieving” male peers
affect girls’ risky behavior.

21

and arrest before 18 which equals 1 if the individual was arrested before age 18 and 0
otherwise.44,45
We perform factor analysis separately for males and females on the set of risky
behaviors described above and use the first two factors as indices of risky behavior (both
have eigenvalues greater than 1).46 Table 13 shows the variance explained by the first
two factors, their eigenvalues, and the factor loadings. As shown, the various measures of
alcohol use load most strongly for both girls and boys for the first factor (the first index
of risky behavior). Physical fights and arrests load most strongly for the second factor.
Lastly, we explore an additional measure of behavior that may make college less likely:
having a child before age 18. Wave IV asks individuals about the date (month and year)
of each birth. We create a dummy variable for whether the individual first had a child
before 18 years of age and set it equal to one if yes and to zero otherwise. In the sample,
7 percent of girls and 2 percent of boys reported having a child before age 18.
Table 12 reports the results using the full specification as usual. As shown in columns
(2) and (3), exposure to a greater proportion of “high-achieving” boys increases girls’ risky
behavior as measured by index 1 (with no significance for the index 2). Furthermore, as
shown in column (4), greater exposure also increases the probability of having a child
before age 18. A one standard-deviation increase in M F is associated with an increase
of almost 1 percentage point in this probability. F F , on the other hand, decreases the
first index of risky behavior (associated with drinking) but increases the second index
(associated with fighting and arrests) and the probability of having a child before age 18.
This effect could be driven by “high-achieving” boys lowering girls’ ability rank, as Elsner
and Isphording (2018) find that lower PVT rank leads to greater risky behavior. To see
whether this is the case, Table 12 repeats the analysis including a control for PVT rank
calculated in the manner described in Section 5. The results given in Appendix Table 4
are very similar to those without rank control.
For boys, there is no significant impact of “high-achieving” boys as shown in columns
(5)-(8). The effect of greater exposure to ”high-achieving” girls is positive and significant:
it reduces risky behavior as measured by both indices and also the likelihood of having a
child before age 18.
Altogether, we take this as evidence that a possible pathway by which “high-achieving”
boys affect girls is via increasing the latter’s propensity to engage in risky behavior
including having a child before the age of 18. Exactly why this happens, as discussed
previously, we cannot determine as it may be a reaction to either teacher or student
44

Since there is no question on arrests in Wave I, we use the Wave IV question: “How many times were
you arrested before your 18th birthday?”, and create a dummy equal to 1 if the individual was arrested
before age 18.
45
The means of these variables are reported in the base of Appendix Table 3.
46
The loadings are very similar for girls and boys.

22

behavior.47

7

Heterogeneous Effects and Further Outcomes

The previous section showed that decreased confidence/aspirations and increased
risky behavior were possible pathways leading girls to have worse long-run educational
outcomes when exposed to a greater fraction of “high-achieving” boys in high school. We
next examine heterogeneity in the main results, both with respect to individual/family
characteristics and those of a school, as this will allow us to increase our understanding of
the mechanisms at play. We also consider other long-run outcomes.

7.1

Heterogeneity

Individual ability and family background are strongly associated with the probability
of graduating from college. To examine how these attributes matter we can split the
sample according to (i) individual PVT score and (ii) parents’ education levels. For
PVT scores, we divide the sample into at-or-below the median and above the median
PVT.48 For parental education, we divide the sample into students who have at least one
residential parent with any kind of college degree or higher levels of education than this,
and those students whose parents have lower levels of education than a college degree.49
Table 14 displays the results. As can be seen in columns (1) and (2), higher levels of
M F reduce the likelihood that girls will graduate with a bachelor’s degree if their PVT is
below the median. Specifically, a one standard deviation increase in M F (0.016 for girls
with below-median PVT, always net of fixed effects and time trend) decreases bachelor’s
degree attainment by 2.3 percentage points for this group. This is a very large effect: 21
percent of girls in this group on average graduate with a bachelor’s degree so this is over a
10 percent decrease. The effect on girls with an above-median PVT score is negative but
not statistically significant.50 A higher proportion of “high-achieving” girls, on the other
hand increases college completion for below-median PVT females. From the magnitude
of the coefficients, it is clear that an equal proportion of male and female “high-achievers”
would have essentially a zero net effect on these girls. For girls with an above-median
47

If we include the measures of risky behavior or early motherhood as additional controls in our
main regression with bachelor’s degree as the dependent variable, the point estimate of M F is reduced
in magnitude but remains significant. These regressions do not have a straightforward interpretation,
however, these controls are themselves endogenous variables and hence we omit them.
48
The median PVT score for females is 100 and we use this cutoff for both males and females to
construct the samples.
49
That is, if the student answers that either residential parent “graduated from a college or university”
or has “professional training beyond a four-year college or university”, this is coded as college degree for
the purpose of this question.
50
A Wald test, however, is unable to reject equality of the coefficients on M F across columns (1) and
(2) (p value=0.30).

23

PVT score, there is no statistically significant effect from female “high-achievers.”51 This
result is consistent with research suggesting that lower-ability females may be particularly
positively influenced by higher-performing friends.52 As can be seen in columns (7) and
(8), there is no statistically significant effect of “high achievers” of either gender on boys.
Turning to parental education, we use the information on the highest level of education
obtained by the residential mother and residential father as explained previously.53
Contrasting column (3) with column (4), it is clear that the negative impact of “highachieving” boys is concentrated among girls with a college-educated parent; there is
no effect on the other group of girls. The magnitude of the estimate for girls with a
college-educated parent is twice the one we obtained previously for the entire sample. A
one standard-deviation increase in M F (2.1 percentage points for this sample) leads to a
4.5 percentage point decrease in college completion. This is roughly a 7 percent decrease
on a mean of 61 percent. This suggests that the negative impact of boys is precisely on
those girls who, from a family-background perspective, would be most likely to attend and
graduate from college. The impact of F F is restricted to girls whose parents do not have
college degree. For this group, a one standard deviation increase in F F is associated with
a 1.3 percentage point increase in the probability of obtaining a college degree. Lastly,
note that the equivalent sample split for boys in columns (9) and (10) once again shows
no significant effect of either male or female “high achievers.”
Finally, we split the sample by an indicator of the socio-economic characteristics of
the school rather than by individual characteristics. We rely on a question from the
Add Health school administrator survey given to an administrator (e.g., the principal) in
each sample school. Add Health asks the following question: “According to standardized
achievement tests, approximately what percentage of all students at this school are testing:
below grade level, at grade level, above grade level?” The fraction reported as testing at
or above grade level is positively correlated with the average family income and average
parental education level of students in the school.54 The median fraction testing at or
above grade level is 80 percent. We split schools according to whether they are strictly
above this median or not.
Consistent with the results obtained when we split the sample by parental education,
as can be seen comparing columns (5) and (6), the negative impact of “high-achieving”
boys on girls appears in higher socio-economic/better performing schools. The effect
of “high-achieving” girls is positive in this group as well. A one standard deviation
increase in M F (2.0) is associated with a 2.7 percentage point decrease in bachelor’s
51

In this case a Wald test can reject equality of the coefficient across the two columns at the 1 percent
level (p value=0.003).
52
See Hahn, Islam, Patacchini, and Zenou (2017).
53
We exclude students for whom both parents’ educational information is missing. If there is only one
parent in the household, we use that parent’s educational attainment.
54
The correlation between the fraction in the school testing at or above grade level and the median
family income of the Wave I students in the school is 0.46.

24

degree attainment – a 7 percent decrease on its mean of 36 percent. A one standard
deviation increase in F F (1.8) increases bachelor’s degree attainment by 2.1 percentage
points (or 6 percent of the mean). For boys, we again find no impact of “high achievers”
in either group of schools.

7.2

Further Outcomes

Below we explore further the effect of “high achievers” on other long-term outcomes
such as choice of major, labor force participation, fertility, and marriage.
In Wave III (when respondents are approximately 19-26), Add Health asks individuals
who have some sort of college degree (including those with an associate or junior college
degree (AA)) to list up to two major or minor fields of study.55 We use this question to
examine the impact of “high-achieving” peers on major/minor choice, creating a dummy
variable equal to 1 if the individual reported a STEM field, where the classification of the
latter is based on the National Science Foundation (NSF) Classification of STEM fields.56
We restrict the sample to those individuals who were in at least grade 10 in Wave I (1995)
and therefore would have been able to graduate with a BA by the summer of 2001 (Wave
III). We focus on STEM fields because recent work has indicated that “high-achieving”
males may affect women’s likelihood of choosing or completing mathematics-intensive
and/or STEM majors.57
Table 15, column (1) (respectively column (5) for males) examines the effect on choice
of major using STEM major/minor as a dependent variable. We include the same
controls as in our main specification and in addition control for whether the individual has
completed a bachelor’s degree (relative to a junior college degree) by Wave III. Although
the coefficient on M F is negative, it is not statistically significant. There is, on the
other hand, evidence that F F is associated with a higher proportion of STEM majors.
The effect is large: a one standard deviation increase in F F (.019) is associated with an
increase of 1.9 percentage points, a 13.2 percent increase over the mean of 14.5 percent.
Turning next to labor force participation, marriage, and fertility, we start by constructing indicators or measures of each. For labor force participation, we create a dummy
equal to one if an individual states that they are currently employed, are on sick leave or
temporarily disabled, are on maternity/paternity leave, or are unemployed and looking
for work; the dummy is set equal to zero otherwise.58 For the purposes of this question,
we exclude those in the military or prison in Wave IV and restrict the sample to those
individuals who were in 9th-12th grades in Wave I. This ensures that they are 28-32
55

Unfortunately, field of study was not asked in Wave IV.
See https : //www.lsamp.org/help/helps temc ip2 015.cf m.
57
E.g., Mouganie and Wang (2017) and Feld and Zölitz (2018).
58
Employment information is based on the question: “are you currently working for pay at least 10
hours per week?”, where yes=1 and no=0. Individuals who report still working at their first full-time job
are not asked this question so we code them as 1.
56

25

years old by Wave IV, and thus likely to have completed all schooling.59 Marriage and
fertility are based on questions to all sample respondents in Wave IV about whether they
have ever been married (1=yes, 0=no) and the total number of (non-deceased) biological
children they have.
The results are shown in columns (2)-(4) (respectively, columns (6)-(8) for males)
of Table 15. As shown, a one standard deviation increase in M F (0.023) is associated
with a 1.4 percentage point decline in labor force participation of women.60 In contrast,
a one standard deviation increase in F F (0.021) is associated with higher labor force
participation of a slightly smaller magnitude. There is no impact of “high achievers” on a
woman’s probability of having ever being married, but a one standard deviation increase
in M F (0.020) increases a woman’s total number of biological children by 0.03, a 3 percent
increase over its mean of 1.07. There is no effect of F F on males’ labor force participation
or marriage, but a one standard deviation increase in F F decreases a man’s total number
of biological children by 0.04, a 5 percent decrease on a mean of 0.72.

8

Robustness Checks

In this section we investigate the sensitivity of the results to alternative definitions of
the main variable, the exclusion of outliers, alternative specifications, and attrition.
A natural alternative formulation of the explanatory variable would be the fraction of
“high achievers” of a given gender among all students in the grade. It would be interesting
and potentially informative if this formulation gave different answers, but as shown the
answers are on the whole similar.61 Table 16 repeats the most complete specification
from Table 7 with alternative explanatory variables. In column (1) (respectively, column
(3) for males) M F and F F replaced with M F A and F F A, where the A indicates that
the high-achievers are measured as a fraction of the entire grade (All). As is clear, the
negative impact of “high-achieving” males on females’ bachelor degree completion is a
robust result. Furthermore, there is no symmetric negative effect of “high-achieving”
girls on boys’ long-run education. Quantitatively, the coefficient on M F A indicates that
a one standard deviation increase (0.011) in this fraction decreases females’ bachelor’s
degree attainment by 1.7 percentage points.
An alternative definition would be to require both parents, rather than solely one,
to have a post-college education. We denote these main variables M F B and F F B, for
which each student receives a value of 1 if both parents have post-college education and
59

In total, 16 females and 75 males are dropped due to being in the military or prison in Wave IV.
We also explore employment as an outcome, and find a significant negative impact of M F on
employment. This appears to be driven primarily, however, by differences in the work behavior of those
who say they are students in Wave IV.
61
For example, if we found that the results only hold when using MF and FF then we would be inclined
to think that the pathway would be related to the formation of a perception about males.
60

26

0 otherwise. This more restrictive version of high-achievers necessarily results in lower
means (e.g., for females the mean of M F B is 0.040 versus 0.145 for M F ; the mean of
F F B is 0.035 versus 0.122 for F F ). As indicated by the coefficients in column (2), a one
standard deviation increase in M F B (1.1 percentage points) decreases females’ college
completion by 1.7 percentage points. There is no significant impact of F F B for girls nor
of any of the main peer variables for boys. There is no statistically significant effect of
high-achievers on boys’ outcomes.
We next consider our results without school-specific linear time-trends. While these
allow us to control for time-varying attributes of a school in a linear fashion, they also
decreases the amount of variation in the main variables. Columns (1)-(2) (respectively,
columns (5)-(6) for boys) of Table 17 display our main results without time trends. As is
clear from the table, the results remain strong and significant. A one standard deviation
increase in M F for females (0.027) decreases the likelihood of graduating with a bachelor’s
degree by 2.3 percentage points, a similar magnitude to that obtained for our main
specification (Table 7).
We can also examine the robustness of the results by eliminating outliers. As discussed
in Section 4, the great majority of schools in our sample have variation in M F and F F
similar to with what would be expected by chance. For about 10 percent of schools,
however, the variation lies outside the 90 percent confidence interval obtained through
the Monte Carlo simulation. To test whether these outliers are driving the results, we
re-run our main specifications [columns (5)-(6) of Table 7] excluding the schools whose
within-school standard deviations of M F and F F lie outside of the 90 percent confidence
interval. The results are shown in columns (3)-(4) (respectively, columns (7)-(8) for boys)
of Table 17. As shown, the magnitude and significance of the coefficients are similar to
what we obtained previously.
Lastly, we can also examine whether the results are due to differential attrition between
Wave I and Wave IV as this could generate bias in the results. To do so, we regress a
dummy for whether the individual remained in the sample between Wave I and Wave IV
on the main variables. As shown in Appendix Table 5, there is no significant association
between these and the dummy, suggesting that the results are unlikely to be driven by
selective attrition of specific types of girls and boys from the sample.

9

Conclusion

This paper investigated the long-run effects of exposure to “high-achieving” boys
versus girls in high school. Using a predetermined student characteristic – whether at
least one of their parents has some post-college education – to proxy for a bundle of
student characteristics, we investigated the consequences of quasi-random variation in the
proportion of “high-achieving” girls and boys, separately, across grades within the same
27

school. As shown, we found a very strong asymmetric gender effect: the proportion of
“high-achieving” boys has a statistically and economically significant negative effect on the
probability that girls will end up with a bachelor’s degree some 14 years later. Boys, on
the other hand, are not affected by their exposure to “high-achievers” of either gender.
Our paper suggests that in the future it would be useful to conduct experiments that
examine how female subjects vs male subjects are affected by competing with varying
proportions of high-performing males vs high-performing females. Are asymmetric gender
effects also present there? Are any particular interventions helpful? It would also be of
interest to examine whether the results the paper obtained are present in other data sets
and in contexts other than high schools.
The data does not allow us to distinguish among various potential mechanisms. It
could be that interacting with “high-achieving” boys has a direct negative effect on fellow
female students. Or, the effect could be more indirect, e.g., arising from how teachers
react to these students or even from how the parents of these boys affect teachers or
the allocation of resources at the grade level. Nonetheless, we can identify some of
the pathways. In particular, we show that greater exposure to “high-achieving” boys
decreases girls’ self confidence and aspirations and increases their risky behavior including
increasing teen-age motherhood. The girls especially affected are those in the lower half
of the ability distribution as measured by their PVT score. Policies that target these
more marginal girls – that increase their ambition and self-confidence or that decrease
their exposure to these boys – are likely to have beneficial effects. Furthermore, our
findings suggest that exposure to “high-achieving” girls has a positive effect of essentially
the same absolute magnitude indicating that the negative effects of “high-achieving” boys
can be counterbalanced through exposure to their female counterparts.

28

10

References

Altonji, J. G., Elder, T. E., and Taber, C. R. (2005). Selection on observed and unobserved variables: Assessing the effectiveness of Catholic schools. Journal of
Political Economy, 113 (1), 151–184.
Angrist, J. D., and Lang, K. (2004). Does school integration generate peer effects?
Evidence from Boston’s Metco Program. American Economic Review , 94 (5),
1613–1634.
Athey, S., and Imbens, G. W. (2017). The Econometrics of Randomized Experiments. In
Handbook of Economic Field Experiments (Vol. 1, pp. 73–140). Elsevier.
Bifulco, R., Fletcher, J. M., Oh, S. J., and Ross, S. L. (2014). Do high school peers
have persistent effects on college attainment and other life outcomes? Labour
Economics, 29 , 83–90.
Bifulco, R., Fletcher, J. M., and Ross, S. L. (2011). The effect of classmate characteristics on post-secondary outcomes: Evidence from the Add Health. American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3 (1), 25–53.
Black, S. E., Devereux, P. J., and Salvanes, K. G. (2013). Under pressure? The effect of
peers on outcomes of young adults. Journal of Labor Economics, 31 (1), 119–153.
Bordalo, P., Coffman, K. B., Gennaioli, N., and Shleifer, A. (2018). Beliefs about Gender.
Working Paper.
Burbidge, J. B., Magee, L., and Robb, A. L. (1988). Alternative transformations
to handle extreme values of the dependent variable. Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 83 (401), 123–127.
Carrell, S. E., Fullerton, R. L., and West, J. E. (2009). Does your cohort matter?
measuring peer effects in college achievement. Journal of Labor Economics, 27 (3),
439–464.
Carrell, S. E., Hoekstra, M., and Kuka, E. (2018). The long-run effects of disruptive
peers. American Economic Review , 108 (11), 3377–3415.
Davis-Kean, P. E. (2005). The influence of parent education and family income on
child achievement: the indirect role of parental expectations and the home environment. Journal of Family Psychology, 19 (2), 294.
Elsner, B., and Isphording, I. E. (2017). A big fish in a small pond: Ability rank and
human capital investment. Journal of Labor Economics, 35 (3), 787–828.
Elsner, B., and Isphording, I. E. (2018). Rank, sex, drugs, and crime. Journal of Human
Resources, 53 (2), 356–381.
Feld, J., and Zölitz, U. (2018). Peers from Venus and Mars: Higher-Achieving Men
Foster Gender Gaps in Major Choice and Labor Market Outcomes. Working
Paper.
Fischer, S. (2017). The downside of good peers: How classroom composition differentially

29

affects men’s and women’s stem persistence. Labour Economics, 46 , 211–226.
Gould, E. D., Lavy, V., and Paserman, M. D. (2009). Does immigration affect the
long-term educational outcomes of natives? Quasi-experimental evidence. The
Economic Journal , 119 (540), 1243–1269.
Hahn, Y., Islam, A., Patacchini, E., and Zenou, Y. (2017). Do Friendship Networks
Improve Female Education? Working Paper.
Hoxby, C. M. (2000a). The effects of class size on student achievement: New evidence
from population variation. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115 (4), 1239–
1285.
Hoxby, C. M. (2000b). Peer effects in the classroom: Learning from gender and race
variation. NBER Working Paper No. 7867.
Imberman, S. A., Kugler, A. D., and Sacerdote, B. I. (2012). Katrina’s children: evidence on the structure of peer effects from hurricane evacuees. American Economic
Review , 102 (5), 2048–82.
Lavy, V., Paserman, M. D., and Schlosser, A. (2011). Inside the black box of ability
peer effects: Evidence from variation in the proportion of low achievers in the
classroom. The Economic Journal , 122 (559), 208–237.
Lavy, V., and Schlosser, A. (2011). Mechanisms and impacts of gender peer effects at
school. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3 (2), 1–33.
Merlino, L., Steinhardt, M. F., and Wren-Lewis, L. (2019). More than just friends?
School peers and adult interracial relationships. Forthcoming in Journal of Labor
Economics.
Mouganie, P., and Wang, Y. (2017). High Performing Peers and Female STEM Choices
in School. Working Paper.
Niederle, M., Segal, C., and Vesterlund, L. (2013). How costly is diversity? Affirmative
action in light of gender differences in competitiveness. Management Science,
59 (1), 1–16.
Olivetti, C., Patacchini, E., and Zenou, Y. (2018). Mothers, Peers, and Gender-Role
Identity. Journal of the European Economic Association.
Reardon, S. F. (2011). The widening academic achievement gap between the rich and
the poor: New evidence and possible explanations. Whither Opportunity, 91–116.
Rodrı́guez-Planas, N., Sanz-de Galdeano, A., and Terskaya, A. (2018). Independent
Thinking and Hard Working, or Caring and Well Behaved? Short-and Long-Term
Impacts of Gender Identity Norms. IZA Discussion Paper No. 11694.
Sacerdote, B. (2011). Peer effects in education: How might they work, how big are they
and how much do we know thus far? In Handbook of the economics of education
(Vol. 3, pp. 249–277). Elsevier.
van Tetering, M. A., de Groot, R. H., and Jolles, J. (2018). Boy–Girl Differences
in Pictorial Verbal Learning in Students Aged 8–12 Years and the Influence of
30

Parental Education. Frontiers in Psychology, 9 .

31

11

Tables
Table 1: Summary Statistics

Add Health
Males
Females
mean sd mean sd
Age in Years (July 1995) 15.77 1.75 15.88 1.80
Age in Years (July 2008) 28.77 1.75 28.88 1.80
White
0.65 0.48 0.67 0.47
Black
0.17 0.38 0.15 0.36
Latino
0.10 0.30 0.11 0.31
Asian
0.03 0.17 0.04 0.19
Other Race
0.05 0.21 0.04 0.20
Foreign Born
0.05 0.22 0.05 0.22
HS Graduate
0.94 0.24 0.91 0.29
Bachelor’s Degree
0.35 0.48 0.28 0.45
5899
4954
Observations

2008 ACS
Females
mean
sd
28.77
0.67
0.14
0.13
0.03
0.03
0.07
0.91
0.33
153,269

1.75
0.47
0.35
0.34
0.17
0.16
0.25
0.28
0.47

Males
mean
sd
28.88
0.67
0.13
0.15
0.03
0.03
0.07
0.88
0.26
148,470

1.80
0.47
0.34
0.35
0.17
0.16
0.26
0.33
0.44

Note: This table reports summary statistics for the Add Health data sample used in the paper and the 2008 American Community Survey. The ACS sample excludes those who immigrated to the United States after 1994. ACS age in years is the average
age in years of the sample with responses pooled over all survey months (ranging from January 2008 - December 2008) as birth
dates are not reported. The ACS female and male samples are restricted to those aged 25-34 and re-weighted to match the
age distribution of the Add Health female and male final samples, respectively. Wave IV weights are used in Add Health data.

32

Table 2: Parental Education and Child GPA: In-Home Sample
Dependent Variable: Grade Point Average
Females
(1)
0.136∗∗∗
(0.044)

(2)
0.097∗∗
(0.045)

(3)
0.074
(0.045)

(4)
0.069
(0.046)

Males
(5)
0.138∗∗
(0.055)

(6)
0.116∗∗
(0.055)

(7)
0.091∗
(0.054)

(8)
0.074
(0.054)

Mother Some College

0.221∗∗∗
(0.048)

0.170∗∗∗
(0.048)

0.118∗∗
(0.046)

0.108∗∗
(0.044)

0.219∗∗∗
(0.059)

0.181∗∗∗
(0.058)

0.139∗∗
(0.057)

0.133∗∗
(0.057)

Mother College Grad

0.319∗∗∗
(0.052)

0.245∗∗∗
(0.053)

0.187∗∗∗
(0.050)

0.187∗∗∗
(0.049)

0.247∗∗∗
(0.066)

0.194∗∗∗
(0.066)

0.149∗∗
(0.065)

0.144∗∗
(0.065)

Mother Post College

0.488∗∗∗
(0.065)

0.402∗∗∗
(0.066)

0.291∗∗∗
(0.059)

0.294∗∗∗
(0.060)

0.381∗∗∗
(0.077)

0.327∗∗∗
(0.077)

0.265∗∗∗
(0.072)

0.246∗∗∗
(0.071)

Mother Not in HH

0.053
(0.060)

0.039
(0.061)

0.049
(0.062)

0.059
(0.064)

-0.155∗
(0.082)

-0.147∗
(0.078)

-0.154∗
(0.083)

-0.158∗
(0.086)

Father HS Grad

0.106∗∗
(0.047)

0.073
(0.047)

0.055
(0.046)

0.074∗
(0.043)

0.065
(0.064)

0.025
(0.057)

-0.001
(0.060)

0.009
(0.059)

Father Some College

0.212∗∗∗
(0.062)

0.166∗∗∗
(0.061)

0.126∗∗
(0.058)

0.152∗∗
(0.059)

0.228∗∗∗
(0.066)

0.175∗∗∗
(0.059)

0.134∗∗
(0.061)

0.130∗∗
(0.059)

Father College Grad

0.359∗∗∗
(0.056)

0.302∗∗∗
(0.057)

0.258∗∗∗
(0.054)

0.266∗∗∗
(0.051)

0.256∗∗∗
(0.073)

0.209∗∗∗
(0.066)

0.162∗∗
(0.069)

0.158∗∗
(0.066)

Father Post College

0.370∗∗∗
(0.066)

0.306∗∗∗
(0.064)

0.260∗∗∗
(0.064)

0.275∗∗∗
(0.063)

0.486∗∗∗
(0.077)

0.418∗∗∗
(0.075)

0.382∗∗∗
(0.080)

0.409∗∗∗
(0.078)

Father Not in HH

0.016
(0.043)

0.028
(0.043)

0.004
(0.044)

0.011
(0.042)

-0.042
(0.067)

-0.028
(0.061)

-0.057
(0.066)

-0.067
(0.064)

Age in Months

-0.017∗∗∗
(0.002)

-0.013∗∗∗
(0.002)

-0.013∗∗∗
(0.002)

-0.017∗∗∗
(0.002)

-0.013∗∗∗
(0.003)

-0.012∗∗∗
(0.003)

Foreign Born

0.233∗∗∗
(0.071)

0.325∗∗∗
(0.065)

0.308∗∗∗
(0.068)

0.141∗
(0.080)

0.202∗∗
(0.091)

0.219∗∗
(0.088)

Log Family Income

0.038∗∗
(0.015)

0.029∗
(0.016)

0.026
(0.016)

0.039∗∗
(0.019)

0.028
(0.019)

0.023
(0.020)

1.204∗∗∗
(0.132)

1.195∗∗∗
(0.137)

0.945∗∗∗
(0.135)

0.999∗∗∗
(0.133)

Mother HS Grad

PVT Score

School, Grade FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Race FE

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No
5788
0.193
0.001
0.825

No
5788
0.224
0.001
0.926

No
5548
0.257
0.017
0.968

Yes
5548
0.293
0.013
0.857

No
4851
0.183
0.013
0.000

No
4848
0.225
0.016
0.000

No
4611
0.246
0.021
0.000

Yes
4611
0.290
0.049
0.000

School Linear TT
Observations
R2
Equality P Value Moth Coll vs Moth Postcoll
Equality P Value Fath Coll vs Fath Postcoll

Note: This table reports parameter estimates and standard errors (in parentheses) from a regression of the student’s
grade point average on individual characteristics for the in-home sample. Grade point average is calculated based on
self-reported student grades in math, science, english, and history from the Wave I in-home survey where A=4, B=3,
C=2, and D or lower=1. All columns include dummy for whether Wave I interview took place in 1994-1995 or 19951996 school year. Race fixed effects include dummies for Black, Latino, Asian, and other races. If mother’s (respectively, father’s) education is missing, all mother’s (respectively, father’s) education dummies are set to zero and a dummy
is included for missing mother’s (respectively, father’s) education. If family income is missing, family income is set to
the mean value for the school and a dummy is included for missing family income. Coefficient on PVT score multiplied by 100. Wave IV weights used. Standard errors clustered at the school level. * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

33

Table 3: Parental Education and Child GPA: In-School Sample
Dependent Variable: Grade Point Average
Females
(1)
0.125∗∗∗
(0.016)

(2)
0.117∗∗∗
(0.015)

(3)
0.115∗∗∗
(0.015)

Males
(4)
0.100∗∗∗
(0.019)

(5)
0.094∗∗∗
(0.019)

(6)
0.092∗∗∗
(0.019)

Mother Some College

0.232∗∗∗
(0.019)

0.227∗∗∗
(0.018)

0.225∗∗∗
(0.018)

0.204∗∗∗
(0.023)

0.201∗∗∗
(0.023)

0.200∗∗∗
(0.022)

Mother College Grad

0.306∗∗∗
(0.018)

0.284∗∗∗
(0.019)

0.283∗∗∗
(0.018)

0.270∗∗∗
(0.024)

0.256∗∗∗
(0.024)

0.253∗∗∗
(0.024)

Mother Post College

0.339∗∗∗
(0.024)

0.318∗∗∗
(0.024)

0.317∗∗∗
(0.024)

0.324∗∗∗
(0.024)

0.313∗∗∗
(0.024)

0.309∗∗∗
(0.024)

Mother Not in HH

-0.008
(0.020)

-0.016
(0.018)

-0.017
(0.018)

0.000
(0.021)

-0.002
(0.020)

-0.005
(0.020)

Father HS Grad

0.066∗∗∗
(0.018)

0.051∗∗∗
(0.018)

0.049∗∗∗
(0.018)

0.073∗∗∗
(0.020)

0.066∗∗∗
(0.020)

0.066∗∗∗
(0.020)

Father Some College

0.227∗∗∗
(0.022)

0.208∗∗∗
(0.021)

0.207∗∗∗
(0.021)

0.205∗∗∗
(0.023)

0.192∗∗∗
(0.022)

0.195∗∗∗
(0.022)

Father College Grad

0.272∗∗∗
(0.021)

0.240∗∗∗
(0.021)

0.238∗∗∗
(0.021)

0.299∗∗∗
(0.024)

0.275∗∗∗
(0.024)

0.279∗∗∗
(0.024)

Father Post College

0.381∗∗∗
(0.028)

0.347∗∗∗
(0.027)

0.344∗∗∗
(0.027)

0.380∗∗∗
(0.029)

0.354∗∗∗
(0.028)

0.357∗∗∗
(0.028)

Father Not in HH

-0.079∗∗∗
(0.017)

-0.063∗∗∗
(0.016)

-0.063∗∗∗
(0.016)

-0.058∗∗∗
(0.018)

-0.041∗∗
(0.017)

-0.039∗∗
(0.017)

0.136∗∗∗
(0.023)

0.135∗∗∗
(0.022)

0.119∗∗∗
(0.023)

0.119∗∗∗
(0.023)

Mother HS Grad

Foreign Born

School, Grade FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Race FE

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

No
39181
0.171
0.049
0.000

No
39181
0.190
0.033
0.000

Yes
39181
0.201
0.038
0.000

No
38021
0.160
0.001
0.000

No
38021
0.175
0.001
0.000

Yes
38021
0.182
0.001
0.000

School Linear TT
Observations
R2
Equality P Value Moth Coll vs Moth Postcoll
Equality P Value Fath Coll vs Fath Postcoll

Note: This table reports parameter estimates and standard errors (in parentheses) from a regression of the student’s grade
point average on individual characteristics for the in-school sample. Grade point average is calculated based on self-reported
student grades in math, science, english, and history from the in-school survey where A=4, B=3, C=2, and D or lower=1.
Race fixed effects include dummies for Black, Latino, Asian, and other races. If mother’s (respectively, father’s) education is missing, all mother’s (respectively, father’s) education dummies are set to zero and a dummy is included for missing
mother’s (respectively, father’s) education. Standard errors clustered at the school level. * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

34

Table 4: Parental Education and Child PVT: In-Home Sample
Dependent Variable: PVT Score
Females
(1)
3.157∗∗∗
(0.752)

(2)
1.925∗∗∗
(0.725)

(3)
1.839∗∗
(0.745)

Males
(4)
4.558∗∗∗
(0.952)

(5)
3.031∗∗∗
(0.985)

(6)
2.970∗∗∗
(1.022)

Mother Some College

5.320∗∗∗
(0.916)

3.855∗∗∗
(0.885)

3.873∗∗∗
(0.918)

7.326∗∗∗
(1.012)

5.319∗∗∗
(0.992)

5.427∗∗∗
(1.014)

Mother College Grad

6.227∗∗∗
(0.833)

4.518∗∗∗
(0.830)

4.713∗∗∗
(0.832)

7.100∗∗∗
(1.125)

4.968∗∗∗
(1.094)

5.147∗∗∗
(1.130)

Mother Post College

9.426∗∗∗
(1.122)

7.327∗∗∗
(1.100)

7.607∗∗∗
(1.134)

8.828∗∗∗
(1.433)

6.495∗∗∗
(1.380)

6.798∗∗∗
(1.424)

Mother Not in HH

0.269
(1.497)

-0.092
(1.470)

-0.307
(1.516)

2.015
(1.456)

0.982
(1.414)

1.498
(1.510)

Father HS Grad

1.529∗
(0.841)

0.802
(0.747)

0.663
(0.765)

2.459∗∗
(1.090)

1.558
(1.065)

1.159
(1.080)

Father Some College

4.014∗∗∗
(1.106)

2.922∗∗∗
(1.034)

2.578∗∗
(1.062)

5.724∗∗∗
(1.314)

4.311∗∗∗
(1.246)

3.580∗∗∗
(1.285)

Father College Grad

4.545∗∗∗
(0.965)

3.041∗∗∗
(0.924)

2.935∗∗∗
(0.924)

5.241∗∗∗
(1.410)

3.808∗∗∗
(1.275)

3.256∗∗
(1.288)

Father Post College

5.816∗∗∗
(1.208)

4.143∗∗∗
(1.183)

3.929∗∗∗
(1.216)

6.951∗∗∗
(1.592)

5.530∗∗∗
(1.402)

4.990∗∗∗
(1.362)

Father Not in HH

1.128
(0.889)

1.366
(0.824)

1.250
(0.838)

1.757
(1.159)

1.974∗
(1.097)

1.529
(1.162)

Age in Months

-0.344∗∗∗
(0.042)

-0.346∗∗∗
(0.043)

-0.397∗∗∗
(0.036)

-0.406∗∗∗
(0.037)

Foreign Born

-5.715∗∗∗
(1.769)

-5.848∗∗∗
(1.770)

-7.019∗∗∗
(1.353)

-7.184∗∗∗
(1.346)

0.641∗
(0.329)

0.683∗∗
(0.336)

0.813∗∗∗
(0.270)

0.825∗∗∗
(0.301)

Mother HS Grad

Log Family Income

School, Grade FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Race FE

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

No
5650
0.293
0.000
0.255

No
5650
0.351
0.001
0.325

Yes
5650
0.378
0.001
0.385

No
4703
0.265
0.113
0.088

No
4703
0.354
0.148
0.061

Yes
4703
0.392
0.129
0.060

School Linear TT
Observations
R2
Equality P Value Moth Coll vs Moth Postcoll
Equality P Value Fath Coll vs Fath Postcoll

Note: This table reports parameter estimates and standard errors (in parentheses) from a regression of the student’s Peabody
Picture Vocabulary Test (PVT) score on individual characteristics for the in-home sample. All columns include dummy
for whether Wave I interview took place in 1994-1995 or 1995-1996 school year. Race fixed effects include dummies for
Black, Latino, Asian, and other races. If mother’s (respectively, father’s) education is missing, all mother’s (respectively,
father’s) education dummies are set to zero and a dummy is included for missing mother’s (respectively, father’s) education. If family income is missing, family income is set to the mean value for the school and a dummy is included for missing family income. Wave IV weights used. Standard errors clustered at the school level. * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

35

Table 5: Variation in Main Variables
(a) Variation in M F and F F
Females
MF

FF

Males
MF

FF

Raw Variation
Mean
SD
Min, Max

0.145
0.102
0.000, 0.707

0.122
0.102
0.000, 0.909

0.143
0.097
0.000, 0.713

0.119
0.098
0, 0.870

Net of Fixed Effects and
School Trends
Mean
SD
Min, Max
Count

0.000
0.020
-0.109, 0.095
5899

0.000
0.019
-0.133,0.165
5899

0.000
0.021
-0.171, 0.108
4954

0.000
0.019
-0.072,0.127
4954

(b) Variation in M N and F N

Raw Variation
Mean
SD
Min, Max
Net of Fixed Effects and
School Trends
Mean
SD
Min, Max
Count

Females
MN

FN

Males
MN

FN

16.398
15.543
0.00, 86.805

14.178
15.090
0.00, 80.457

16.139
14.810
0.00, 86.805

13.785
14.230
0.00, 80.457

0 .000
2.670
-13.091, 16.843

0 .000
2.095
-16.032,10.179

0 .000
2.540
-18.211, 14.169

0 .000
2.099
-15.715, 14.704

5899

5899

4954

4954

Note: This table reports the raw and residual (net of fixed effects and time trends) variation in M F , F F , M N , and F N .
M F (respectively, F F ) is the fraction of male (respectively, female) “high achievers” (those with at least one post-college parent) in the grade and
school. M N (respectively, F N ) is the number of male (respectively, female) “high achievers”
(those with at least one post-college parent) in the grade and school. Wave IV weights used.

36

Table 6: Balance Tests for M F and F F
Panel A, Females
MF
FF
Own Parent Post College

Log Family Income
0.411
(0.592)
0.245
(0.443)
0.312∗∗∗
(0.036)

PVT Score
0.856
(6.627)
-4.232
(8.250)
5.163∗∗∗
(0.725)

Mother Not in HH
-0.147
(0.111)
0.134
(0.113)
-0.009
(0.007)

Father Not in HH
-0.329
(0.250)
-0.195
(0.301)
-0.018
(0.019)

Black Age in Months
0.001
4.670
(0.200)
(3.691)
0.162
2.050
(0.132)
(3.921)
0.004
-1.103∗∗∗
(0.019)
(0.288)

Log Family Income
-0.037
(0.666)
0.277∗∗∗
(0.042)
0.370
(0.506)

PVT Score
3.858
(7.933)
4.183∗∗∗
(0.615)
3.731
(9.972)

Mother Not in HH
0.107
(0.144)
-0.014
(0.010)
-0.0879
(0.207)

Father Not in HH
-0.239
(0.356)
-0.009
(0.019)
-0.557∗∗
(0.226)

Black Age in Months
0.328
-2.782
(0.208)
(3.748)
0.030∗
-1.157∗∗∗
(0.015)
(0.294)
0.155
-2.980
(0.134)
(5.399)

Panel B, Males
MF
Own Parent Post College
FF

Note: This table reports parameter estimates and standard errors (in parentheses) for regressions of M F and
F F on individual characteristics. The estimates displayed in each row are for separate regressions in which
the dependent variable is the variable name in the column and the independent variable is displayed in the
row. M F (respectively, F F ) is the fraction of male (respectively, female) “high achievers” (those with at least
one post-college parent) in the grade and school. The regressions of F F in Panel A and M F in Panel B include a control for whether the individual has at least one post-college parent. If family income is missing, family income is set to the mean value for the school and a dummy is included for missing family income. All
regressions are unweighted.
Standard errors clustered at the school level.
* p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

37

Table 7: High Achievers and Bachelor’s Degree Attainment
Dependent Variable: Bachelor’s degree
Females
(1)
-1.053∗∗∗
(0.293)

(2)
-1.046∗∗∗
(0.276)

(3)
-1.019∗∗∗
(0.269)

(4)
-0.991∗∗∗
(0.296)

(5)
-1.083∗∗∗
(0.317)

(6)
-0.945∗∗∗
(0.286)

Males
(7)
0.024
(0.428)

(8)
0.285
(0.387)

(9)
0.288
(0.389)

(10)
0.221
(0.365)

(11)
0.124
(0.365)

(12)
0.110
(0.380)

-0.258
(0.384)

0.176
(0.357)

0.199
(0.348)

0.184
(0.364)

0.291
(0.338)

0.318
(0.331)

0.553
(0.550)

0.306
(0.522)

0.307
(0.526)

0.323
(0.502)

0.201
(0.493)

0.213
(0.498)

Foreign Born

0.089∗∗
(0.041)

0.081∗∗
(0.040)

0.089∗∗
(0.040)

0.087∗∗
(0.040)

0.061
(0.040)

0.102∗∗
(0.045)

0.099∗∗
(0.045)

0.101∗∗
(0.045)

0.104∗∗
(0.046)

0.068
(0.042)

PVT Score

0.530∗∗∗
(0.065)

0.233∗
(0.133)

0.533∗∗∗
(0.065)

0.535∗∗∗
(0.064)

0.455∗∗∗
(0.071)

0.211
(0.168)

0.450∗∗∗
(0.071)

0.449∗∗∗
(0.070)

Age in Months

-0.006∗∗∗
(0.001)

-0.005∗∗∗
(0.001)

-0.006∗∗∗
(0.001)

-0.006∗∗∗
(0.001)

-0.008∗∗∗
(0.001)

-0.005∗∗∗
(0.001)

-0.005∗∗∗
(0.001)

-0.005∗∗∗
(0.001)

-0.005∗∗∗
(0.001)

-0.007∗∗∗
(0.001)

Mother HS Grad

0.060∗∗∗
(0.022)

0.060∗∗∗
(0.022)

0.060∗∗∗
(0.022)

0.059∗∗∗
(0.022)

0.064∗∗∗
(0.021)

0.007
(0.021)

0.007
(0.021)

0.009
(0.021)

0.009
(0.021)

0.025
(0.021)

Mother Some College

0.115∗∗∗
(0.026)

0.114∗∗∗
(0.026)

0.115∗∗∗
(0.026)

0.116∗∗∗
(0.026)

0.138∗∗∗
(0.027)

0.086∗∗∗
(0.025)

0.086∗∗∗
(0.025)

0.088∗∗∗
(0.025)

0.088∗∗∗
(0.025)

0.107∗∗∗
(0.024)

Mother College Grad

0.213∗∗∗
(0.036)

0.213∗∗∗
(0.036)

0.213∗∗∗
(0.036)

0.214∗∗∗
(0.036)

0.239∗∗∗
(0.036)

0.098∗∗∗
(0.032)

0.098∗∗∗
(0.032)

0.100∗∗∗
(0.032)

0.099∗∗∗
(0.032)

0.127∗∗∗
(0.032)

Mother Post College

0.286∗∗∗
(0.043)

0.284∗∗∗
(0.043)

0.287∗∗∗
(0.042)

0.287∗∗∗
(0.043)

0.319∗∗∗
(0.043)

0.202∗∗∗
(0.040)

0.202∗∗∗
(0.040)

0.205∗∗∗
(0.040)

0.202∗∗∗
(0.040)

0.241∗∗∗
(0.043)

Mother Not in HH

0.067∗
(0.039)

0.066∗
(0.039)

0.066∗
(0.038)

0.067∗
(0.038)

0.063
(0.038)

-0.043
(0.041)

-0.045
(0.041)

-0.043
(0.041)

-0.042
(0.040)

-0.029
(0.037)

Father HS Grad

0.053∗∗
(0.023)

0.054∗∗
(0.023)

0.053∗∗
(0.023)

0.052∗∗
(0.023)

0.061∗∗
(0.024)

0.010
(0.027)

0.011
(0.027)

0.010
(0.028)

0.011
(0.027)

0.017
(0.025)

Father Some College

0.120∗∗∗
(0.026)

0.119∗∗∗
(0.025)

0.120∗∗∗
(0.026)

0.121∗∗∗
(0.026)

0.137∗∗∗
(0.025)

0.107∗∗∗
(0.030)

0.106∗∗∗
(0.030)

0.106∗∗∗
(0.030)

0.105∗∗∗
(0.030)

0.116∗∗∗
(0.030)

Father College Grad

0.239∗∗∗
(0.035)

0.240∗∗∗
(0.035)

0.240∗∗∗
(0.035)

0.240∗∗∗
(0.035)

0.254∗∗∗
(0.035)

0.201∗∗∗
(0.045)

0.202∗∗∗
(0.045)

0.201∗∗∗
(0.045)

0.200∗∗∗
(0.044)

0.218∗∗∗
(0.041)

Father Post College

0.301∗∗∗
(0.052)

0.298∗∗∗
(0.052)

0.300∗∗∗
(0.052)

0.298∗∗∗
(0.052)

0.323∗∗∗
(0.052)

0.319∗∗∗
(0.044)

0.319∗∗∗
(0.044)

0.318∗∗∗
(0.044)

0.315∗∗∗
(0.044)

0.317∗∗∗
(0.047)

Father Not in HH

0.034
(0.023)

0.034
(0.023)

0.034
(0.023)

0.033
(0.023)

0.036
(0.024)

0.042
(0.030)

0.043
(0.030)

0.041
(0.030)

0.042
(0.030)

0.049∗
(0.028)

Log Family Income

0.046∗∗∗
(0.012)

0.046∗∗∗
(0.012)

0.046∗∗∗
(0.012)

0.046∗∗∗
(0.012)

0.042∗∗∗
(0.012)

0.024∗∗
(0.011)

0.024∗∗
(0.011)

0.023∗∗
(0.011)

0.023∗∗
(0.011)

0.028∗∗
(0.012)

-0.540∗∗
(0.270)

-0.576∗∗
(0.267)

-0.594∗∗
(0.265)

MF

FF

0.135∗∗
(0.058)

PVT Rank

0.109
(0.067)
0.394∗
(0.226)

0.438∗
(0.226)

0.325
(0.217)

Fraction Foreign Born

-0.942
(0.642)

-0.816
(0.627)

1.294∗∗
(0.522)

1.478∗∗∗
(0.500)

Fraction Black

-0.703
(0.522)

-0.606
(0.509)

-0.341
(0.603)

-0.344
(0.592)

Fraction Latino

-0.292
(0.431)

-0.154
(0.414)

-0.120
(0.410)

-0.199
(0.411)

Fraction Asian

0.638
(0.686)

0.546
(0.645)

-1.534∗
(0.793)

-1.628∗∗
(0.786)

Fraction Other Races

-0.431
(0.310)

-0.274
(0.298)

-0.113
(0.250)

-0.126
(0.246)

Fraction Female

School, Grade FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Race FE

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
5899
0.187
0.152

Yes
5650
0.332
0.299

Yes
5649
0.332
0.299

Yes
5650
0.332
0.300

Yes
5650
0.334
0.300

Yes
5898
0.318
0.285

Yes
4954
0.199
0.158

Yes
4703
0.326
0.286

Yes
4703
0.326
0.286

Yes
4703
0.326
0.287

Yes
4703
0.328
0.287

Yes
4948
0.312
0.273

School Linear TT
Observations
R2
Adjusted R2

Note: This table reports parameter estimates and standard errors (in parentheses) for regressions of bachelor’s degree attainment on individual and peer characteristics. The dependent variable is equal to 1 if the individual has completed a bachelor’s (four-year college) degree and 0 otherwise. M F (respectively, F F ) is the fraction of male (respectively, female) “high
achievers” (those with at least one post-college parent). All columns include a dummy for whether Wave I interview took
place in 1994-1995 or 1995-1996 school year. Race fixed effects include dummies for Black, Latino, Asian, and other races.
If mother’s (respectively, father’s) education is missing, all mother’s (respectively, father’s) education dummies are set to zero
and a dummy is included for missing mother’s (respectively, father’s) education. If family income is missing, family income
is set to the mean value for the school and a dummy is included for missing family income. Coefficient on PVT score multiplied by 100. Wave IV weights used. Standard errors clustered at the school level. * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

38

Table 8: High Achievers and Bachelor’s Degree Attainment
Dependent Variable: Bachelor’s degree
Females
(1)
-0.100∗∗∗
(0.023)

(2)
-0.103∗∗∗
(0.028)

(3)
-0.100∗∗∗
(0.027)

(4)
-0.094∗∗∗
(0.031)

(5)
-0.095∗∗∗
(0.030)

(6)
-0.082∗∗∗
(0.026)

Males
(7)
-0.005
(0.052)

(8)
0.027
(0.045)

(9)
0.027
(0.046)

(10)
0.005
(0.046)

(11)
0.004
(0.046)

(12)
0.001
(0.047)

0.036
(0.033)

0.058∗∗
(0.027)

0.058∗∗
(0.026)

0.053∗
(0.028)

0.050∗
(0.026)

0.051∗
(0.027)

0.016
(0.050)

0.001
(0.046)

0.001
(0.046)

0.017
(0.043)

0.035
(0.047)

0.036
(0.051)

Foreign Born

0.089∗∗
(0.040)

0.081∗∗
(0.040)

0.089∗∗
(0.040)

0.087∗∗
(0.040)

0.062
(0.040)

0.103∗∗
(0.045)

0.100∗∗
(0.045)

0.101∗∗
(0.045)

0.100∗∗
(0.045)

0.064
(0.041)

PVT Score

0.531∗∗∗
(0.065)

0.235∗
(0.135)

0.532∗∗∗
(0.065)

0.532∗∗∗
(0.064)

0.455∗∗∗
(0.071)

0.211
(0.169)

0.450∗∗∗
(0.071)

0.450∗∗∗
(0.071)

Age in Months

-0.006∗∗∗
(0.001)

-0.005∗∗∗
(0.001)

-0.006∗∗∗
(0.001)

-0.006∗∗∗
(0.001)

-0.008∗∗∗
(0.001)

-0.005∗∗∗
(0.001)

-0.005∗∗∗
(0.001)

-0.005∗∗∗
(0.001)

-0.005∗∗∗
(0.001)

-0.007∗∗∗
(0.001)

Mother HS Grad

0.060∗∗∗
(0.022)

0.059∗∗∗
(0.022)

0.060∗∗∗
(0.022)

0.058∗∗
(0.022)

0.062∗∗∗
(0.021)

0.008
(0.021)

0.008
(0.021)

0.010
(0.021)

0.007
(0.021)

0.024
(0.021)

Mother Some College

0.115∗∗∗
(0.026)

0.114∗∗∗
(0.026)

0.115∗∗∗
(0.026)

0.115∗∗∗
(0.026)

0.138∗∗∗
(0.027)

0.086∗∗∗
(0.025)

0.086∗∗∗
(0.025)

0.089∗∗∗
(0.024)

0.085∗∗∗
(0.025)

0.104∗∗∗
(0.024)

Mother College Grad

0.213∗∗∗
(0.036)

0.212∗∗∗
(0.036)

0.213∗∗∗
(0.036)

0.212∗∗∗
(0.036)

0.238∗∗∗
(0.036)

0.099∗∗∗
(0.032)

0.098∗∗∗
(0.032)

0.101∗∗∗
(0.032)

0.098∗∗∗
(0.032)

0.127∗∗∗
(0.032)

Mother Post College

0.287∗∗∗
(0.043)

0.285∗∗∗
(0.043)

0.287∗∗∗
(0.043)

0.286∗∗∗
(0.043)

0.318∗∗∗
(0.043)

0.203∗∗∗
(0.040)

0.203∗∗∗
(0.040)

0.205∗∗∗
(0.040)

0.204∗∗∗
(0.040)

0.244∗∗∗
(0.043)

Mother Not in HH

0.067∗
(0.039)

0.066∗
(0.038)

0.067∗
(0.038)

0.065∗
(0.038)

0.062
(0.038)

-0.043
(0.041)

-0.045
(0.041)

-0.043
(0.041)

-0.044
(0.040)

-0.030
(0.037)

Father HS Grad

0.052∗∗
(0.023)

0.052∗∗
(0.023)

0.052∗∗
(0.023)

0.051∗∗
(0.023)

0.060∗∗
(0.024)

0.010
(0.027)

0.011
(0.027)

0.010
(0.027)

0.012
(0.027)

0.019
(0.025)

Father Some College

0.119∗∗∗
(0.026)

0.118∗∗∗
(0.026)

0.119∗∗∗
(0.026)

0.117∗∗∗
(0.026)

0.135∗∗∗
(0.025)

0.106∗∗∗
(0.030)

0.106∗∗∗
(0.030)

0.106∗∗∗
(0.030)

0.106∗∗∗
(0.030)

0.117∗∗∗
(0.030)

Father College Grad

0.240∗∗∗
(0.035)

0.240∗∗∗
(0.035)

0.240∗∗∗
(0.035)

0.238∗∗∗
(0.035)

0.251∗∗∗
(0.035)

0.202∗∗∗
(0.045)

0.203∗∗∗
(0.045)

0.201∗∗∗
(0.045)

0.202∗∗∗
(0.044)

0.220∗∗∗
(0.041)

Father Post College

0.300∗∗∗
(0.051)

0.296∗∗∗
(0.051)

0.299∗∗∗
(0.052)

0.296∗∗∗
(0.052)

0.321∗∗∗
(0.052)

0.319∗∗∗
(0.044)

0.319∗∗∗
(0.044)

0.318∗∗∗
(0.044)

0.316∗∗∗
(0.044)

0.319∗∗∗
(0.047)

Father Not in HH

0.034
(0.023)

0.034
(0.023)

0.034
(0.023)

0.031
(0.023)

0.035
(0.024)

0.041
(0.031)

0.042
(0.031)

0.041
(0.031)

0.042
(0.030)

0.049∗
(0.028)

Log Family Income

0.045∗∗∗
(0.012)

0.046∗∗∗
(0.012)

0.045∗∗∗
(0.012)

0.045∗∗∗
(0.012)

0.041∗∗∗
(0.011)

0.024∗∗
(0.011)

0.024∗∗
(0.011)

0.023∗∗
(0.011)

0.023∗∗
(0.011)

0.028∗∗
(0.012)

-0.575∗∗
(0.280)

-0.722∗∗
(0.290)

-0.747∗∗
(0.292)

IHS MN

IHS FN

0.134∗∗
(0.059)

PVT Rank

Fraction Female

0.109
(0.067)
0.383
(0.256)

0.261
(0.236)

IHS Number Foreign Born

-0.050∗∗
(0.022)

-0.046∗∗
(0.021)

0.048∗∗
(0.021)

0.049∗∗
(0.021)

IHS Number Black

0.004
(0.027)

0.013
(0.026)

-0.032
(0.043)

-0.028
(0.043)

IHS Number Latino

0.022
(0.022)

0.023
(0.019)

-0.009
(0.023)

-0.012
(0.022)

IHS Number Asian

0.021
(0.032)

0.014
(0.030)

-0.060∗
(0.031)

-0.054∗
(0.029)

IHS Number Other Race

-0.010
(0.047)

0.008
(0.046)

-0.031
(0.044)

-0.038
(0.039)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

School, Grade FE
Race FE
School Linear TT
Observations
R2
Adjusted R2

0.222
(0.248)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
5899
0.186
0.152

Yes
5650
0.332
0.300

Yes
5649
0.332
0.299

Yes
5650
0.332
0.300

Yes
5650
0.333
0.300

Yes
5898
0.318
0.286

Yes
4954
0.199
0.158

Yes
4703
0.325
0.285

Yes
4703
0.326
0.286

Yes
4703
0.326
0.286

Yes
4703
0.328
0.287

Yes
4948
0.312
0.273

Note: This table reports parameter estimates and standard errors (in parentheses) for regressions of bachelor’s degree attainment
on individual and peer characteristics. The dependent variable is equal to 1 if the individual has completed a bachelor’s (fouryear college) degree and 0 otherwise. M N (respectively, F N ) is the number of male (respectively, female) “high achievers” (those
with at least one post-college parent). IHS refers to the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation. All columns include a dummy for
whether Wave I interview took place in 1994-1995 or 1995-1996 school year. Race fixed effects include dummies for Black, Latino,
Asian, and other races. If mother’s (respectively, father’s) education is missing, all mother’s (respectively, father’s) education dummies are set to zero and a dummy is included for missing mother’s (respectively, father’s) education. If family income is missing,
family income is set to the mean value for the school and a dummy is included for missing family income. Coefficient on PVT
score multiplied by 100. Wave IV weights used. Standard errors clustered at the school level. * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

39

Table 9: High Achievers and Educational Attainment
Females
(1)
Vocational or Associate’s Degree
1.120∗∗∗
(0.300)

(2)
High School Graduate
0.060
(0.110)

Males
(3)
Vocational or Associate’s Degree
0.055
(0.281)

(4)
High School Graduate
0.284
(0.173)

FF

-0.243
(0.320)

0.038
(0.132)

0.073
(0.240)

-0.114
(0.197)

PVT Score

-0.042
(0.061)

0.220∗∗∗
(0.044)

-0.076
(0.075)

0.206∗∗∗
(0.048)

Fraction Female

-0.243
(0.287)

-0.124
(0.110)

0.172
(0.261)

0.120
(0.185)

School, Grade FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

School Linear TT

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Individual Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
5650
0.097
0.052

Yes
5650
0.199
0.159

Yes
4703
0.115
0.062

Yes
4703
0.242
0.196

MF

Peer Characteristics Controls
Observations
R2
Adjusted R2

Note: This table reports parameter estimates and standard errors (in parentheses) for regressions of educational attainment
on individual and peer characteristics with the dependent variable listed in the column heading. The variable Vocational or
Associate’s Degree takes a value of 1 if the individual has a vocational/technical degree from a program lasting 1-3 years or
an associate’s degree and 0 otherwise. The variable High School Graduate takes a value of 1 if the individual has completed
high school and 0 otherwise. M F (respectively, F F ) is the fraction of male (respectively, female) “high achievers” (those
with at least one post-college parent). All columns include a dummy for whether Wave I interview took place in 1994-1995
or 1995-1996 school year. Individual controls include race dummies (Black, Latino, Asian, and other races), age in months,
mother and father’s education (dummies for each parent for high school, some college but no degree, college degree, and
post college), and log family income. Peer characteristics controls include fraction foreign born, Black, Latino, Asian, and
other races. If mother’s (respectively, father’s) education is missing, all mother’s (respectively, father’s) education dummies
are set to zero and a dummy is included for missing mother’s (respectively, father’s) education. If family income is missing,
family income is set to the mean value for the school and a dummy is included for missing family income. Coefficient on PVT
score multiplied by 100. Wave IV weights used. Standard errors clustered at the school level. * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

Table 10: High Achievers and Grades
Females
(1)
GPA
-1.043
(0.643)

(2)
Math
-2.289∗∗∗
(0.850)

(3)
Science
-2.010∗∗
(0.856)

(4)
English
-0.699
(0.850)

(5)
History
0.038
(0.925)

Males
(6)
GPA
0.543
(0.531)

(7)
Math
0.674
(0.820)

(8)
Science
-0.347
(0.919)

(9)
English
0.686
(0.799)

(10)
History
0.522
(0.979)

FF

0.222
(0.521)

-0.141
(0.658)

-0.546
(0.858)

0.901
(0.698)

0.352
(0.891)

0.692
(0.728)

-0.839
(0.978)

0.744
(0.904)

1.529
(0.944)

1.282
(1.055)

PVT Score

1.197∗∗∗
(0.136)

0.710∗∗∗
(0.169)

1.355∗∗∗
(0.173)

1.304∗∗∗
(0.149)

1.559∗∗∗
(0.179)

1.006∗∗∗
(0.132)

0.467∗∗∗
(0.169)

1.173∗∗∗
(0.190)

0.912∗∗∗
(0.160)

1.498∗∗∗
(0.183)

Fraction Female

0.175
(0.450)

0.512
(0.684)

0.633
(0.607)

-0.363
(0.648)

0.109
(0.655)

0.872
(0.598)

0.617
(0.723)

0.468
(0.864)

0.948
(0.906)

2.034∗∗
(0.999)

School, Grade FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

School Linear TT

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Individual Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
5548
0.295
0.259

Yes
5224
0.181
0.137

Yes
4961
0.248
0.206

Yes
5508
0.252
0.214

Yes
4946
0.255
0.213

Yes
4611
0.292
0.248

Yes
4388
0.239
0.189

Yes
4135
0.253
0.201

Yes
4552
0.234
0.186

Yes
4126
0.257
0.206

MF

Peer Characteristics Controls
Observations
R2
Adjusted R2

Note: This table reports parameter estimates and standard errors (in parentheses) for regressions of grades on individual and peer characteristics. Grades are based on student reports of their grade in each subject over the previous year,
with A=4, B=3, C=2, and D or lower=1. Average GPA reflects the average across these four subjects. M F (respectively, F F ) is the fraction of male (respectively, female) “high achievers” (those with at least one post-college parent).
All columns include a dummy for whether Wave I interview took place in 1994-1995 or 1995-1996 school year. Individual controls include race dummies (Black, Latino, Asian, and other races), age in months, mother and father’s education
(dummies for each parent for high school, some college but no degree, college degree, and post college), and log family
income. Peer characteristics controls include fraction foreign born, Black, Latino, Asian, and other races. If mother’s
(respectively, father’s) education is missing, all mother’s (respectively, father’s) education dummies are set to zero and
a dummy is included for missing mother’s (respectively, father’s) education. If family income is missing, family income
is set to the mean value for the school and a dummy is included for missing family income. Coefficient on PVT score
multiplied by 100. Wave IV weights used. Standard errors clustered at the school level. * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

40

Table 11: Confidence and Motivation Factor
Loadings
(a) Females
Factor 1
Factor 2
Factor 3
Rotated Factor Loadings
Very Intelligent
College Likely
Want College

Eigenvalue
1.65
0.88
0.47

Proportion of Variance
0.55
0.29
0.16

Factor 1
0.51
0.85
0.82

(b) Males
Factor 1
Factor 2
Factor 3
Rotated Factor Loadings
Very Intelligent
College Likely
Want College

Eigenvalue
1.58
0.87
0.54

Proportion of Variance
0.53
0.29
0.18

Factor 1
0.54
0.82
0.79

Note: This table reports eigenvalues and factor loadings
based on factor analysis of the following variables: “Want
College”, which equals 1 if the student reports that they
want to go to college as a 5 on a scale of 1-5 and equals
0 otherwise; “College likely”, which equals 1 if the student says the likelihood that they will go to college is a
5 on a scale of 1-5 and equals 0 otherwise; and “Very intelligent”, which equals 1 if the student reports that their
intelligence level is “moderately above average” or “extremely above average” relative to others their own age
and equals 0 otherwise. Factor analysis performed separately for males and females. Wave IV weights used.

41

Table 12: High Achievers and Confidence and Risky Behaviors
Females
(1)
Confidence
Index
-1.337∗∗
(0.673)

(2)
Risky
Index 1
1.397∗
(0.720)

(3)
Risky
Index 2
0.662
(0.759)

(4)
Birth
Before 18
0.467∗∗∗
(0.164)

Males
(5)
Confidence
Index
0.111
(0.894)

(6)
Risky
Index 1
0.175
(0.724)

(7)
Risky
Index 2
-0.871
(0.779)

(8)
Birth
Before 18
0.111
(0.103)

FF

0.353
(0.712)

-1.346∗∗
(0.674)

1.306∗∗
(0.607)

0.354∗
(0.183)

1.378∗
(0.780)

-1.597∗∗
(0.698)

-1.974∗∗
(0.914)

-0.179∗∗
(0.081)

PVT Score

1.265∗∗∗
(0.166)

-0.302∗
(0.169)

-0.364∗
(0.187)

-0.122∗∗∗
(0.045)

0.955∗∗∗
(0.167)

0.094
(0.155)

-0.266
(0.174)

-0.063∗∗
(0.028)

Fraction Female

-0.220
(0.540)

-0.247
(0.500)

-0.693
(0.549)

0.000
(0.122)

-0.518
(0.660)

0.573
(0.767)

-0.235
(0.684)

0.106
(0.123)

School, Grade FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

School Linear TT

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Individual Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
5631
0.237
0.199

Yes
5513
0.235
0.196

Yes
5513
0.174
0.132

Yes
5548
0.130
0.086

Yes
4685
0.245
0.199

Yes
4505
0.291
0.247

Yes
4505
0.191
0.140

Yes
4610
0.154
0.102

MF

Peer Characteristics Controls
Observations
R2
Adjusted R2

Note: This table reports parameter estimates and standard errors (in parentheses) for regressions of confidence and risky
behaviors on individual and peer characteristics. The Confidence Index is the first factor from a factor analysis of three
variables measuring self-perceptions of intelligence, desire to go to college, and the likelihood of going to college. The Risky
Index 1 (respectively, 2) is the first (respectively, second) factor from a factor analysis of 8 variables measuring risky behavior. First Birth Before 18 takes a value of 1 if the individual has had a child by the time she turns age 18 and 0
otherwise. M F (respectively, F F ) is the fraction of male (respectively, female) “high achievers” (those with at least one
post-college parent). All columns include a dummy for whether Wave I interview took place in 1994-1995 or 1995-1996
school year. Individual controls include race dummies (Black, Latino, Asian, and other races), age in months, mother and
father’s education (dummies for each parent for high school, some college but no degree, college degree, and post college),
and log family income. Peer characteristics controls include fraction foreign born, Black, Latino, Asian, and other races.
If mother’s (respectively, father’s) education is missing, all mother’s (respectively, father’s) education dummies are set to
zero and a dummy is included for missing mother’s (respectively, father’s) education. If family income is missing, family income is set to the mean value for the school and a dummy is included for missing family income. Coefficient on PVT score
multiplied by 100. Wave IV weights used. Standard errors clustered at the school level. * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

42

Table 13: Risky Behavior Factor Loadings
(a) Females
Factor1
Factor2
Factor3
Rotated Factor Loadings
Any Cigarette
Any Alcohol
Drunk
Binge
Any Marijuana
Fight
Arrested before 18
Unprotected Sex

Eigenvalue
2.97
1.06
0.97

Proportion of Variance
0.37
0.13
0.12

Factor 1
0.61
0.75
0.86
0.84
0.58
0.07
0.01
0.35

Factor 2
0.20
0.04
0.03
0.00
0.26
0.73
0.71
0.18

(b) Males
Factor1
Factor2
Factor3
Rotated Factor Loadings
Any Cigarette
Any Alcohol
Drunk
Binge
Any Marijuana
Fight
Arrested before 18
Unprotected Sex

Eigenvalue
2.97
1.12
0.94

Proportion of Variance
0.37
0.14
0.12

Factor 1
0.59
0.75
0.88
0.87
0.55
0.07
0.04
0.27

Factor 2
0.17
0.06
0.06
0.02
0.23
0.73
0.74
0.28

Note: This table reports eigenvalues and factor loadings based on factor analysis of the following variables: “any alcohol”, which equals
1 if the individual has ever had more than a “couple of sips” of alcohol and equals 0 otherwise; “any cigarettes”, which equals 1 if the
individual has ever smoked cigarettes and equals 0 otherwise; “any
marijuana”, which equals 1 if the individual has smoked any marijuana in the past 30 days and equals 0 otherwise; “binge drinking”, which equals 1 if the individual has had 5 or more drinks “in
a row” in the past year and equals 0 otherwise; “drunk”, which
equals 1 if the individual reports being drunk in the past year and
equals 0 otherwise; “fight”, which equals 1 if the individual reports
getting in a “serious physical fight” in the past year and 0 otherwise; “unprotected sex,”, whick equals 1 if the individual did not
use any form of birth control the most recent time she had sex and
0 otherwise; and arrest before 18, which equals 1 if the individual
was arrested before age 18 and 0 otherwise. Factor analysis performed separately for males and females. Wave IV weights used.

43

Table 14: High Achievers and Bachelor’s Degree Attainment: Heterogeneity
Dependent Variable: Bachelor’s Degree
Females

School
School
Below
Above
Median
Median
Test Scores Test Scores
(5)
(6)
-0.144
-1.351∗∗
(0.820)
(0.619)

Below
Median
PVT
(1)
-1.410∗∗∗
(0.476)

Above
Median
PVT
(2)
-0.739
(0.486)

Neither
Parent
College
(3)
-0.038
(0.431)

Parent
College
(4)
-2.138∗∗∗
(0.546)

FF

1.493∗∗∗
(0.469)

-0.353
(0.490)

0.697∗
(0.390)

0.325
(0.679)

0.357
(0.453)

PVT Score

0.465∗∗∗
(0.119)

0.587∗∗∗
(0.201)

0.505∗∗∗
(0.083)

0.601∗∗∗
(0.142)

Fraction Female

0.331
(0.264)

0.583
(0.373)

0.348
(0.222)

0.442
(0.579)

MF

Males

School
School
Below
Above
Median
Median
Test Scores Test Scores
(11)
(12)
0.943
0.317
(0.832)
(0.419)

Below
Median
PVT
(7)
-0.192
(0.668)

Above
Median
PVT
(8)
0.188
(0.359)

Neither
Parent
College
(9)
-0.217
(0.503)

Parent
College
(10)
0.554
(0.525)

1.156∗∗
(0.494)

0.776
(0.707)

0.097
(0.609)

0.344
(0.615)

-0.015
(0.755)

-0.282
(0.531)

0.313
(0.924)

0.508∗∗∗
(0.091)

0.620∗∗∗
(0.102)

-0.011
(0.104)

0.795∗∗∗
(0.161)

0.374∗∗∗
(0.085)

0.596∗∗∗
(0.164)

0.412∗∗∗
(0.103)

0.562∗∗∗
(0.121)

0.210
(0.535)

0.420
(0.324)

-0.491
(0.428)

-0.635∗
(0.346)

-0.525
(0.322)

-0.585
(0.554)

-1.530∗∗∗
(0.458)

-0.437∗
(0.249)

School, Grade FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

School Linear TT

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Individual Controls
Peer Characteristics Controls
Observations
R2
Adjusted R2

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
2913
0.330
0.263

Yes
2737
0.357
0.290

Yes
3443
0.254
0.192

Yes
1939
0.405
0.313

Yes
2245
0.303
0.266

Yes
2207
0.339
0.297

Yes
2093
0.351
0.258

Yes
2610
0.368
0.296

Yes
2744
0.279
0.203

Yes
1731
0.443
0.345

Yes
1842
0.336
0.292

Yes
1872
0.336
0.286

Note: This table reports parameter estimates and standard errors (in parentheses) for regressions of bachelor’s degree attainment on
individual and peer characteristics. The dependent variable is equal to 1 if the individual has completed a bachelor’s (four-year college) degree and 0 otherwise. Columns (1)-(2) and (7)-(8) split the sample into below-median and above-median PVT score. Columns
(3)-(4) and (9)-(10) split the sample by whether at least one parent has a college degree. Columns (5)-(6) and (11)-(12) split the
sample by the fraction of students at the individual’s school testing at or above grade level. M F (respectively, F F ) is the fraction of male (respectively, female) “high achievers” (those with at least one post-college parent). All columns include a dummy for
whether Wave I interview took place in 1994-1995 or 1995-1996 school year. Individual controls include race dummies (Black, Latino,
Asian, and other races), age in months, mother and father’s education (dummies for each parent for high school, some college but
no degree, college degree, and post college), and log family income. Peer characteristics controls include fraction foreign born, Black,
Latino, Asian, and other races. If mother’s (respectively, father’s) education is missing, all mother’s (respectively, father’s) education dummies are set to zero and a dummy is included for missing mother’s (respectively, father’s) education. If family income is
missing, family income is set to the mean value for the school and a dummy is included for missing family income. Coefficient on
PVT score multiplied by 100. Wave IV weights used. Standard errors clustered at the school level. * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

44

Table 15: Other Outcomes
Females
(1)
STEM
Major
-0.202
(0.561)

FF

LFP
-0.623∗∗
(0.305)

(3)
(4)
Ever
Total No.
Married Children
-0.239
1.670∗∗
(0.457)
(0.775)

Males
(5)
STEM
Major
0.115
(0.733)

LFP
-0.085
(0.212)

(7)
(8)
Ever
Total No.
Married Children
-0.237
-0.248
(0.430)
(0.681)

1.021∗
(0.522)

0.465∗
(0.241)

-0.022
(0.467)

-1.428
(0.971)

0.564
(1.316)

-0.078
(0.235)

-0.470
(0.528)

-1.908∗∗
(0.877)

PVT Score

0.153
(0.160)

0.102
(0.070)

-0.107
(0.075)

-0.962∗∗∗
(0.205)

0.301
(0.338)

0.027
(0.057)

-0.013
(0.095)

-0.466∗∗∗
(0.168)

Fraction Female

0.547
(0.822)

-0.077
(0.260)

0.189
(0.308)

0.616
(0.630)

-3.223∗∗∗
(1.176)

0.383∗∗
(0.155)

-0.034
(0.282)

0.569
(0.599)

School, Grade FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

School Linear TT

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Individual Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
909
0.298
0.148

Yes
4090
0.100
0.061

Yes
5649
0.202
0.162

Yes
5640
0.222
0.183

Yes
584
0.455
0.267

Yes
3275
0.161
0.114

Yes
4698
0.205
0.156

Yes
4678
0.208
0.159

MF

Peer Characteristics Controls
Observations
R2
Adjusted R2

(2)

(6)

Note: This table reports parameter estimates and standard errors (in parentheses) for regressions of STEM field choice, labor
force participation, marriage, and fertility on individual and peer characteristics. STEM major choice is equal to 1 if the individual lists a STEM field as one of her two major/minor fields of study and is equal to 0 otherwise. LFP is equal to 1 if the
individual is currently working at least 10 hours per week, is on sick leave or temporarily disabled, is on maternity/paternity
leave, or is unemployed and looking for work and is equal to zero otherwise. M F (respectively, F F ) is the fraction of
male (respectively, female) “high achievers” (those with at least one post-college parent). All columns include a dummy for
whether Wave I interview took place in 1994-1995 or 1995-1996 school year. Individual controls include race dummies (Black,
Latino, Asian, and other races), age in months, mother’s and father’s education (dummies for high school, some college but
no degree, college degree, post college for each parent), and log family income. Peer characteristics controls include fraction
foreign born, Black, Latino, Asian, and other races. If mother’s (respectively, father’s) education is missing, all mother’s
(respectively, father’s) education dummies are set to zero and a dummy is included for missing mother’s (respectively, father’s) education. If family income is missing, family income is set to the mean value for the school and a dummy is included
for missing family income. Coefficient on PVT score multiplied by 100. Columns (1) and (5) also include an indicator for
whether the individual has completed a bachelor’s degree by Wave III. Sample for STEM field of study restricted to students
in grades 10-12 in Wave I who have completed a postsecondary degree by Wave III. Sample for LFP restricted to students in
grades 9-12 in Wave I. Wave IV weights used. Standard errors clustered at the school level. * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

45

Table 16: High Achievers and Bachelor’s Degree Attainment:
Alternative Measures
Dependent Variable: Bachelor’s degree

MFA

FFA

Females
(1)
-1.579∗∗
(0.644)

(2)

-0.198
(0.687)

Males
(3)
0.208
(0.651)

(4)

0.544
(0.859)

MFB

-1.537∗∗
(0.680)

-0.097
(0.783)

FFB

0.511
(0.570)

-0.081
(0.749)

PVT Score

0.535∗∗∗
(0.064)

0.531∗∗∗
(0.064)

0.449∗∗∗
(0.070)

0.449∗∗∗
(0.070)

Fraction Female

0.307
(0.257)

0.539∗∗
(0.209)

-0.611∗∗
(0.286)

-0.592∗∗
(0.267)

School, Grade FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

School Linear TT

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Individual Characteristics Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
5650
0.333
0.300

Yes
5650
0.333
0.300

Yes
4703
0.328
0.287

Yes
4703
0.328
0.287

Peer Characteristics Controls
Observations
R2
Adjusted R2

Note: This table reports parameter estimates and standard errors (in parentheses) for regressions of bachelor’s degree attainment on individual and peer characteristics. The dependent variable is equal to 1 if the individual has completed a
bachelor’s (four-year college) degree and 0 otherwise. M F A (respectively, F F A)
represents male (respectively, female) “high achievers” (those with at least one
post-college parent) as a fraction of all students in the grade. M F B (respectively,
F F B) is represents male (respectively, female) “high achievers” (those with two
post-college parents) as a fraction of males (respectively, females) in the grade.
All columns include a dummy for whether Wave I interview took place in 19941995 or 1995-1996 school year. Individual controls include race dummies (Black,
Latino, Asian, and other races), age in months, mother and father’s education
(dummies for each parent for high school, some college but no degree, college degree, and post college), and log family income. Peer characteristics controls include fraction foreign born, Black, Latino, Asian, and other races. If mother’s
(respectively, father’s) education is missing, all mother’s (respectively, father’s) education dummies are set to zero and a dummy is included for missing mother’s
(respectively, father’s) education. If family income is missing, family income is
set to the mean value for the school and a dummy is included for missing family income. Coefficient on PVT score multiplied by 100. Wave IV weights used.
Standard errors clustered at the school level. * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

46

Table 17: High Achievers and Bachelor’s Degree Attainment: Robustness
Dependent Variable: Bachelor’s degree
Females
(1)
-0.851∗∗∗
(0.272)

(2)
-0.823∗∗∗
(0.247)

(3)
-1.148∗∗∗
(0.355)

(4)
-1.001∗∗∗
(0.325)

Males
(5)
0.201
(0.295)

(6)
0.178
(0.298)

(7)
0.151
(0.465)

(8)
0.108
(0.482)

FF

0.047
(0.266)

0.055
(0.262)

0.163
(0.326)

0.194
(0.323)

-0.042
(0.370)

-0.111
(0.365)

0.375
(0.530)

0.389
(0.528)

PVT Score

0.544∗∗∗
(0.064)

Fraction Female

0.388∗∗∗
(0.143)

0.291∗∗
(0.143)

0.461∗∗
(0.231)

0.343
(0.229)

0.011
(0.214)

-0.001
(0.216)

-0.611∗∗
(0.293)

-0.592∗∗
(0.292)

School, Grade FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

School Linear TT

No

No

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

Yes

Individual Characteristics Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
5650
0.308
0.289

Yes
5898
0.292
0.274

Yes
5098
0.337
0.303

Yes
5326
0.321
0.288

Yes
4703
0.289
0.266

Yes
4948
0.274
0.251

Yes
4135
0.328
0.286

Yes
4364
0.313
0.273

MF

Peer Characteristics Controls
Observations
R2
Adjusted R2

0.527∗∗∗
(0.067)

0.469∗∗∗
(0.069)

0.426∗∗∗
(0.075)

Note: This table reports parameter estimates and standard errors (in parentheses) for regressions of bachelor’s degree attainment on individual and peer characteristics. The dependent variable is equal to 1 if the individual has completed
a bachelor’s (four-year college) degree and 0 otherwise. Columns (1)-(2) (respectively (5)-(6) for males) exclude linear
time trends. Columns (3)-(4) (respectively (7)-(8) for males) exclude schools with variation in M F and F F outside of
the 90 percent confidence interval obtained in the Monte Carlo simulations. M F (respectively, F F ) is the fraction of
male (respectively, female) “high achievers” (those with at least one post-college parent). All columns include a dummy
for whether Wave I interview took place in 1994-1995 or 1995-1996 school year. Individual controls include race dummies (Black, Latino, Asian, and other races), age in months, mother and father’s education (dummies for each parent
for high school, some college but no degree, college degree, and post college), and log family income. Peer characteristics controls include fraction foreign born, Black, Latino, Asian, and other races. If mother’s (respectively, father’s)
education is missing, all mother’s (respectively, father’s) education dummies are set to zero and a dummy is included
for missing mother’s (respectively, father’s) education. If family income is missing, family income is set to the mean
value for the school and a dummy is included for missing family income. Coefficient on PVT score multiplied by 100.

47

12

Figures

.15
Standard Deviation of MF
.05
.1
0

0

Standard Deviation of MF
.05
.1

.15

Figure 1: Monte Carlo Estimates of M F and F F

5th−95th Percentile Simulated SD

Actual SD

5th−95th Percentile Simulated SD

Standard Deviation of FF
.05
.1
0

0

Standard Deviation of FF
.05
.1

.15

(b) Males: M F

.15

(a) Females: M F

Actual SD

5th−95th Percentile Simulated SD

Actual SD

5th−95th Percentile Simulated SD

(c) Females: F F

Actual SD

(d) Males: F F

Note: These figures display simulated and actual standard deviations for schools in the sample with at least three grades, with each bar representing
a different school. Upper and lower edges of the bar represent the 5th and 95th percentiles respectively of the simulated within-school standard
deviation of M F (or F F ). The dot represents the empirical standard deviation.

48

100
80
Frequency
40
60
20
0

0

20

Frequency
40
60

80

100

Figure 2: Randomization-Based Inference for M F and F F

−1.2

−1

−.8

−.6

−.4

−.2
0
.2
.4
Estimated Coefficient

.6

.8

1

1.2

−1.2

−1

−.8

−.4

−.2
0
.2
.4
Estimated Coefficient

.6

.8

1

1.2

(b) Males: M F

0

0

20

Frequency
50

Frequency
40
60

80

100

100

(a) Females: M F

−.6

−1.2

−1

−.8

−.6

−.4

−.2
0
.2
.4
Estimated Coefficient

.6

.8

1

1.2

−1.2

(c) Females: F F

−1

−.8

−.6

−.4

−.2
0
.2
.4
Estimated Coefficient

.6

.8

1

1.2

(d) Males: F F

Note: These figures show distribution of coefficients obtained from the final OLS specification in Table 7 while replacing M F (respectively, F F )
with the value of M F (respectively, F F ) from a random grade in the same school. Red line represents actual estimate obtained in specifications
(5) and (11) in Table 7.

49

100
80
Frequency
40
60
20
0

0

20

Frequency
40
60

80

100

Figure 3: Randomization-Based Inference for M N and F N

−.1

−.08

−.06

−.04

−.02
0
.02
Estimated Coefficient

.04

.06

.08

.1

−.1

−.08

−.06

−.02
0
.02
Estimated Coefficient

.04

.06

.08

.1

80
Frequency
40
60
20
0

0

20

Frequency
40
60

80

100

(b) Males: M N

100

(a) Females: M N

−.04

−.1

−.08

−.06

−.04

−.02
0
.02
Estimated Coefficient

.04

.06

.08

.1

−.1

(c) Females: F N

−.08

−.06

−.04

−.02
0
.02
Estimated Coefficient

.04

.06

.08

.1

(d) Males: F N

Note: These figures show distribution of coefficients obtained from the final OLS specification in Table 7 while replacing M N (respectively, F N )
with the value of M N (respectively, F N ) from a random grade in the same school. Red line represents actual estimate obtained in specifications
(5) and (11) in Table 8.

50

13
13.0.1

Appendix
Add Health: Sample selection

Of the over 15,000 students in grades 7-12 in Wave I and followed through Wave IV, we
drop about 4000 students for whom we cannot match information on peer characteristics
(because they cannot be identified in both the in-home and in-school survey). We also
drop those in a male-only school (58 students), and students without information on our
main variables (7 students). We also drop 42 7th and 8th graders from a school that
doubles in size between 8th and 9th grade, because the smaller junior high and larger high
school populations may be different in characteristics. Lastly, we drop 272 individuals in
grades with fewer than 20 students in a grade and a school with only one grade left at the
end of this procedure (56 students).
50 schools have grades 9-12, 15 have grades 7-12, 43 have grades 7-8, and the remaining
10 schools have other mixes of grades. There is 1 school that has grades 7-12, but we drop
grades 7-8 (see above) and are left with grades 9-12.
13.0.2

Imputing Post-College for Parents

We use the in-school survey which records the student’s response to the highest level
of education attained by their residential father and residential mother and create a
dummy variable P Ci for student i that takes the value one if either the residential mother
or the residential father of student i has a post-college education, i.e., obtained any
education beyond a four-year college degree, and takes the value of 0 otherwise. If a
student either does not have a residential father/mother or the information is missing,
we impute that parent’s level of education using the other parent’s education. For
example, if the residential father’s education is missing, but the residential mother has a
high-school education, we impute a value for father post-college by taking the average
value of father post-college among students of the same gender within the school who
also have a residential mother with a high-school education. If there are no students with
equivalent mother’s education and non-missing information on father’s education, we
impute father post-college using the value of father post-college among all students in the
school who have a residential mother with a high-school education.62
13.0.3

Identification Tests for M N and F N

Appendix Table 2 provides tests of balance as described in Section 4 of the paper for
M N and F N . They reveal that there is sufficient residual variation to estimate the effects
62

For the 32 cases for which this procedure didn’t work (because there was no other parent with the
same education), we impute the missing parent’s level of education at the same level as the non-missing
parent.

51

of M N and F N and that this residual variation is not strongly correlated with individual
characteristics.
Appendix Figure 1 shows the equivalent to Figure 1 for M N and F N for females
(panels a and c) and males (panels b and d). Again, close to 90 percent of our schools have
a standard deviation of M N and F N within the 90 percent confidence interval obtained
from our simulations for both males and females. Specifically, 90 percent (females) and 89
percent (males) have a standard deviation of MN falling within the estimated 90 percent
confidence interval, and 90 percent (females) and 90 percent (males) have a standard
deviation of F N falling within the estimated 90 percent confidence interval.

52

14

Appendix Tables and Figures
Appendix Table 1: Balance Tests, M N and F N

Panel A, Females
IHS MN
IHS FN
Own Parent Post College

Log Family Income
-0.0143
(0.057)
0.003
(0.038)
0.310∗∗∗
(0.036)

PVT Score
-0.462
(0.822)
-0.464
(0.735)
5.170∗∗∗
(0.715)

Mother Not in HH
0.000
(0.014)
0.017
(0.012)
-0.009
(0.007)

Father Not in HH
-0.030
(0.028)
-0.023
(0.026)
-0.018
(0.019)

Black Age in Months
0.015
0.232
(0.021)
(0.554)
0.023∗
-0.197
(0.013)
(0.372)
0.004
-1.133∗∗∗
(0.019)
(0.295)

Log Family Income
0.009
(0.101)
0.278∗∗∗
(0.043)
-0.012
(0.040)

PVT Score
0.859
(1.033)
4.200∗∗∗
(0.616)
-0.208
(0.780)

Mother Not in HH
0.022
(0.017)
-0.014
(0.010)
-0.015
(0.016)

Father Not in HH
0.011
(0.042)
-0.007
(0.019)
-0.046∗
(0.024)

Black Age in Months
0.026
-0.626
(0.023)
(0.562)
0.029∗
-1.170∗∗∗
(0.015)
(0.293)
0.011
0.147
(0.012)
(0.449)

Panel B, Males
IHS MN
Own Parent Post College
IHS FN

Note: This table reports parameter estimates and standard errors (in parentheses) for regressions of M N and F N
on individual characteristics. The estimates displayed in each row are for separate regressions in which the dependent variable is the variable name in the column and the independent variable is displayed in the row. M N (respectively, F N ) is the fraction of male (respectively, female) “high achievers” (those with at least one post-college parent) as defined in the text and IHS is the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation. The regressions of F N in Panel A
and M N in Panel B include a control for whether the individual has at least one post-college parent. If family income is missing, family income is set to the mean value for the school and a dummy is included for missing family
income. All regressions are unweighted. Standard errors clustered at the school level. * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

53

Appendix Table 2: High Achievers and Confidence and Motivation
Females
(1)
Very Intelligent
-0.288
(0.358)

(2)
College Likely
-0.485
(0.322)

(3)
Want College
-0.545∗
(0.297)

Males
(4)
Very Intelligent
0.251
(0.426)

(5)
College Likely
-0.589
(0.399)

(6)
Want College
0.507
(0.456)

FF

-0.125
(0.407)

0.113
(0.335)

0.289
(0.335)

0.802∗∗
(0.404)

0.785
(0.481)

-0.015
(0.380)

PVT Score

0.649∗∗∗
(0.094)

0.433∗∗∗
(0.076)

0.317∗∗∗
(0.072)

0.818∗∗∗
(0.084)

0.120
(0.086)

0.226∗∗
(0.089)

Fraction Female

0.004
(0.229)

-0.064
(0.275)

-0.127
(0.282)

-0.002
(0.283)

-0.324
(0.328)

-0.174
(0.331)

School, Grade FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

School Linear TT

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Individual Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
5642
0.167
0.125

Yes
5636
0.224
0.185

Yes
5641
0.144
0.102

Yes
4695
0.212
0.164

Yes
4691
0.219
0.171

Yes
4694
0.191
0.142

MF

Peer Characteristics Controls
Observations
R2
Adjusted R2

Note: This table reports parameter estimates and standard errors (in parentheses) for regressions of measures of confidence
and motivation on individual and peer characteristics. “Want College” equals 1 if the student reports that they want to
go to college as a 5 on a scale of 1-5 and equals 0 otherwise; “College likely” equals 1 if the student says the likelihood
that they go to college is a 5 on a scale of 1-5 and equals 0 otherwise. “Very intelligent” equals 1 if the student reports
that their intelligence level is “moderately above average” or “extremely above average” relative to others their own age and
equals 0 otherwise. M F (respectively, F F ) is the fraction of male (respectively, female) “high achievers” (those with at least
one post-college parent). All columns include a dummy for whether Wave I interview took place in 1994-1995 or 1995-1996
school year. Individual controls include race dummies (Black, Latino, Asian, and other races), age in months, mother and
father’s education (dummies for each parent for high school, some college but no degree, college degree, and post college),
and log family income. If mother’s (respectively, father’s) education is missing, all mother’s (respectively, father’s) education dummies are set to zero and a dummy is included for missing mother’s (respectively, father’s) education. If family
income is missing, family income is set to the mean value for the school and a dummy is included for missing family income.
Peer characteristics controls include fraction foreign born, Black, Latino, Asian, and other races. Coefficient on PVT score
multiplied by 100. Wave IV weights used. Standard errors clustered at the school level. * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01.

54

55

Yes

Yes
5630
0.166
0.124
0.586

Individual Controls

Peer Characteristics Controls
Observations
R2
Adjusted R2
Dep Var Mean

Yes
5626
0.198
0.158
0.563

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
5612
0.191
0.151
0.275

Yes

Yes

Yes

-0.156
(0.280)

-0.097
(0.086)

Yes
5608
0.171
0.130
0.237

Yes

Yes

Yes

-0.247
(0.257)

-0.120
(0.080)

-0.491
(0.352)

(4)
Binge
0.433
(0.322)

Yes
5594
0.135
0.091
0.121

Yes

Yes

Yes

0.061
(0.155)

-0.055
(0.052)

-0.151
(0.266)

(5)
Marijuana
0.267
(0.249)

Yes
5629
0.156
0.113
0.218

Yes

Yes

Yes
5628
0.122
0.078
0.027

Yes

Yes

Yes

0.012
(0.091)

-0.704∗∗∗
(0.206)
Yes

0.021
(0.032)

0.201∗
(0.108)

Yes
5598
0.143
0.100
0.126

Yes

Yes

Yes

0.052
(0.222)

-0.129∗∗
(0.055)

0.720∗∗
(0.342)

(7)
(8)
Arrest Unpr Sex
-0.031
0.202
(0.124)
(0.342)

-0.261∗∗∗
(0.062)

-0.106
(0.248)

(6)
Fight
0.368
(0.247)

Yes
4678
0.173
0.122
0.574

Yes

Yes

Yes

0.782∗
(0.413)

-0.086
(0.088)

-0.752
(0.522)

Males
(9)
Cigarettes
0.618
(0.428)

Yes
4681
0.202
0.154
0.565

Yes

Yes

Yes

0.202
(0.339)

0.185∗∗
(0.091)

-0.518∗
(0.295)

(10)
Alcohol
0.184
(0.330)

Yes
4652
0.240
0.193
0.279

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
4656
0.261
0.216
0.275

Yes

Yes

Yes

0.022
-0.013
(0.350) (0.365)

0.042
0.013
(0.066) (0.072)

-0.454 -0.650
(0.351) (0.458)

(11)
(12)
Drunk Binge
-0.217 -0.183
(0.359) (0.357)

Yes
4626
0.157
0.106
0.135

Yes

Yes

Yes

0.044
(0.214)

0.012
(0.053)

-0.354
(0.377)

Yes
4676
0.156
0.105
0.406

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
4666
0.159
0.108
0.111

Yes

Yes

Yes

-0.036 -0.140
(0.295) (0.198)

-0.098
0.004
(0.083) (0.055)

-0.902∗ -0.462∗
(0.491) (0.269)

Yes
4642
0.149
0.097
0.102

Yes

Yes

Yes

-0.078
(0.174)

-0.139∗∗
(0.065)

-0.189
(0.272)

(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
Marijuana Fight Arrest Unpr Sex
-0.029
-0.532 -0.206
-0.126
(0.303)
(0.470) (0.238)
(0.197)

Note: This table reports parameter estimates and standard errors (in parentheses) for regressions of measures of risky behaviors on individual and peer characteristics. The dependent variables are
defined as follows: “any cigarettes” equals 1 if the individual has ever smoked cigarettes and equals 0 otherwise; “any alcohol” equals 1 if the individual has ever had more than a “couple of sips” of
alcohol and equals 0 otherwise; “drunk” equals 1 if the individual reports being drunk in the past year and equals 0 otherwise; “binge drinking” equals 1 if the individual has had 5 or more drinks “in a
row” in the past year and equals 0 otherwise; “any marijuana” equals 1 if the individual has smoked any marijuana in the past 30 days and equals 0 otherwise; “fight” equals 1 if the individual reports
getting in a “serious physical fight” in the past year and 0 otherwise; “arrest before 18” equals 1 if the individual was arrested before age 18 and 0 otherwise; and “unprotected sex,” equals 1 if the individual did not use any form of birth control the most recent time she had sex and 0 otherwise. M F (respectively, F F ) is the fraction of male (respectively, female) “high achievers” (those with at least
one post-college parent) as described in the text. All columns include a dummy for whether Wave I interview took place in 1994-1995 or 1995-1996 school year. Individual controls include race dummies
(Black, Latino, Asian, and other races), age in months, mother and father’s education (dummies for each parent for high school, some college but no degree, college degree, and post college), and log
family income. If mother’s (respectively, father’s) education is missing, all mother’s (respectively, father’s) education dummies are set to zero and a dummy is included for missing mother’s (respectively,
father’s) education. If family income is missing, family income is set to the mean value for the school and a dummy is included for missing family income. Peer characteristics controls include fraction
foreign born, Black, Latino, Asian, and other races. Coefficient on PVT score multiplied by 100. Wave IV weights used. Standard errors clustered at the school level. * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01.

Yes

Yes

School, Grade FE

School Linear TT

-0.058
(0.264)

Fraction Female

-0.324
(0.218)

-0.091
(0.083)

-0.209∗∗
(0.088)

PVT Score

-0.824∗∗
(0.361)

-0.718∗
(0.397)

-0.088
(0.410)

(3)
Drunk
0.656∗
(0.395)

(2)
Alcohol
0.315
(0.307)

FF

MF

Females
(1)
Cigarettes
1.004∗∗
(0.414)

Appendix Table 3: High Achievers and Risky Behaviors

Appendix Table 4: Confidence and Risky Behaviors with Controls for PVT Rank
Females
(1)
Confidence
Index
-1.283∗
(0.676)

(2)
Risky
Index 1
1.325∗
(0.685)

(3)
Risky
Index 2
0.628
(0.760)

(4)
Birth
Before 18
0.457∗∗∗
(0.161)

Males
(5)
Confidence
Index
0.113
(0.912)

(6)
Risky
Index 1
0.170
(0.720)

(7)
Risky
Index 2
-0.874
(0.786)

(8)
Birth
Before 18
0.111
(0.104)

FF

0.413
(0.707)

-1.440∗∗
(0.680)

1.261∗∗
(0.602)

0.343∗
(0.185)

1.378∗
(0.787)

-1.597∗∗
(0.698)

-1.974∗∗
(0.913)

-0.179∗∗
(0.082)

PVT Score

0.471
(0.375)

0.913∗∗∗
(0.341)

0.210
(0.522)

0.027
(0.097)

0.261
(0.481)

0.777∗
(0.441)

0.150
(0.422)

-0.099
(0.073)

Fraction Female

-0.340
(0.542)

-0.064
(0.511)

-0.607
(0.562)

0.024
(0.121)

-0.568
(0.658)

0.626
(0.789)

-0.202
(0.689)

0.104
(0.125)

PVT Rank

0.352∗∗
(0.153)

-0.540∗∗∗
(0.148)

-0.255
(0.182)

-0.068∗
(0.040)

0.309
(0.190)

-0.303∗
(0.179)

-0.185
(0.171)

0.016
(0.030)

School, Grade FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

School Linear TT

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Individual Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
5630
0.237
0.199

Yes
5512
0.239
0.200

Yes
5512
0.175
0.133

Yes
5547
0.131
0.087

Yes
4685
0.246
0.200

Yes
4505
0.293
0.248

Yes
4505
0.191
0.140

Yes
4610
0.154
0.102

MF

Peer Characteristics Controls
Observations
R2
Adjusted R2

Note: This table reports parameter estimates and standard errors (in parentheses) for regressions of measures of confidence
and motivation and risky behaviors on individual and peer characteristics. The Confidence Index is the first factor from a
factor analysis of three variables measuring self-perceptions of intelligence, desire to go to college, and likelihood of going
to college. The Risky Index 1 (respectively, 2) is the first (respectively, second) factor from a factor analysis of 8 variables
measuring risky behaviors. First Birth Before 18 takes a value of 1 if the individual has had a child by the time she turns
age 18 and 0 otherwise. M F (respectively, F F ) is the fraction of male (respectively, female) “high achievers” (those with at
least one post-college parent). All columns include a dummy for whether Wave I interview took place in 1994-1995 or 19951996 school year. Individual controls include race dummies (Black, Latino, Asian, and other races), age in months, mother’s
and father’s education (dummies for high school, some college but no degree, college degree, post college for each parent),
and log family income. If mother’s (respectively, father’s) education is missing, all mother’s (respectively, father’s) education
dummies are set to zero and a dummy is included for missing mother’s (respectively, father’s) education. If family income is
missing, family income is set to the mean value for the school and a dummy is included for missing family income. Peer characteristics controls include fraction foreign born, Black, Latino, Asian, and other races. Coefficient on PVT score multiplied
by 100. The PVT percentile rank of the student is calculated by taking the absolute rank of each student relative to others
in her grade and school in the in-home sample (with the worst-performing student having a value of 1) and then converting
into a percentile. Wave IV weights used. Standard errors clustered at the school level. * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

56

Appendix Table 5: Sample Attrition
Dependent Variable: In Wave IV Sample

MF

FF

Females
(1)
0.216
(0.259)

(2)

0.339
(0.248)

Males
(3)
0.333
(0.310)

(4)

-0.503
(0.433)

MN

0.029
(0.027)

0.028
(0.032)

FN

0.023
(0.022)

-0.052
(0.032)

PVT Score

0.076
(0.057)

0.076
(0.057)

0.162∗∗
(0.068)

0.163∗∗
(0.068)

Fraction of Peers who are Female

0.099
(0.178)

0.090
(0.172)

0.341
(0.256)

0.457∗
(0.274)

School, Grade FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

School Linear TT

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Individual Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
6878
0.152

Yes
6876
0.146

Yes
6250
0.144

Yes
6250
0.145

Peer Characteristics Controls
Observations
R2

Note: This table reports parameter estimates and standard errors (in parentheses) for regressions of being in the Wave IV sample (conditional on being in
Wave I) on individual and peer characteristics. M F (respectively, F F ) is the
fraction of male (respectively, female) “high achievers” (those with at least one
post-college parent) as described in the text. All columns include a dummy for
whether Wave I interview took place in 1994-1995 or 1995-1996 school year. Individual controls include race dummies (Black, Latino, Asian, and other races),
age in months, mother and father’s education (dummies for each parent for high
school, some college but no degree, college degree, and post college), and log family income. If mother’s (respectively, father’s) education is missing, all mother’s
(respectively, father’s) education dummies are set to zero and a dummy is included for missing mother’s (respectively, father’s) education. If family income
is missing, family income is set to the mean value for the school and a dummy
is included for missing family income. Peer characteristics controls include fraction foreign born, Black, Latino, Asian, and other races in columns (1) and (3)
and the IHS transformation of the count of peers who are foreign born, Black,
Latino, Asian, and other races in columns (2) and (4). Wave I weights used.
Standard errors clustered at the school level. * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01.

57

15
Standard Deviation of MN
5
10
0

0

Standard Deviation of MN
5
10

15

Appendix Figure 1: Monte Carlo Estimates of M N and F N

5th−95th Percentile Simulated SD

Actual SD

5th−95th Percentile Simulated SD

Standard Deviation of FN
5
10
0

0

Standard Deviation of FN
5
10

15

(b) Males: M N

15

(a) Females: M N

Actual SD

5th−95th Percentile Simulated SD

Actual SD

5th−95th Percentile Simulated SD

(c) Females: F N

Actual SD

(d) Males: F N

Note: These figures display simulated and actual standard deviations for schools in the sample with at least
three grades, with each bar representing a different school. Upper and lower edges of the bar represent the
5th and 95th percentiles respectively of the simulated within-school standard deviation of M N (or F N ).
The dot represents the empirical standard deviation.

58

