NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A NON-COMPETITIVE, EQUILIBRIUM
Y 7DEL'OF FLUCTUATIONS

Robert E. Mall

Working Paper No. 2576

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 1988

This research was supported by the National Science Foundation and is part
of the Economic Fluctuations Program of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2576
May 1988

A NON-COMPETITIVE, EQUILIBRIUM
MODEL OF FLUCTUATIONS
ABSTRACT

An equilibrium model of fluctuations has two components: an elastic
labor supply schedule and a source of shifts of the labor demand schedule.

In the real business cycle model, shifts of labor demand follow from
vibrations in the production function. In the model of this paper, shifts of
labor demand are the result of changes in preferences. Total real GNP
falls when demand shifts away from goods produced by sectors with
market power and toward competitive sectors. The observed cyclical
stability of relative prices is consistent with such demand shifts.

Robert E. Hall
Hoover Institution

Stanford University
Stanford, California 94305

At

a

very general level, macroeconomists have a common view
about the basic elements of a model of fluctuations in aggregate output
and employment. First, labor supply is effectively highly elastic. Real
business cycle theorists posit sufficiently high intertemporal substitution in
leisure that the labor supply schedule for temporary movements of the real
wage is very elastic.
Others, who question high intertemporal
substitution, embrace theories of efficiency wages or other theories where
large movements in hours of work can occur without significant changes in
real wages.
The second area of basic agreement is that shifts labor demand are
the basic driving force of fluctuations. In the real business cycle model,
vibrations of the production function are responsible for movements of
labor demand. Critics have pointed out that technical regress is not a
convincing explanation of recessions. But within a one-sector model, the

of shifts of labor demand are closely circumscribed. Any inward
shift of the marginal product of labor schedule is interpretable as technical
regress. Hence a two-sector model seems a more natural one to generate
sources

upward and downward shifts in labor demand. Net demand will fluctuate
only if there are important asymmetries between the sectors.
The basic idea of this paper is to explore the asymmetry that
results from the coexistence of monopoly and competitive sectors. The
monopoly sector might be manufacturing and the competitive sector the
rest of the economy. Shifts of demand generate fluctuations in total
output because resources are not usually fully utilized in the monopoly

sector whereas the competitive sector always produces at capacity.

The principal objective of this paper is to develop a model in the
equilibrium style that combines elastic labor supply with the driving force
of shifts in the composition of demand. IL the model, contractions in
aggregate output are inefficient, because they are the result of
inappropriately low levels of output of the monopoly good. However,
there is much more to the analysis than just the simple point that the
social cost of reductions in output is higher in a non-competitive economy.
'That point has already been made effectively by Akerlof aud Yelien (1985)
and Maukiw (1985). The point here is that a competitive economy has a
strong drive to full resource utilisation, whereas that drive is much
attenuated in a non-competitive economy. The competitor puts all his
output on the market; the price-maker always has to worry about the
effect of more output on the price he gets for his existing output. The
analysis has some points in corncnon with Oliver Hart's (1982) important
paper.
The model in this paper relies entirely on the equilibrium mode of
analysis. The preferences of the actors are clearly stated, the technology is
spelled out, and the restrictions on the interactions of the actors are made
plain. Subject to those restrictions, there are no opportunities for Pareto
improvements. The central departure from most other equilibrium models
is non-competitive behavior on the part of some sellers. These sellers
perceive the true demand schedule for their products and maximize profit
subject to that schedule. Of course, the resulting equilibrium is
inefficient—Pareto-preferableallocations are available. However, I assume
that no collective action on the part of consumers is possible to achieve
2

those improved allocations.
As usual in equilibrium models, clarity and precision are achieved
at considerable cost in realism. There is no more than an analogy between

the recession state in this model and what actually happens in the U.S.
economy in recession. But the essential elements are there, in my view. A
recession involves unused resources and it is a time when no actor can
improve his well-being by making a simple deal.

The question of driving forces

Any model of fluctuations has to take a stand on the sources of
those fluctuations. Some commentators have made a distinction between
aggregate demand and supply disturbances as driving forces in

in general equilibrium, the distinction between
demand and supply is not fundamental. A better distinction is among
fluctuations,

However,

shifts in preferences, in technology, and in policy.
Recent equilibrium models, such as Prescott's (1986), have
stressed technology shifts as the basic driving force of fluctuations. In
models with only

a

single produced good, preference shocks are
driving force because they amount to explaining

unattractive as a
recessions as periods of epidemic laziness, when the public prefers to
languish at home rather than work.
The model in this paper contains shifts in both preferences and
technology. The two shifts are incorporated in the model in such a way

that

only

their product influences real allocations.
3

In the basic

development of the model, I will talk about the "driving variable," which
is the product of the two shift variables. Later I will discuss how
preference shifts differ from technology shifts in their effects on relative
prices. It tnrns out that preference shifts generate fluctuations that look
like the ones discussed in the traditional account of variations in aggregate
demand, whereas technology shifts look more like the fluctuations
generated by real business cycle models.

1. The model

The economy has two sectors. In the first, there are worker-producers
who make a good, x1, and consume both x1 and the other good, x2. There
are a great many of them and they are always price-takers. They have an
endowment, z, of good 1. Their preferences are stated in an indirect
utility function,

i [
(1.1)

V(p,y)

L

1c1
P2

1

+ log

()

Here Pi and P2 are the two prices and y is income. The variable S
influences the allocation of income between the two goods; it will be

4

considered one of the two driving forces of fluctuations.1 The parameter e
controls the elasticity of demand for good 2 and is assumed to exceed one.

These preferences were proposed by Burtless and Hausman (1978) in the
context of labor supply. The demand for good 2 is

x2

rf
-P2)

—
—

9V
P2

—
—

ôy

-

—

r6

[

P21
J Pi

I will take good I as numeraire and note that y =

so

the demand

schedule for good 2 is:

=

[

]

I assume the following about the technology:
units of x2 by using

1

unit of good 1

Sector 2 produces 9
as raw material. The variable 9 is

1Readers of the earlier version of the paper should note that 6
does not shift the elasticity of demand for good 2, only the level. The
paper does not rest on any cyclical changes in the elasticity of demand.
5

the other driving force of fluctuations. Sector 2 has a physical capacity
limit, z, The owners of sector 2 consume only x1, so their objective is to
maximize their profit or consumption of good 1. The workers in sector 2
are incapable of working in sector 1 and they do not value their own time.

The variables S and 8 are specified so that for both, higher values
are associated with greater output of good 2. 1 will also consider the
8 8, to measure their combined effect.
product,

Competition

To find the competitive equilibrium in the model, I will examine
the excess demand function for good 2:

(L4)

E(p2)

=

(1.5)

=

(1.6)

=

if P2 <

D(p2)

[D()
D(p2)

-

z2,

z2

D()j

if

P2

=

if P2 >

In 1.4 , price is below cost in sector 2, so supply is zero and excess demand
6

is positive. In 1.5, price is at the point where supply from sector 2 is
perfectly elastic. Excess demand is a correspondence, but there is a
possibility that it includes only positive values. Finally, in 1.6, price is
sufficiently high that producers in sector 2 operate at capacity, z2. If there
was no equilibrium in 1.5 in the perfectly elastic part of the supply
there will be one at a higher price in 1.6. That price
schedule, at price

9,

P2
Because

[ij
r z1

=

this price exceeds £11, sector 2 operates at capacity:
x2

=

z2

The critical point at which sector 2 just reaches capacity is described by

D() =

Z2

or

—C

(60)

z1

=

z2

Note that this depends just on the product, q. The critical point is

7

=

(LII)

[j

The real allocations in the economy are controlled by the composite
variable
If times are sufficiently bad that < 4" , then the
equilibrium occurs at a level of output below capacity and price is equal to

.

marginal materials cost:
(1.12)
(1.13)

If

P2

=

times are good and

>

,

then x2 is

at its capacity

level z2,

The

relation between output and the driving variable th is shown in Figure 1.
Sector 2 operates at capacity except in the most unfavorable conditions.

In those conditions, price falls all the way to the marginal cost of raw
materials; workers earn no wages and owners earn no rents in sector 2.
Monopoly

The demandschedule facing sector 2 is

(1.14)

D(p9)

=

[

]

In the monopoly case, sector 2 maximizes its consumption of good 1:

8

Figure 1. Output under competition
Sector 2 output
1.3 1.2

-

1.1 -

0.9
0.8 0.7 0.6

-

0.5
0.4
0.3

—

0.2
0.1

0
0

i

0.2

0.4

06

0.8

1

12

Driving variable, 0

1.4

L6

LB

Max

(1.15)

(P2

-

) D2)

subject to D(p2) < z2.
At an internal maximum, the optimal price is

(1J6)

P2

=
=

Here, p is

the markup ratio, c/(c - 1); price is a markup on marginal cost.

Output is
(L17)

x9

=

the real allocation depends just on the composite, th. A comparison
of i17 to 1.10 shows that the critical value of the driving variable where
the monopoly reaches full capacity output is
Again,

Comparison

of competition and monopoly

In the model, the capacity of sector 2 is a given value, not chosen
by the economy's actors, I will compare competition and monopoly for
10

the case where the capacity is the same. Of course, if the monopolist has
an exclusive license for selling the second product, he would choose less
than the competitive level of capacity. By the competitive level, I mean
the level that would result from free entry. In comparison to the exclusive
license case, my results will overstate the tendency for a monopolist to
have excess capacity. On the other hand, if the monopolist does not have

an exclusive license and must defend a profitable position, that defense
might well involve holding at least the competitive level of capacity.
Hence the comparison at equal levels of capacity is a reasonable one.
Figure 2 compares the relations between the driving variable
and the level of output for the cases of monopoly and competition. There
is a range of values of under which the competitive economy operates at
capacity but the monopolistic economy has unused capacity. That range

/1*
The width of the interval is controlled in proportional terms by the
markup ratio, p. If that ratio is 1.5, for example, then the monopolistic
economy has idle resources at values of up to 1.5 times as high as the
ones where the competitive economy begins to operate at capacity.

U

Figure

2.

Competition and monopoly

Sector 2 output
1.3
1.2
1.1

0.9
0.6
0,7
0.6

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.2

1.4

1.6

Driving variable, 0

1.8

2. Fluctuations

there is no capital, the model can serve as a fluctuations
model without further elaboration. In each period, there is a drawing
Because

a

probability distribution F(.) for the driving variable. The
determination of output, as derived in the previous section, can be
summarized for the competitive case as

from

(2.1)

xt = i,bc(t) =

z1

z2

if

<

otherwise

,
,

I have dropped the subscript 2 from xt because the output of sector 1
never departs from its capacity, z1. The critical value,
for the driving
variable is (z2/zi)1; whenever
>
the competitive economy
reaches capacity output in sector 2.
Output for the monopolistic case is simply

= ,bm(t)

(2.2)

c(

In both cases, the price of good 2 can be obtained from the inverse
of the demand function:

(2.3)

t

=

6

r z1

[rj
13

Again, I have dropped the subscript 2.
The foflowing disussion will make t:he assumption that there is
will be below the level,
and so in the region
some chance that

p,

where sector 2 operates below capacity and monopely power affects the
> 0 Then
allocation. That assumption can be expressed as
there are four ways to express the general conclusion that the monopolictic
economy is more vulnerable to episodes & unmed rapacity:
1.

The expected value of

x

ic lewer under monoxoly

than under

competitIon.
2. The monopolistic economy has unused eapait: a iargrr fraction of the
which exceeds
time; the probability of slack nuder monopoly is F(ic

the probability of slack under competition. F(ç55).

F(*) =

0, then the competitive economy will always operate at
capacity. whereas the mcnopollstic economy will have slack wt*enever &
3.

If

<
Under conditions when both economies would have slack (tht
the monopolistic economy always has more slack:
<
4.

m

As Figure 2

demenr' e,

i

is no'

d

asc that the

<

inef5ciency

associated with monopoly pc w has ten ynneral effect f reducing the
concentrated in
output of sector 2 in equilibrium. itatl-tr, P r Impart

i

14

bad times. The reason for this is simple. Once sector 2 reaches its
capacity, monopoly power has no effect on its output or price. The
adverse effects of monopoly occur only when output is below capacity; this
happens only in bad times.

Aggregate output

The output of sector 1 is always equal to its endowment z1.
Excess capacity cannot occur as long as good 1 is valued positively; that
is, p is finite. Only the output of sector 2 changes over time.
output could be measured as real GNP,
(2.4)

-

y =

The quantity z1 -

x2

+

Aggregate

p0 x2

and p0x is
deliveries of good 2 to final demand, valued at a base year price Po Real
GNP can also be expressed as the sum of value added in the two sectors:
(2.5)

y =

x2 is deliveries of good

z1

+

(Po

As long as the base-year price,

-

)

1

to final demand

X2

p, exceeds marginal materials, cost,

,

real

GNP will be positively related to sector 2 output.
The preference shift, 5, which only changes the composition of
15

demand at the level of the individual, affects the level of output in the
aggregate. The influence is much greater in the case of monopoly, because
Po will exceed

0' by a wider margin in that case.

The technology shift, 9,
operates in the same way by influencing the level of x2 and also increases
real GNTP by reduciugthe input requirement, 9' x2, which is a charge
against real GNP.
I conclude that the variations in the output of sector 2 will give
rise to fluctuations in real GNP. To put it a different way, fluctuations in
real GNP will he seen as fluctuations in the sum of the value added in

a

cyclically stable sector (sector 1) and cyclically sensitive sector (sector 2).

3. Comparison of shifts in preferences and in technology

of the salient characteristics of fluctuations in modern
economies is the insensitivity of relative prices and wages to slack
One

conditions,

Traditional macroeconomic thinking has made price-wage
rigidity a starting point for explanations of fluctuations, Other models,
including this one, derive price rigidity from assumptions about the
underlying characteristics of the economy, In this model, there is no
distinction between workers and owaers, so there is no way to measure
wage rigidity. However, it is possible to examine the cyclical movements

of the relative price.
The movements of the relative price are quite different under
preference st1nts from those under technology shifts.
16

Co-movements of

relative price and relative quantity are one of the ways to determine the
relative importance of the two driving forces In competition, a slnft of
preferences toward good 2 will raise its relative price. On the other hand.

an improvement in tile technology in sector 2 will lower the r°lative price.
In monopoly, the second statement remains true. but the first may fail. to
the region of constant marginal cost, with outpnt below capacity in sector
2, the behavior of the monopolist's price depends on the behavior of the
elasticity of demand. nile relative price can ri,c or fail when preferencm
shift, depending on what ltappen to thc eiasticity.

Shifts in preferences

Figure 3 plo s tile relative price of good 2 against the value of the
preference sinF, ô, fur both conpciitlun and aonupoly. The plot as0urne

a constanr
=

I

value oi 0

up to capacity

1. Lnder competition LIl price d coittant at 0
Above that, the relati' price serves its function nf

u

allocating the increasingiy scarce fixed capacity of sector 2. Under
monopoly, however, the relative price is cnndant oser a much wider raage.
When output reaches capacity, monopoly no longer has any effect. Price
is set purely by he competitive principle of aflocating scarce capacity.

the preference variable S varies in a region mostly below th
capacIty potat, 6'r10 the relation netween output and price w: 0€
essentially fiat, The relative price will appear mc' be rigid. Be: ,c r,ge
U'

is the result of monopoly power with constant demand elaat'clm:
17

a"

a

Figure

3. Price with preference shift

2 price
2.8
2.4
2.2
2

1.8
1.6
1.4
1,2

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

Preference shift

direct assumption of the model.
level

of demand

If the elasticity of demand rises when the

rises, then the relative price

will move inversely ;sith

output, up to capacity output.

Shifts in technology

It is an unambiguous unphca ion of both competition and
monopoly rhac iznprcverriex'- ii t!e uroilur tivity of secter 2 lower the
relative price of good 2. f;gore

1

illustrates the relationship bt tween

he

relative price and the driving vartahie, when all the variations in the
dri'ing voriabl' conic front trte technobgy sariable 0 and the prefererict

variabe r

iS

held cor,tarit at 2.

1

or hurl, cornpeui1)n and monopoly,

he

relative price declines in the region there output is helov capacity. Ahoy
capacity, marginal cost is irrelevant; pri 'e is at the level needed to ration
scarce capacity

hence, the price reir;ain., constant a,

fish-capacity point.

0

rises beyond

lii'

linprovenrents in technology are captured as high"'

earnings by prodncere in that region
One of the iriterestin feat nres of Figure 4 is that price rigidiry is
more pronounced in competition than ni monopoly. As I have stressed
earlier, the monopoly is more likely to operate below capacity. Below
capacity, price is negatively related to the productivity variable and
negative y related to output.

19

Figure
Sector

4.

Price with technology shift

2 price

4.5
4
3.5
3

2.5
2
1.5

0.5
0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

Technology shift

Conclusions from relative price movements

I believe that it is a reasonable stylized fact of business cycles that
there are no robust and important fluctuations in relative prices over the
cycle. Cyclcally-sensitive" prices are hard to find and are limited to
quantitatively unimportant sectors such as scrap metal. There evidence

that in deep. prolonged contractions, thc prices of conipetitively-supplicd
goods tend to fall more than those of monopoly or oligopoly goods (Stigler
(1947)).

The stylized fact of roughly constant relative prices is consistent
with the preference-shift story of Fignre 3, where the relative price of
sector 2 is roughly independent of ontpnt. It is inconsistent with the
technoiogy-slnft story of Figure 4, which would call for a declining price
for an expanding sector.

4. Is a recession in the model anythinglike a

recession

in a modern economy?

in the previous section make it clear that the nodel
fits the stylized fact of relative price stability when fluctuations are driven
by preference shifts, not by technology shifts, Is it plausible that shifts of
The remarks

21

preferences among categories of goods are an important driving force in a
modern economy? In the model as stated, a shift favoring a competitive

as against a monopoly good causes a recession. More generally, a
shift away from a sector which has excess capacity toward one that is
good

operating at full capacity will cause

a

recession,

Market power is

important in the general case because it is unlikely that a competitive
sector would ever operate below capacity.
In addition to pure shifts in underlying preferences, it is
appropriate to include changes in household technology in the

.

,

interpretation of the driving variable,
Under one interpretation,
could be a time cost of purchasing good 1 in relation to good 2. An
increase in the inconvenience or effort required to make a purchase of good
2 would be equivalent to a decline in 5 and would set
decline in total output described by the model.

in motion the

In a more general model, ö could include other costs. In
particular, if the monopoly good is a durable good frequently purchased on
credit, the

could include the influence of credit rationing (Stiglitz and
Weiss (1981)).
Or, again for durables, could capture the benefits to
ö

delaying durables purchases in times of increased uncertainty as discussed
by Bernanke (1983).

The model as stated contains no explanation for monetary nonneutralities. However, if monetary events can generate changes in 11
through credit rationing, uncertainty, or other mechanisms, then the
model of this paper can explain the propagation of monetary shocks into
fluctuations in real GNP.

22

Labor supply assumptions

A second important question is whether the labor supply
assumptions for sector 2 in the model have any analogy in a real economy.
There is no contribution to marginal cost from the value of workers' time.
Or, to put it a different way, labor supply is perfectly elastic. The model
rests on elastic labor supply just as the real business cycle and uagerigidity models do. The question is whether this form of the lnstic labor
supply assumption is more realistic than the other forms.
The nypothesls of perfectly-elastic labor supply at zero wage has
hecr wiuely accepted as part of the theory of labor hoarding. In tirr±es of
weak demand, the firm retains workers on tile payroll who are not fully
occupied. Their services are available t, be Itrm fur free. The firm, not

the worker has the perfectly' elastic inbor supply, hut the resulting
aliocatiju of labo is as descrined in the nuodel, Ciarher (1986) has founu
empirical support 1or the labor-hoarding proposition. TIe tests and accepts
the hypothesis that prices, output, and eniploynient are unaffected by
changes in wages paid to workers during periods of labor hoarding. In
other words, the wage does not allocate labor during downturns, according
to Garber's evidence. Firms buy a block of their workers' time and then
allocate it as they piease The implicit cost of labor up to the timm
commitment is zero, and the assumption of this paper is appropriate.
A related defense

of the assumption is that workers have the

standard textbook labor supply schedule—a vertical line at full-time work,
23

connected to the origin by a perfectly elastic segment at wage zero. In
addition, the possibility of supplying labor to a different sector, which

the labor supply schedule for sector 2 be different from the
labor supply schedule to the market, is foreclosed. High mobility costs
would be the best explanation for the irrelevance of alternative
would make

employment opportunities. Hall (1987) shows that workers will be
inhibited from moving to other sectors during temporary downturns under
reasonable assumptions about costs and preferences

The conclusions of the model would not be changed if workers put
a value on their time, as long as the marginal value did not vary with the
amount of work. That is, it is the property of highly elastic supply, not
the zero marginal value of time, that is critical in this and other
equilibrium models of employment fluctuations. As Rogerson (1988) and
Hansen (1985) have noted, highly elastic labor supply can be the result of
aggregation over individuals who are indifferent between working full days
and not working at all. The indifference could arise from fixed costs of
going to work. In Hall (1987), I show that it is extremely unlikely that
workers could be on the horizontal parts of their labor supply schedules a
large fraction of the time. However, fixed costs can contribute a perfectly
elastic segment to the labor supply schedule, where the flat part of the
schedule begins for hours of work somewhat below normal.

If the perfectly elastic part of the labor supply schedule occurs at a
positive wage, the model of this paper can easily be modified to
accommodate that feature by absorbing the level of the wage into 1i.
Figure 5 compares the labor supply assumptions of the four types
of fluctuations models. The real business cycle model makes the explicit
24

Figure

5. Alternative Labor Supply
Schedules

I

o

0

E

:Rlbusiness cycte
and wage rigidity

/

models

Amount of work

assumption that labor suppiy is highly elastic. A temporary reduction in
the real wage brings a large reduction in work effort because the worker is
virtually indifferent to the scheduling of work. The shadow value of the
worker's time is set by the total amount of work performed over the
lifetime. Whenever the wage drops below that shadow value, it is a good
time to stop working and use time for other purposes. The work can be
made up later, when the real wage is back to normal.

In the wage rigidity model, the worker agrees to work as much as
asked by the employer (up to some limit) at a predetermined wage. The
agreement supplants the underlying labor supply schedule of the worker.
The allocation of work proceeds as if the labor supply schedule were
perfectly elastic.

The labor supply of this model is a reverse L. The level of
employment is frequently along the flat, perfectly elastic portion because
the firm frequently has a marginal revenue product of labor equal to zero.
Obviously, this would rarely happen in competition. The point of this
paper is that it can frequently happen with market power.
The labor supply schedule in a model with fixed costs of going to
work has a flat segment at a positive wage. Again, a firm with market
power facing fluctuations in demand may have extensive periods when the
marginal revenue product of labor schedule intersects the flat segment.

26

5. Concluding remarks
One of the unique responsibilities of

the macroeconomist is to

identify the driving forces of economic fluctuations. The real business
cycle model considers economy-wide fluctuations in productivity as the
major driving force. Critics have pointed out that technical regress is a
qnestionahle came of recessions, hut have not been active in identifying
alternative driving forces. In a one-seetor model, preference shifts are not
a plausible driving force, because the only preference shift that could cause
a recession would be a sluft away from goods consumption and toward
leisure consuxnpt ion. Labeling a recession a period of epidemic laziness is
unattractive to all schools of niacroeconoinics.

set of possible driving forces.
Productivity could shift in favor of one sector from time to time, for
A two-sector model enriches tbe

example.

Flowever, such shifts must be accompanied by corresponding

changes in relative prices. Because cyclical changes in relative prices are
weak, productivity shifts again seem unattractive as an important driving
force at business-cycle frequencies. On the other hand, shifts in preferences
from one sector to another are a more promising type of driving force, if
there is enough asymmetry between the two sectors, Monopoly in one
sector and competition in the other provides the necessary asymmetry. If

the competitive sector always operates at capacity, but the monopoly
sector sometimes operates below capacity, preference shifts will cause
changes in aggregate real GNP but not in the relative price.

27

References

Akerlof and Janet L. Yellen, "A Near-Rational Model of the
Business Cycle, with Wage and Price Inertia," Quarterly Journal of

George A.

Economics 100:823-838, Supplement 1985

Ben S. Bernanke, "Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Cyclical Investment,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics 98: 85-196, February 1983
Gary Burtless and Jerry A. Hausman, "The Effect of Taxation on Labor
Supply: Evalñating the Gary Negative Income Tax Experiment," Journal
of Political Economy 86:1103-1130, December 1978.
Steven Garber, "The Reserve-Labor Hypothesis, Short-Run Pricing
Theories and the Employment-Output Relationship," Carnegie-Mellon
University, July 1986
Robert E. Hall, "The Volatility of Employment with Fixed Costs of Going

to Work," Stanford, June 1987
Gary D. Hansen, "Indivisible Labor and the Business Cycle," Journal of
Monetary Economics 16:309-327, 1985
Oliver ilart, "A Model of Imperfect Competition with Keynesian
28

Features," Quarterly Journal of Economics 97: 109-138, February 1982
N. Gregory Mankiw,

Smali

Menu Costs and Large Business Cycles: A

Macroeconomic Model of Monopoly," Quarterly Journal of Economics 100:
529-538, May 1985

Edward C. Prescott, 'Theory ahead of Business Cycle Measurement," in
Karl Brunner and Allan Meltzer (eds.) Real Business Cycles, Real
Exchange Rates and Actual Policies, Volume 25 in the Carnegie-Rochester
ConferenceSeries on Public Policy, North-holland, 1986, pp. 11-44.
Richard Rogerson, "Indivisible Labor, Lotteries, and Equilibrium,"
Journal of Monetary Economics 21:3-16, January 1988
George Stigler, "The Kinky Oligopoly Demand Curve and Rigid Prices,"
Journal of Political Economy 55, October 1947, reprinted in George
Stigier, The Organization of Industry (Ilomewood, Illinois: Richard D.
Irwin), 1968, pp.

208-234

Joseph E. Stiglitz and Andrew Weiss, "Credit Rationing in Markets with
Imperfect Information," American Economic Review 71: 393-410, June
1981

29

