                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          HOW THE WEALTH WAS WON:
                   FACTORS SHARES AS MARKET FUNDAMENTALS

                                    Daniel L. Greenwald
                                       Martin Lettau
                                    Sydney C. Ludvigson

                                     Working Paper 25769
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25769


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2019




We are grateful to John Y. Campbell, Ralph Koijen, Edward Nelson, and Mindy Xiaolan for
helpful comments, and to seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Board, the University of
California Berkeley Haas School of Business, the University of Chicago Booth School of
Business, and the University of Michigan Ross School of business for helpful comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Daniel L. Greenwald, Martin Lettau, and Sydney C. Ludvigson. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How the Wealth Was Won: Factors Shares as Market Fundamentals
Daniel L. Greenwald, Martin Lettau, and Sydney C. Ludvigson
NBER Working Paper No. 25769
April 2019, Revised in October 2020
JEL No. G0,G12,G17

                                         ABSTRACT

Why do stocks rise and fall? From the beginning of 1989 to the end of 2017, $34 trillion of real
equity wealth (2017:Q4 dollars) was created by the U.S. corporate sector. We estimate that 43%
of this increase was attributable to a reallocation of rewards to shareholders in a decelerating
economy, virtually all of which came at the expense of labor compensation. Economic growth
accounted for just 25%, followed by a lower risk premium (24%), and lower interest rates (8%).
From 1952 to 1988 less than half as much wealth was created, but economic growth accounted
for more than 100% of it.

Daniel L. Greenwald                            Sydney C. Ludvigson
MIT Sloan School of Management                 Department of Economics
100 Main Street, E62-641                       New York University
Cambridge, MA 02142                            19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
dlg@mit.edu                                    New York, NY 10002
                                               and NBER
Martin Lettau                                  sydney.ludvigson@nyu.edu
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
545 Student Services Bldg. #1900
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and CEPR
and also NBER
lettau@haas.berkeley.edu
1        Introduction

Why do stocks rise and fall? Surprisingly little academic research has focused directly on this
question.1 While much of the literature has concentrated on explaining expected quarterly
or annual returns, this paper takes a longer view and considers the economic forces that have
driven the total value of the market over the post-war era. According to textbook economic
theories, the stock market and the broader economy should share a common trend, implying
that the same factors that boost economic growth are also the key to rising equity values
over longer periods of time.2 In this paper, we directly test this paradigm.
        Some basic empirical facts serve to motivate the investigation. While the U.S. equity
market has done exceptionally well in the post-war period, this performance has been highly
uneven over time, even at long horizons. For example, real market equity of the U.S. corpo-
rate sector grew at an average rate of 7.5% per annum over the last 29 years of our sample
(1989 to 2017), compared to an average of merely 1.6% over the previous 29 years (1966
to 1988). At the same time, growth in the value of what was actually produced by the
corporate sector has displayed a strikingly di¤erent temporal pattern. While real corporate
net value added grew at a robust average rate of 3.9% per annum from 1966 to 1988 amid
anemic stock returns, it averaged much lower growth of only 2.6% from 1989 to 2017 even
as the stock market was booming. This multi-decade disconnect between growth in market
equity and output presents a di¢ cult challenge to theories in which economic growth is the
key long-run determinant of market returns.
        One potential resolution of this puzzle is to posit that economic fundamentals such as
cash ‡ows may be relatively unimportant for the value of market equity, with discount rates
driving the bulk of growth even at long horizons. In this paper we entertain an alternative
    1
        See the literature review below.
    2
        This tenet goes back to at least Klein and Kosobud (1961), followed by a vast literature in macroeconomic
theory that presumes balanced growth among economic aggregates over long periods of time. For a more
recent variant, see Farhi and Gourio (2018).
hypothesis motivated by an additional set of empirical facts. Within the total pool of net
value added produced by the corporate sector, only a relatively small share — averaging
12.3% in our sample — accrues to the shareholder in the form of after-tax pro…ts. Impor-
tantly, however, this share varies widely and persistently over time, ‡uctuating from less
than 8% to nearly 20% over our sample. This suggests that swings in the pro…t share are
strong enough to cause large and long-lasting deviations between cash ‡ows and output. If
so, growth in market equity could diverge from economic growth for an extended period of
time, even when valuations are largely driven by fundamental cash ‡ows. Indeed, while the
1989-2017 period lagged the 1966-1988 period in economic growth, it exhibited growth in
corporate earnings of 5.1% per annum that far outpaced the average 1.8% earnings growth
of the previous period. Behind these trends are movements in the after-tax pro…t share of
output, which fell from 15.3% in 1966 to 8.9% in 1988, before rising again to 17.4% by the
end of 2017. These shifts are in turn made possible by a reverse pattern in labor’s share of
corporate output, which rises from 67.0% in 1966:Q1 to 72.4% in 1988:Q4, before reverting
to 67.7% by 2017:Q4.
   The upshot of these trends is a widening chasm between the stock market and the broader
economy, a phenomenon displayed in Figure 1, which plots the ratio of market equity for the
corporate sector to three di¤erent measures of aggregate economic activity: gross domestic
product, personal consumption expenditures, and net value added of the corporate sector.
(To make the units comparable, each series has been normalized to unity in 1989:Q1.) Despite
substantial volatility in these ratios, each is at or near a post-war high by the end of 2017.
Notably, however, the ratio of market equity to after-tax pro…ts (earnings) for the corporate
sector is far below its post-war high.
   What role, if any, might these trends have played in the evolution of the post-war stock
market? To translate these empirical facts into a quantitative decomposition of the post-war
growth in market equity, we construct and estimate a model of the U.S. equity market.
Although the speci…cation of a model necessarily imposes some structure, our approach is
intended to let the data speak as much as possible. We do this by estimating a ‡exible
parametric model of how equities are priced that allows for in‡uence from a number of
mutually uncorrelated latent factors, including not only factors driving productivity and

                                              2
pro…t shares, but also independent factors driving risk premia and risk-free interest rates.
   Equity in our model is priced, not by a representative household, but by a representative
shareholder, akin in the data to a wealthy household or large institutional investor. The
remaining agents supply labor, but play no role in asset pricing. Shareholder preferences
are subject to shocks that alter their patience and appetite for risk, driving variation in
both the equity risk premium and in risk-free interest rates. The model allows for the
possibility that rising corporate pro…t shares have been associated with a greater willingness
to take on stock market risk over time, in addition to accommodating preference shocks
that alter the pricing of stock market risk independently of pro…t shares or other economic
fundamentals. We refer to the latter as the orthogonal component of the market price of
risk. Shareholders understand the laws of motion for these shocks and internalize them
when forming expectations. Our representative shareholder consumes cash ‡ows from …rms,
the variation of which is driven by shocks to the total rewards generated by productive
activity, but also by shocks to how those rewards are divided between shareholders and
other claimants.
   We estimate the full dynamic model using state space methods, allowing us to precisely
decompose the market’s observed growth into these distinct component sources. The model
is ‡exible enough to explain 100% of the change in equity values over our sample and at
each point in time. To capture the in‡uence of our primitive shocks at di¤erent horizons, we
model each as a mixture of multiple stochastic processes driven by low- and high-frequency
variation. Because our log-linear model is computationally tractable, we are able to account
for uncertainty in both latent states and parameters using millions of Markov Chain Monte
Carlo draws. We apply and estimate our model using data on the U.S. corporate sector over
the period 1952:Q1-2017:Q4.
   Our main results may be summarized as follows. First, we …nd that neither economic
growth, risk premia, nor risk-free interest rates has been the foremost driving force behind
the market’s sharp gains over the last several decades. Instead, the single most important
contributor has been a string of factor share shocks that reallocated the rewards of production
without a¤ecting the size of those rewards. Our estimates imply that the realizations of
these shocks persistently reallocated rewards to shareholders, to such an extent that they

                                              3
account for 43% of the market increase since 1989. Decomposing the components of corporate
earnings reveals that virtually all of the increases in the pro…t share came at the expense of
labor compensation.
   Second, while equity values were also boosted since 1989 by persistent declines in the
equity risk premium attributable to the orthogonal component of the market price of risk, and
in the risk-free rate of interest, these factors played smaller roles quantitatively, contributing
24% and 8.5%, respectively, to the increase in the stock market over this period.
   Third, growth in the real value of corporate sector output contributed just 25% to the
increase in equity values since 1989 and 54% over the full sample. By contrast, while economic
growth accounted for more than 100% of the rise in equity values from 1952 to 1988 this 37
year period created less than a third of the equity wealth generated over the 29 years from
1989 to the end of 2017.
   Fourth, one reason persistently rising corporate pro…ts shares have been such a powerful
force for rising stock market values is that they are correlated with a growing willingness
to tolerate stock market risk over time, according to our estimates. Nevertheless, even if
we restrict our estimation to eliminate this correlation, factor share shocks remain the most
important source of the market’s rise since 1989, albeit accounting for a smaller 29% in this
case.
   An implication of these …ndings is that the considerable gains to holding equity over the
post-war period can be in large part attributed to an unpredictable sequence of factor share
shocks that reallocated rewards to shareholders. We estimate that roughly 2.9 percentage
points of the post-war average annual log return on equity in excess of a short-term interest
rate is attributable to this string of favorable shocks, rather than to genuine ex-ante compen-
sation for bearing risk. These results imply that the common practice of averaging return,
dividend, or payout data over the post-war sample to estimate an equity risk premium is
likely to overstate the true risk premium by about 44%.
   As a by-product of our empirical implementation, we obtain an estimate of the conditional
equity risk premium over time, a variable that should be of independent interest given the
importance of this latent factor for theories of intangible capital and other determinants of
macro-…nance trends (e.g., Crouzet and Eberly (2020); Farhi and Gourio (2018)). By ‡exibly

                                                4
specifying the equity premium to be a mixture of processes with di¤erent components, our
estimate is capable of simultaneously accounting for both the high frequency variation in
the equity premium implied by options data (Martin (2017)), as well as the low frequency
variation suggested by ‡uctuations in stock market valuation ratios. With the exception of
an extreme spike upward during the …nancial crisis, we …nd that the equity premium has
been declining for decades. By the end of 2017, our estimates imply that the equity premium
had reached the record low levels attained previously only two times: at the culminations of
the tech boom in 2000 and the twin housing/equity booms in 2006.
        The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The next section discusses related literature.
Section 3 describes the theoretical model. Section 4 describes the econometric procedure and
data. Section 5 presents our …ndings. Section 6 concludes.


2        Related Literature

The empirical asset pricing literature has traditionally focused on explaining stock market
expected returns, typically measured over monthly, quarterly or annual horizons.3 But as
noted in Summers (1985), and still true today, surprisingly little attention has been given to
understanding what drives the real level of the stock market over time. Previous studies have
noted an apparent disconnect between economic growth and the rate of return on stocks over
long periods of time, both domestically and internationally (see e.g., Estrada (2012); Ritter
(2012); Siegel (2014)). But they have not provided a model and evidence on the economic
foundations of this disconnect or on the alternative forces that have driven the market in
post-war U.S. data, a gap our study is intended to …ll.
        In this regard, the two papers closest to this one are Lettau and Ludvigson (2013) and
our previous work entitled “Origins of Stock Market Fluctuations,”(Greenwald, Lettau, and
Ludvigson (2014), GLL), which this paper supplants. These papers emphasized the relevance
    3
        A body of research has addressed the question of whether expected returns or expected dividend growth
drive valuation ratios, e.g., the price-dividend ratio, but this analysis is silent on the the primitive economic
shocks that drive expected returns or dividend growth. For reviews of empirical asset pricing literature, see
Campbell, Lo, and MacKinlay (1997), Cochrane (2005), and Ludvigson (2012).



                                                       5
of factor share shocks in the data for explaining stock market values, but they di¤er in a
number of substantive ways from the present study. Lettau and Ludvigson (2013) was a
purely empirical exercise that investigated three shocks from a VAR, while GLL presented
a model of the stochastic discount factor (SDF) to interpret these VAR shocks. But neither
paper undertook a complete estimation of an equity pricing model, and the theoretical
framework in GLL was less general and less ‡exible than that of this paper. In further
contrast to GLL, which used a calibrated model to match simulated and data moments, we
use state space methods to directly estimate the model on the time series data, allowing
us to obtain maximum likelihood estimates of the parameters, as well as recover the latent
state variables that have driven the actual equity prices over our sample. The model of the
SDF in this paper also adds additional state variables not present in the model of GLL that
allow for time variation in risk free interest rates, as well as separate low- and high-frequency
components driving equity premia and the share of rewards accruing to shareholders. Finally,
the model in this paper also does away with a commonplace but implausible assumption that
cash payments to shareholders are equal to earnings, by allowing for reinvestment.
       Like GLL and Lettau, Ludvigson, and Ma (2018), the model of this paper adopts a hetero-
geneous agent perspective characterized by two types of agents and imperfect risk sharing
between them: wealth is concentrated in the hands of a few investors, or “shareholders,”
while most households are “workers” who …nance consumption primarily out of wages and
salaries. This aspect adds an important element of realism to the model, since only about
half of households report owning stocks either directly or indirectly in 2016. More impor-
tantly, even among those households that own equity, most own very little: the top 5% of the
stock wealth distribution owns 76% of the stock market value and earns a relatively small
fraction of income as labor compensation.4 In this sense our model relates to a classic older
   4
       Source: 2016 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). In the 2016 SCF, 52% of households report owning
stock either directly or indirectly. Stockowners in the top 5% of the net worth distribution had a median
wage-to-capital income ratio of 27%, where capital income is de…ned as the sum of income from dividends,
capital gains, pensions, net rents, trusts, royalties, and/or sole proprietorship or farm. Even this low number
likely overstates traditional worker income for this group, since the SCF and the IRS count income paid in
the form of restricted stock and stock options as “wages and salaries.” Executives who receive substantial
sums of this form would be better categorized as “shareholders”in the model below, rather than as “workers”


                                                      6
literature emphasizing the importance for stock pricing of limited stock market participation
and heterogeneity (Mankiw (1986), Mankiw and Zeldes (1991), Constantinides and Du¢ e
(1996), Vissing-Jorgensen (2002), Ait-Sahalia, Parker, and Yogo (2004), Guvenen (2009),
and Malloy, Moskowitz, and Vissing-Jorgensen (2009)). In contrast to this literature, our
results suggest the relevance of frameworks in which investors are concerned about shocks
that have opposite e¤ects on labor and capital. Such redistributive shocks play no role in
the traditional limited participation literature.
   Besides Lettau and Ludvigson (2013), GLL, and Lettau, Ludvigson, and Ma (2018),
a growing body of literature considers the role of redistributive shocks in asset pricing or
macro models, most in representative agent settings (Danthine and Donaldson (2002); Fav-
ilukis and Lin (2013a, 2013b, 2015), Gomez (2016), Marfe (2016), Farhi and Gourio (2018)).
In this literature, labor compensation is a charge to claimants on the …rm and therefore a
source of cash-‡ow variation in stock and bond markets. In contrast to the limited par-
ticipation/heterogeneous agent paradigm pursued here, representative agent models imply
that a variant of the consumption CAPM using aggregate consumption still prices equity
returns, so those frameworks cannot not account for the evidence in Lettau, Ludvigson, and
Ma (2018) that the capital (i.e., nonlabor) share of aggregate income exhibits signi…cant
explanatory power for expected returns across a range of equity characteristic portfolios and
non-equity asset classes.
   The factors share element of our paper is related to a separate macroeconomic literature
that examines the long-run variation in the labor share (e.g., Karabarbounis and Neiman
(2013), and the theoretical study of Lansing (2014)). The factors share …ndings in this
paper also echo those from previous studies that use very di¤erent methodologies but …nd
that returns to human capital are negatively correlated with those to stock market wealth
(Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2008); Lettau and Ludvigson (2009); Chen, Favilukis, and
Ludvigson (2014))).
   Farhi and Gourio (2018) extend a representative agent neoclassical growth model to allow
for time varying risk premia and study the sources of macro-…nance trends in recent data.
who own no (or very few) assets.




                                               7
They …nd a large role for rising market power in the high returns to equity, similar to our
…ndings regarding the importance of the factor share shock for driving equity values over
the post-war period. An appealing feature of their approach is that it speci…es a structural
model of production that takes a …rm stand on the sources of variation in the earnings share.
Corhay, Kung, and Schmid (2018) …nd a similar result that they likewise attribute to rising
market power in a rich model of the …rm investment margin. But it is fair to say that the
literature has not yet reached a consensus on the key structural features of the economy that
drive variation over time in the earnings/labor share (e.g., see the di¤ering explanations
in Autor, Dorn, Katz, Patterson, and Van Reenen (2017), Hartman-Glaser, Lustig, and
Xiaolan (2016), and Kehrig and Vincent (2018)). By contrast, our modeling and estimation
approach is designed to quantify what role the earnings share has played in stock market
‡uctuations, without requiring us to take a stand on the structural model that may have
produced those equilibrium observations. We do this with estimates that match the observed
earnings share exactly (i.e., without error) over the sample and at each point in time, and by
estimating full transition dynamics for each factor that drives asset returns. This approach
contrasts with that of Farhi and Gourio (2018) and Corhay, Kung, and Schmid (2018), who
make inferences by estimating the time-invariant deep parameters of their structural model
on di¤erent subsamples of the data and then making comparisons across subsamples. We
discuss the implications of these di¤ering methodological approaches further below.


3   The Model

The economy is populated by a representative …rm that produces aggregate output, and two
types of households. The …rst type are investors who typify those that own the majority of
equity wealth in the U.S. These could be wealthy households or large institutional investors.
They may borrow and lend amongst themselves in the risk-free bond market. We refer to
these investors simply as “shareholders.”The second type are hand-to-mouth “workers”who
…nance consumption out of wages and salaries. The model is stylized, as we suppose that
workers own no assets and consume their labor earnings. Taken literally, these coarsely
di¤erent groups are an obvious abstraction from the real world. But we argue that they are


                                              8
a reasonable …rst approximation of the data given the high concentration of wealth at the
top, the evidence that the wealthiest earn the overwhelming majority of their income from
ownership of assets or …rms, and that households outside of the top 5% of the stock wealth
distribution own far less …nancial wealth of any kind.5
         Aggregate output is governed by a constant returns to scale process:

                                             Yt = At Nt Kt1    ;                                        (1)

where At is a mean zero factor neutral total factor productivity (TFP) shock, Nt is the
aggregate labor endowment (hours times a productivity factor) and Kt is input of capital,
respectively. Workers inelastically supply labor to produce output. Capital grows determin-
istically at a gross rate G = exp(g), while labor productivity grows deterministically at the
same rate. Hours of labor supplied are …xed and normalized to unity. Taken together, these
assumptions imply that Yt = At Gt K0 Gt(1           )
                                                        = At K0 Gt , where K0 is the …xed initial value
of the capital stock.
         In the accounting framework of the data, a fraction           t   of Yt is devoted to taxes and
interest (and a catchall of “other” charges against earnings). We refer to                    t   simply as
the “tax and interest” share for brevity. The remaining 1                     t   is divided between labor
compensation and domestic after-tax pro…ts (domestic earnings, EtD ). Labor compensation
in the model is equal to Wt Nt , where Wt is an aggregate wage per unit of productivity. De…ne
Zt        1    t   and let StD denote the domestic after-tax pro…t share of combined after-tax pro…t
and domestic labor compensation. We refer to StD as the domestic pro…t share for short.
Last, total earnings of the …rm includes retained earnings from …rms’ foreign subsidiaries
EtF         Ft Yt , where Ft is the ratio of foreign earnings to domestic output Yt . Total earnings,
Et = EtD + EtF , are identically equal to6

                                       Et    St Yt = StD Zt + Ft Yt :
     5
         See discussion above. In the 2016 SCF, the median household in the top 5% of the stock wealth
distribution had $2.97 million in nonstock …nancial wealth. By comparison, households with no equity
holdings had median nonstock …nancial wealth of $1,800, while all households (including equity owners) in
the bottom 95% of the stock wealth distribution had median nonstock …nancial wealth of $17,480. Additional
evidence is presented in Lettau, Ludvigson, and Ma (2019).
   6
     This identity follows NIPA accounting for the corporate sector.

                                                     9
Labor compensation is de…ned by

                                          Wt Nt      1     StD Zt Yt ;

where 1         StD is the labor share of combined after-tax pro…ts and labor compensation.
The ratio Et =Yt = St           StD Zt + Ft is the total earnings share of domestic output, referred
to hereafter as the earnings share for short. The variable 1                  StD is the domestic labor
share of after-tax domestic output, referred to hereafter as the labor share for short.
       The variable St is modeled as an exogenous stochastic process with an innovation that
we refer to as a factor share shock. This aggregate shock captures changes that may occur
for any reason in the ratio of total earnings to domestic output. One component of that is
the domestic after-tax pro…t share StD , which moves inversely with the domestic labor share.
This component captures changes in the allocation of rewards between …rms and workers
in an imperfectly competitive environment, while holding …xed the size of those rewards.
Possible sources of variation in StD could include changes in industry concentration structure
that alter the labor intensivity of aggregate production, changes in the bargaining power of
U.S. workers due to international competition or the prevalence of worker unions, changes in
employment practices such as o¤shoring and outsourcing, or technological factors that alter
how substitutable is labor for technology or capital inputs.7 Earnings from overseas a¢ liates
and taxes and interest make up the remaining components of the factor share process St .
       In summary, the …rm’s total earnings can vary over time for four reasons. First, the
level of output and economic growth may change, which a¤ects the size of the domestic
economic pie Yt . Second, shifts in StD alter the allocation of rewards between shareholders
and domestic workers independently of Yt . Third, the foreign retained earnings share of
domestic output Ft can change over time. Fourth, the tax and interest wedge Zt may vary
over time.
       We model the total earnings share St as an aggregate process, which makes it convenient
to handle correlated components. For example, o¤shoring could lead to both an increase
   7
       Some have argued that the aggregate labor share has fallen due to a reallocation of value added toward
a few “superstar” …rms with low labor shares (e.g., Autor, Dorn, Katz, Patterson, and Van Reenen (2017)
Hartman-Glaser, Lustig, and Xiaolan (2016); Kehrig and Vincent (2018)). In our model this would show up
as a decline in 1    StD .

                                                      10
in the foreign earnings share Ft and in the domestic pro…t share StD , if o¤shoring is partly
motivated by a desire to replace domestic labor with less expensive foreign labor. To get a
sense of the individual roles of StD ; Zt , and Ft in driving the corporate earnings share, we
report decompositions of St below that hold …xed one more components over time.
     The …rm makes cash payments to shareholders, which di¤ers from domestic earnings
by net new investment. Net new investment is required to attain long term (steady state)
growth in output at the rate g. Speci…cally, the …rm is modeled as reinvesting a …xed fraction
!Yt of current output each period. Thus, cash ‡ows to shareholders, denoted Ct , are de…ned
by


                                  C t = Et       !Yt = (St      !) Yt                     (2)

The variable Ct is net payout, de…ned as the sum of net dividend payments and net equity
issuance. It encompasses any cash distribution to shareholders including share repurchases,
which have become the dominant means of returning cash to shareholders in the U.S. For
brevity, we shall refer to these payments simply as “cash‡ows.”
     Embedded in this model of reinvestment is the implicit assumption that the …rm has
access to a technology or market that allows it to swap the stochastic stream !Yt for a …xed
increment g to the net growth of Yt forever. More generally, it is a simple way to capture
the empirical fact that …rms in aggregate retain part of their revenue for reinvestment, so
that Ct is invariably less than Et on average, and that this required reinvestment depends
on output rather than the pro…t share.
     Let Cits denote the consumption of an individual stockholder indexed by i at time t.
Identical shareholders maximize the function
                                             X
                                             1 Y
                                               t
                                                                s
                                    U =E                  k u (Cit )                      (3)
                                             t=0 k=0

with
                                                   (Cits )1 xt 1
                                     u (Cits )   =               ;                        (4)
                                                    1 xt 1
where    t   is a time-varying subjective time discount factor. The parameter xt is likewise
time-varying and ‡uctuates stochastically over time. This variable, which can be thought

                                                   11
of as a time-varying sentiment or preference shifter that shareholders take as given, is a
latent state that drives the price of risk in the stochastic discount factor (SDF). Since an
SDF always re‡ects both preferences and beliefs, an increase in xt may be thought of as
either an increase in e¤ective risk aversion or an increase in pessimism about shareholder
consumption. Thus, xt may occasionally go negative, re‡ecting the possibility that investors
sometimes behave in a con…dent or risk tolerant manner.8
       Shareholder preferences are also subject to an externality in the subjective discount
factor      t.   A time-varying speci…cation for the subjective time discount factor is essential
for obtaining a stable risk-free rate along with a volatile equity premium. If instead the
subjective time discount factor were itself a constant, shocks to xt and cash‡ow growth
would generate counterfactual volatility in the risk-free rate.
       Worker preferences play no role in asset pricing since they hold no assets. We assume
that equities are priced by a representative shareholder who owns the entire corporate sector.
In equilibrium, identical shareholders will have identical consumption, equal to per capita
aggregate cash‡ows.9 We therefore drop the i subscript and simply denote the consumption
of a representative shareholder Ct from now on. This speci…cation should be distinguished
from the more common approach of modeling a representative household in which aggregate
(average) consumption is the relevant source of systematic risk. In the model of this paper,
it is not aggregate consumption but instead aggregate shareholder cash‡ows that are the ap-
propriate source of systematic risk. Moreover, redistributive shocks such as those considered
here that shift the share of income between labor and capital shift shareholder consumption
are a source of systematic risk for asset owners. This implication has been explored by (Let-
tau, Ludvigson, and Ma (2019)) who study risk pricing in a large number of cross-sections
   8
       This does not imply a negative unconditional equity risk premium. Investors in the model occasionally
behave in a risk tolerant manner while still being averse to risk on average. Indeed, our estimates reported
below imply a substantial positive mean equity premium.
   9
     This need not imply that individual shareholders are hand-to-mouth households. They may borrow
and save in the risk-free bond and could have idiosyncratic investment income drawn from an identical
distribution. But they are assumed to be able to perfectly share any identical idiosyncratic risk with other
shareholders. This implies that in equilibrium, they each consume per capita aggregate shareholder cash‡ows
Ct . See the Appendix for a stylized model.


                                                      12
of return premia.
   The intertemporal marginal rate of substitution of shareholder consumption is the SDF
and takes the form
                                                          xt
                                                   Ct+1
                               Mt+1 =          t                                                (5)
                                                    Ct
                                                 0
                             ln Mt+1 =          1 t dt     xt   ln Ct+1

where the subjective time discount factor         t    exp ( [ t + dt ]) is speci…ed below. This
SDF is a more general version of the lognormal models considered in previous work, (e.g.,
Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and Lettau and Wachter (2007)). As in these models, the
preference shifter xt is taken as an externality (akin to an external habit) that is the same
for each stockowner and represents the market’s willingness to bear risk.


3.1    A Loglinear Model

We work with a loglinear approximation of the model that can be solved analytically. A
loglinear model facilitates estimation by permitting the resulting system of equations to be
written in state space form so that the Kalman …lter may be used to infer unobserved states.
Such an approximation implies that the earnings share could, in principle, go above unity in
the loglinear model. It never does so in practice, however, because the estimated earnings
share process is over 14 standard deviations away from unity in steady state. It follows
that such an event happens with e¤ectively zero probability in a very long simulation of the
model. For notation, we use lower case letters to denote log variables, e.g., ln (Yt ) = yt .
   The model we explore has seven latent state variables and seven latent shocks whose
evolutions are described below. These state variables include a factors share process st ; a
subjective time-discount factor process   t,   and a latent price of risk process xt , each of which
are modeled as in‡uenced by low- and high frequency components. In addition to shocks to
each of these latent state components, a seventh latent shock is the i.i.d. innovation to TFP
growth.
   All shocks are modeled as Gaussian, independent over time, and mutually uncorrelated.
This allows us to decompose the market’s growth into distinct component sources. The


                                                 13
econometric procedure is, however, free to estimate a small or even zero variance parame-
ter for any of the mutually uncorrelated shocks. Thus the estimates give a sense of the
quantitative importance of the mutually uncorrelated components of the latent series.


3.1.1    Earnings and Cash‡ow Growth

TFP is a random walk in logs, implying that the log di¤erence is independently and identi-
cally distributed (i.i.d.):

                                                                                   2
                              at+1 = "a;t+1 ;    "a;t+1              N i:i:d: 0;   a   :               (6)

   Since Yt = At K0 G, we have yt = at + k0 + g and log output growth is

                                          yt+1 = g + "a;t+1 :                                          (7)

   With earnings Et = St Yt , log earnings growth is

                                              et =       st +            yt :

Cash payments to shareholders are Ct = (St                       !)Yt . We may log-linearize this equation
around ct    yt = cy to obtain the approximate relation

                                         ct     yt = cy + st                                           (8)

where
                                                             S
                                                =                    ;                                 (9)
                                                         S       !
and S is the average value of St .
   For convenience, we generalize the cash ‡ow growth equation to the more abstract ex-
pression
                                                     0
                                          ct =               st +         yt :

Using the vector st ‡exibly allows us to model any of the components of st as a mixture of
multiple stochastic processes. This is particularly useful for the log corporate earnings share,
since an inspection of its time series plainly suggests that it contains both lower and higher



                                                         14
frequency sources of variation (as shown below in several …gures). We accommodate this in
the model by specifying the mixture of low- and higher-frequency components:

                                                  st = sLF;t + sHF;t

where one log component, sLF;t , will be subject to lower frequency variation compared to
the other, less persistent, component, denoted sHF;t . Thus we have s0t = (sLF;t ; sHF;t )0 and
 0
     = ( ; ).
     The dynamics of cash‡ow and earnings share growth are speci…ed as independent …rst-
order autoregressive processes with the following equations:

                         0
                ct+1 =            st+1 +       yt+1                                                                     (10)

                st+1 = (I           s )s   +     s st   + "s;t+1 ;                       "s;t+1    N (0;    s)          (11)

                st+1 =       (I       s )e
                                         st    + "s;t+1 ;                                    est   st   s               (12)

where I is the identity matrix,            s   is a diagonal matrix with the …rst-order autocorrelation
coe¢ cient of each st element in the diagonal entries, s is a vector containing the means of
the components, and          s   is a diagonal covariance matrix. Entries with “tildes” over them
indicate demeaned variables.


3.1.2     Stochastic Discount Factor and Risk Free Rate

The log of the SDF is an a¢ ne function of log cash‡ow growth times the price of risk, but
also depends on the subjective time discount factor                        t           exp ( [ t + dt ]). Variation in the
subjective time discount factor a¤ects the return on the risk-free asset whose value is known
with certainty at time t and given in gross units by

                                                                               1
                                               Rf;t+1       (Et [Mt+1 ])           :

     An inspection of the data on short rates of interest, e.g., the three-month Treasury bill
(T-bill) rate, suggest that short rates also contain both lower and higher frequency sources
of variation. As above, we accommodate this in the empirical model by allowing                                          t   to
contain two components that are multiplicative in levels or linear in logs, i.e.,                                t   = 10 t ,


                                                              15
                                0
where   t   =(     LF t ; HF t ) .   One component,                 LF t ,    will be subject to lower frequency variation
compared to the other less persistent component, denoted                                             HF t .          We assume          t+1    follows a
multivariate Gaussian process so that the log SDF becomes

                         mt+1              ln Mt+1 =           10    t        dt     xt ct+1                                                           (13)

                           t+1       = (I             ) +                t   +"    ;t+1 ;    "   ;t+1            N (0;       );

where        is a 2       2 diagonal matrix with the …rst-order autocorrelation coe¢ cient of each
component in the diagonal entries,                    is the vector of means of the two components of                                             t;   and
   is a diagonal covariance matrix. The stochastic process                                               t       is a shock to the subjective
time-discount factor that moves the risk-free rate independently of cash‡ow growth variation.
The parameter dt is a compensating factor chosen to ensure that the log risk-free rate rf;t =
  ln Et exp (mt+1 ) obeys the process

                                                               rf;t = 10 t :

With Gaussian shocks, the SDF is conditionally lognormal, which implies that the log risk-
free rate takes the form

                                                                    0                            1 2                     0
                     rf;t+1 = 10       t   + dt + xt [g                 (I         s )e
                                                                                      st ]        x              2
                                                                                                                     +       s    :
                                                                                                 2 t             a


It follows that
                                                      0                            1                         0
                              dt =         xt [g          (I            s )e
                                                                           st ]   + x2t          2
                                                                                                 a   +               s   :
                                                                                   2
   The SDF depends on the state variable xt , which we also specify as the sum of two
components to account for both high and low frequency variation:

                                           0
                   xt = 10 x?;t +           est                                                                                                        (14)
                        | {z }
                           x?;t

             x?;t+1 = (I             x? ) x ?     +   x? x?;t       + "x? ;t+1 ;             "x? ;t+1             N i:i:d: (0;        x? ) :


where       x?   is a diagonal matrix, and x0?;t = (x?;LF;t ; x?;HF;t )0 . The two components in x?;t
capture variation in the price of risk that is orthogonal to the other components of the
aggregate economic state. Denote this component x?;t                                                 10 x?;t = x?;LF;t + x?;HF;t . We


                                                                         16
refer to x?;t and its components as orthogonal risk price factors. Note that since the est
that appears in equation (14) is demeaned, the mean of xt is the same as (I                   x? ) x? .The

second term on the right-hand-side of (14) allows the price of risk to vary systematically with
the pro…t share, potentially because the willingness to bear risk rises as the earnings share
                                   0
increases. The parameter               is a vector of constants with the same value for both entries:
 0
     = ( ; ) and determines the extent to which the risk price varies with the pro…t share.
Because        is freely estimated under ‡at priors and the procedure is free to recover          = 0, we
can assess the extent to which risk premia in fact vary with the earnings share empirically.
       We note that restricting        = 0 would be inappropriate given the properties of the data.
To see why, consider the two plots in Figure 2. One displays the time-series variation in the
corporate sector log earnings share of output, et             yt ; along with the corporate sector log
price-earnings ratio, pt       et . The other displays et    yt along with the Center for Research in
Securities Prices (CRSP) log price-dividend ratio pt dt . The plots show that both pt et and
pt dt are positively correlated with the earnings share et yt . This is especially true at lower
frequencies. For example, the correlations between et              yt and pt     et and between et      yt
and pt        dt are 47% and 69%, respectively, for components of the raw series that retain
‡uctuations with cycles between 8 and 50 years. Were there no correlation between the
the earnings share and the rate at which shareholder’s discount future payouts, these large
positive correlations would be di¢ cult to rationalize. This can be understood by considering
the implications of a model where shocks to the earnings share have no in‡uence on discount
rates. In this case, if shocks that increase the earnings share result in a rise in earnings that
is persistent but transitory, as we …nd, prices in the model will rise less than proportionally
with earnings in anticipation of their eventual mean reversion, thereby resulting in a negative
correlation between the earnings share and valuation ratios. (See the equilibrium equations
below.) That the data supports a positive correlation, implies that persistently high earnings
shares must coincide with a decline in the expected stock market return, so that valuation
ratios still rise even as earnings and shareholder payouts are rationally expected to decline
in the future.10
  10
       If shocks to the earnings share improved shareholder fundamentals permanently, the model would imply
that such shocks drive prices up proportionally with earnings, leaving valuation ratios una¤ected and the


                                                      17
3.1.3      Equilibrium Stock Market Values

Let Pt denote total market equity, i.e., price per share times shares outstanding. Then with
Ct equal to total equity payout, we write the return on equity from the end of t to the end
of t + 1 as
                                                                               Pt+1 + Ct+1
                                                             Rt+1 =                        :
                                                                                    Pt
                        Pt
De…ne pct          ln   Ct
                              . The log return obeys the following approximate identity (Campbell
and Shiller (1989)):
                                                  rt+1 =      0   +        1 pct+1           pct +          ct+1 ;                                        (15)

where      1   = exp (pc) = (1 + exp (pc)), and                            0   = ln(exp (pc) + 1)                            1 pc.

    The …rst-order-condition for optimal shareholder consumption implies the following Euler
equation:

                                 Pt                                                                     Pt+1
                                    = Et exp mt+1 +                              ct+1 + ln                   +1                   :                       (16)
                                 Ct                                                                     Ct+1
    The relevant state variables for the equilibrium pricing of equity are the two components
of st ,   t,   and xt (low and high frequency). We conjecture a solution to (16) taking the form

                                                  pct = A0 + A0sest + A0 et + A0x? x
                                                                                   et ;                                                                   (17)

where “tildes” indicate deviations from the mean. The solution veri…ed in the Appendix
implies that the coe¢ cients on these state variables take the form
                             h                                                                    ih                                              i   1
                                 0                                0                           0                                               0
                  A0s   =            (I            s)    +             s       +       2
                                                                                       y               (I         1    s)    +        1   s
                             h                                                                 i
                                          0
                 A0x? =                       s    +     2
                                                         y   +            0
                                                                      1 (As        s       ) 10 (I            1       x? )
                                                                                                                              1


                  A0 =       10 (I            1      )   1



The coe¢ cients Ax; and A are all negative, while the sign of the coe¢ cients for As depends
on the value of         . The signs of the coe¢ cients A0 and A0x? imply that an increase in the
risk-free rate or an increase in the price of risk xt originating from either component reduces
the price-cash‡ow ratio because either event increases the rate at which future payouts are
correlation zero.

                                                                                18
discounted. The size of these e¤ects depend on the persistence of the movements in the
risk-free rate and the price of risk, as captured by                                      and        x? .     The more persistent the
shocks, the larger the e¤ects.
    The sign of the elements of A0s depends on the sign of                                          . For                = 0; the elements of
A0s are also negative, since the elements of                               s    are both less than unity. In this case, any
increase in the earnings share, while possibly highly persistent, is ultimately transitory and
therefore delivers a transitory increase in cash‡ows to shareholders. Thus, with                                                                = 0,
shocks to either component of st cause equity values to rise proportionally less than current
cash‡ows in anticipation of eventual mean reversion in payout, reducing pct and leading it to
be negatively related to changes in est . The size of these e¤ects depend on the persistence of
the est process, captured by the elements of                              s,   with more persistent a¤ects translating into
smaller movements in pct , where the e¤ects approach zero as the elements of                                                             s   approach
unity. By contrast, if               < 0, so that the price of risk falls when the earnings share rises,
positive shocks to st could cause an increase in pct , depending on the magnitude of .
    As shown in the Appendix, the model solution implies that the log equity premium is
given by

                                              0                  2        0 0                          0                 1
                Et [rt+1 ]   rf;t =                s      +      a   +    1      s As     (10 x
                                                                                              et +         est )           Vt (rt+1 );
                                                                                                                         2
                                         2
                       Vt (rt+1 ) =      1    A0s         s As    + A0x?        x? A x?   + A0        A
                                                   0                 2         0 0
                                          +             s     +      a   +2    1     s As ;


where Vt ( ) denotes variance conditional on time t information. The conditional variance
is constant due to homoskedasticity of the shocks, but the equity premium varies over time
with the price of risk xt and, if                      is non-zero, the factor shares components in st .


4       Estimation and Data

The model just described consists of a vector of primitive parameters

                               0                      0                                                                                             0
    =    ; g;   2
                a ; diag (   s)    ; diag (       x? )    ; diag (        )0 ; diag (     s)
                                                                                            0
                                                                                                ; diag (      x? )
                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                         ; diag (    )0 ; s; ; x;       ;

where vec ( ) denotes the vectorization of a matrix and variables with “bars”indicate means.

                                                                         19
       With the exception of a small group of parameters, discussed below, the primitive para-
meters are freely estimated.11 We estimate these parameters using Bayesian methods with
‡at priors. Since the model is linear in logs, the latent states are recovered using the Kalman
…lter and inferred jointly with the primitive parameters of the model.
       We use observations on …ve data series: the log share of domestic output accruing to
earnings (the earnings share), denoted et           yt        eyt ,12 a measure of a short term real interest
rate as a proxy for the log risk-free rate, denoted rf;t+1 , growth in output for the corporate
sector as measured by growth in corporate net value added, denoted                       yt , and the log market
equity to output ratio for the corporate sector, denoted pt                 yt   pyt .
       The …nal observable variable we use is a measure of the risk premium for the equity
market taken as the SVIX variable of Martin (2017), denoted rpt . This variable is computed
from options data and we use it to help discipline the estimate of the risk-premium process,
especially its higher frequency variation. Martin (2017) uses option data to compute a lower
bound on the equity risk premium, then argues that this lower bound is in fact tight and
is therefore a good measure of the true risk premium on the stock market. That paper
documents that a wide range of representative agent asset pricing theories fails to explain
the high frequency variation in the risk premium implied by options data, even if they are
broadly consistent with the lower-frequency variation suggested by variables like the price-
dividend ratio or cayt (Lettau and Ludvigson (2001)). Since our model allows for mixture
processes, the risk premium we estimate is capable of accounting for both higher- and lower-
frequency components of the risk premium.
       The model implies that these observed series are related to the primitive parameters and
  11
       Although s, ; and xt have multiple components, we assume without loss of generality that all but the
…rst component of each series has zero mean, and therefore only estimate a single parameter for the mean
of each.
  12
     Observations on eyt = ln (St ) = ln StD Zt + Ft are constructed from observations on the components
StD , Zt , and Ft , as indicated in the Online Appendix.




                                                         20
latent state variables according to the following system of equations:

                              eyt = 10 st

                              rf t = 10    t

                              pyt = pct + cyt

                                    = py + (A0s + 0 ) est + A0 et + A0x? x
                                                                         et                                                           (18)

                               yt = g +           y~t
                                           0                                 0                                 1
                              rpt =               s     +   2
                                                            a       +   1        s As        (10 xt + 0est )     Vt (rt+1 );
                                                                                                               2
                                                                        0
where cyt                ct     yt , and py           A0 + c +              s. Note that             y~t is exactly pinned down by the
observation equation for                   yt .
    Let K denote the number of latent state variables and let N denote the number of
observation variables. The above equations may be written in state space form as follows:

                                                            Yt = H0t               t   + bt                                           (19)

                                                                t       = F       t 1       + "t ;                                    (20)

where the observation vector Yt                             (eyt ; rf t ; pyt ; rpt ; yt )0 : The latent state vector is              t
          0                     0                                                                                  0
 s~t 0 ; ~t ; x
              ~ 0?;t ;    y~t , while the shock vector is "t = "0s;t ; "0 ;t ; "0x? ;t ; "a;t : In total, there are
                                                  0
seven latent states, since ~s0t ; ~t ; and x
                                           ~ 0?;t each have a low- and high frequency component.
The i.i.d. shock "a;t is included the “state equation” (20) even though it is exactly pinned
down by the observable series                           yt so that we can estimate its mean and variance, since these
parameters in‡uence our asset pricing equations. The coe¢ cient matrix H0t and vector bt
depend on t because the sample for the SVIX variable rpt spans 1996:Q1 to 2012:Q1, which is
shorter than our full sample period. Thus the state-space estimation uses two measurement
equations to accommodate the missing data. (See the Online Appendix for details.)
    The model is estimated as follows. The matrices, F, H0t , and b0t contain primitive para-
meters of dimensions (K                        K) ; (N              K) ; and (N                 1), respectively. Given values for the
primitive parameters                    in the combinations F, H0t , and G0 , we use the Kalman …lter to
obtain smoothed estimates of the state vector                                          t,   which we denote        tjT .   Since our model
has more latent states than observable series in Yt , we explain all of the variation in our

                                                                             21
observable series and there is no measurement error in equation (19).Moreover, because we
perfectly match pt         yt and    yt , we also perfectly match the growth in market equity                pt
over time and at each point in time, a property we exploit when calculating the growth
decompositions discussed below.
       The posterior distribution of     is obtained by computing the likelihood using the Kalman
…lter and combining it with priors. Since we use ‡at priors, the posterior coincides with the
likelihood and the posterior mode estimate of             coincides with the maximum likelihood esti-
mate. Uncertainty about the parameters             is characterized using a random walk Metropolis-
Hastings (RWMH) algorithm, while uncertainty about the latent state                        t   is characterized
using the simulation smoother of Durbin and Koopman (2002). We use the RWMH algo-
rithm to generate ten independent chains, each containing 550,000 draws of . We discard
the …rst 50,000 draws from each chain as burn-in, leaving 5,000,000 parameter draws. Since
these draws are highly serially correlated, we increase computational e¢ ciency by using every
50th draw, leaving a total of 100,000 draws over which our margins of parameter uncertainty
are computed. For every one of these 100,000 draws of parameters, we simulate one draw
of the latent states using the simulation smoother. The plots below therefore re‡ect both
parameter and latent state uncertainty.13
       Our data consist of quarterly observations spanning the period 1952:Q1 to 2017:Q4.
We focus on our analysis on the U.S. corporate sector. Previous research has examined
joint trends in …nancial markets and aggregate economic quantities by combining data on
the stock market with data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) on aggregate
measures of output and the labor share.14 A weakness of this approach is that the stock
market only covers publicly traded …rms, while the BEA data on output and labor share
are not limited to the publicly traded sector and cover a far broader swath of the economy.
This creates the potential for confounding compositional e¤ects over time. For example, if
  13
       The latent state space includes components that di¤er according to their degree of persistence. With
‡at priors, a penalty to the likelihood is required to ensure that the low frequency component has greater
persistence than the higher frequency component. This is accomplished setting a penalty that forces the
likelihood to negative in…nity if the parameter search wanders into a space where   j;LF         j;HF .
   14
      See e.g., GLL, Farhi and Gourio (2018).



                                                     22
publicly traded …rms have experienced larger shifts over time in their labor shares and/or
output compared to non-public …rms, movements in the aggregate quantities for output
and labor compensation would not correctly describe the …rms for which market equity is
measured. Since it is important for our study that earnings, output, labor compensation,
and the market value of equity all pertain to the same sector of the economy, we focus on the
U.S. corporate sector (CS), where all of these variables can be consistently measured. To see
the potential for compouding compositional e¤ects, consider again Figure 1, which plots the
ratio of corporate sector market equity (ME) to several di¤erent measures of macroeconomic
activity over time. In this plot the only series for which the numerator and denominator are
measured for the same sector of the economy is the corporate sector ME-output ratio. Of all
the ratios plotted, this is the one that has risen the most over our sample. The other ratios
give a more distorted picture because the numerator and denominator are not in comparable
units. The use of the corporate sector also has the advantage that the labor share, 1      St ;
is not a¤ected by the statistical imputation of labor income from total income reported by
sole proprietors and unincorporated businesses.
   We use total CS market equity to measure pt . Total output yt , measured in real, per
capita terms, is observed as net value added for the sector. Labor compensation, earnings,
taxes and interest, and foreign retained earnings are also directly observed for this sector.
The real risk-free rate is measured as the three-month T-bill rate less the …tted value from
a regression of in‡ation on lags of in‡ation. The Online Appendix provides a detailed
description of these data and our sources.
   There are four parameters that are calibrated rather than estimated. The …rst three are
the average growth rate of net value added g, the average log pro…t share s, and the average
real risk-free rate . Since these represent the means of our observable series, we take the
conservative approach of …xing them equal to their sample means. We do this to avoid
a potential estimation concern: because some of our series are persistent, the estimation
might otherwise have a wide degree of freedom in setting steady state values that are far
from the observed sample means. At quarterly frequency, we obtain the values g = 0:552%,
s=    2:120 (corresponding to a share in levels of 12.01%), and    = 0:283%.
                                         S
   The …nal calibrated parameter is =   S !
                                            ;   which relates payout growth to earnings growth

                                             23
according to (9). This parameter can be calibrated directly from data. Since Ct = (St !)Yt ,
                                                                                         C
we can rearrange and take sample averages of both sides to obtain ! = S                  Y
                                                                                           .   Computing
                                                                          C
S as the mean of the total pro…t to domestic output ratio and             Y
                                                                              as the mean of the payout
to output ratio observed in the National Income and Product Account (NIPA) data yields
the value       = 2:19. We con…rm in our results that the calibrated value for            yields average
growth and volatility of payouts that are close to those observed in the data.
       A …nal comment on the data used for estimation is in order. Other than indirectly in the
above calibration, we do not use NIPA payout data in estimation, for two reasons. First,
the NIPA estimate of net payout for the U.S. corporate sector is noisy and subject to large
swings due to temporary factors such as changes in tax law that are outside of the model
and likely to be unrelated to economic fundamentals.15 This suggests that some fraction
of the quarter-to-quarter variation in the payout share is unlikely to be related to the true
value of shareholder consumption even in the short-run. For this reason, we argue that any
serious use of these data would require an extensive investigation to align what is being
measured with the desired theoretical input. Second, a principle objective of our analysis it
to investigate the role of trends in the U.S. corporate pro…t share and aggregate economic
activity on the value of the stock market. This requires that we use data on the corporate
pro…t share rather than the payout share, specifying a model of investment to stipulate how
the two are linked. It is unclear how to use the payout data directly in estimation without
breaking the theoretical linkage between the two and, along with it, our ability to study
the role of the corporate earnings share in driving the stock market. For example, we could
eliminate equation (2) and replace it with data on Ct , but doing so would also eliminate any
linkage in the model between pro…t shares, economic growth and the stock market.
  15
       For a recent example, see NIPA Table 4.1, which shows an unusually large increase in 2018:Q1 in net
dividends received from the rest of the world by domestic businesses, which generated a very large decline
in net payout. BEA has indicated that these unusual transactions re‡ect the e¤ect of changes in the U.S.
tax law attributable to the Tax Cut and Jobs Act of 2017 that eliminated taxes for U.S. multinationals on
repatriated pro…ts from their a¢ liates abroad.




                                                     24
5     Results

5.1    Parameter and Latent State Estimates

We begin with a discussion of the estimated parameter values and latent states.
    Table 1 presents the estimates of our primitive parameters based on the posterior distri-
bution obtained with ‡at priors. A number of results are worth highlighting.
    First, the persistence parameters of the mixture series are of immediate interest, since
they determine the role of each latent variable on market equity values over longer periods
of time. Consider the risk-free rate processes. The mode estimate of the autoregressive
coe¢ cient of the high frequency component is b      ;HF   = 0:56, whereas that of the low frequency
component is b   ;LF   = 0:93. While the latter is clearly persistent, it is not highly so. This
explains why the large declines in real interest rates observed over the last several decades
need not play a large role in explaining the boom in equity values over the same time period.
Although rates have declined, it is not today’s rate but the expected path of future rates
that matters for equity values. This evidence implies that the low rates of recent years are
unlikely to persist for a time period extensive enough to warrent a large equity valuation
boom. We return to this point in Section 5.5.
    Second, the estimates for the factor share and risk price autoregressive parameters suggest
much more persistence, with modal values of bs;HF = 0:879 and bs;LF = 0:985, and bx;HF =
0:671 and bx;LF = 0:986, respectively. These estimates indicate that the low frequency
components of the factor share and risk premium state variables are substantially more
persistent than those of interest rate changes, though still not permanent, foreshadowing
their larger role in the longer-term swings of the market that we document below.
    As a further indication that these estimates are plausible, Figure 11 shows that, at
these estimated parameter values, the model implications for the autocorrelations of model-
implied series closely match those of the corresponding observed series. In both the model
and the data, the autocorrelations of output growth hover around zero, suggesting a near
i.i.d. process, whereas the autocorrelations for the earnings share, the risk-free rate, and
the log ME-to-output ratio start well above zero and converge toward zero as the lag order



                                                25
increases, suggestive of persistent but stationary processes. Panel (c) shows clearly that the
autocorrelations of the risk-free rate converge to zero by quarterly lag 35, while panel (d)
shows that the autocorrelations for the log ME-to-output ratio remain above 0.5 at that lag.
The shows that the risk-free rate process is not nearly persistent enough to explain much of
the considerably more persistent variation in the ME-to-output ratio observed in Figure 1.
   Third, Table 1 shows that the mode estimate of the mean risk price parameter x is about
4.0, a modest value that re‡ects the volatility in cash payments to shareholders that are the
source of systematic risk to shareholders in the model. Because of this, outsized aversion to
risk or ambiguity is not needed to explain the high average equity return premium in the
data.
   Fourth, the parameter estimate b =       7:93 implies that a 0.01 unit increase in the de-
meaned log earnings share set ; approximately corresponding to a one percent increase in the
earnings share St around the mean, results in a 0.08 unit decrease in the price of risk xt .
This implies that persistent increases in the earnings share are associated with a decline in
expected returns and the risk premium.
   Fifth, the mode estimate of the volatility of the productivity shock (output growth) is
0.015, which is roughly equal to that of quarterly real personal consumption growth.
   What about the latent states? The next three …gures illustrate our estimates of the latent
states over time. Figure 3 shows the low and high frequency components of the earnings
share, st ; Figure 4 shows the low and high frequency components of the risk-free rate,     t.

The …gures show the observable series, along with its component attributable to di¤erent
sources of variation. This is accomplished by …xing one component or the other at its value
at the beginning of the sample. The shaded areas around each estimated component source
are 90% credible sets that take into account both parameter and latent state uncertainty.
Credible sets are known to be wide in estimations with ‡at priors, as here. But its important
to note that the sum of the high- and low frequency components add up to the observed series
exactly, without error, both over the sample and at each point in time, since measurement
error is e¤ectively zero in the observation equations.
   Figure 3 shows the time-variation in the log earnings share eyt over our sample, along
with the portion of this variation attributable to each estimated factors share component

                                              26
sLF;t and sHF;t . The plot shows that the log earnings share was high in the 1950s and 1960s,
low in the 1970s and 1980s, and then began an upward trajectory starting around 1990
that continues to the end of the sample, interrupted only temporarily by the tech bust in
2000-2001. Panel (a) juxtaposes observations on eyt with the model’s implications for this
series if only the low frequency component sHF;t were varying over our sample. The low
frequency sLF;t component captures the longer term swings in the earnings share, which
increases over the sample, and has risen sharply since the year 1990. Panel (b) shows the
high frequency component sHF;t captures all the transitory variation in the earnings share,
but cannot account for the full rise in eyt in recent decades.
   Figure 4 shows the evolution of the risk-free rate over time, along with the portion of this
variation attributable to the estimated low and high frequency components. From the series
on the raw interest rate data, it is clear that, although rates are low today, they are not
unusually so by historical standards. Real rates were very low at several points in the 1950s
and late 1970s, then rose under the Volcker disin‡ation around 1979 and remained elevated
for over a decade before declining to their current low values. The low frequency compo-
nent   LF;t   in panel (a) captures all of these longer-term movements. The high frequency
component      HF;t ,   shown in panel (b), picks up the most transitory wiggles in the series.
   Figure 5 shows the estimate of the equity premium over time, but breaks the components
out in a di¤erent way. Panel (a) plots our overall estimated risk premium, which is a¤ected
by both the orthogonal risk price component x?;t and, since b 6= 0, movements in st : Panel
(b) shows our estimate the equity premium variation that is att,ributable to only the high
frequency component of the of the orthogonal risk price component, x?;HF;t . Both panels
superimpose the equity premium implied by the three-month SVIX over the subperiod for
which the latter is available, from 1996:Q1-2012:Q1. Two points are worth noting. First,
with the exception of the spike upward during the …nancial crisis of 2008-2009, panel (a)
shows that the estimated equity premium has been declining steadily over the past several
decades and is quite low by historical standards at the end of the sample. Speci…cally, by
2017:Q4, the estimates imply that the equity premium reached the record low values it had
attained previously only in two episodes: at the end of the tech boom in 1999-2000, and
at the end of the twin housing/equity booms in 2006. Second, panel (b) shows that the

                                                   27
estimation assigns to the high frequency orthogonal risk price component, x?;HF;t , virtually
all of the variation in the risk premium implied by the options data, while the remaining
variation is ascribed to the lower frequency component. The overall risk premium is therefore
in‡uenced by a trending low frequency component and a volatile high frequency component.


5.2    Asset Pricing Moments

Table 2 presents the model’s implications for asset pricing moments and compares them to
data for the corporate sector. The columns labeled “Model” are computed using the mode
parameter estimates and then simulating the model 1,000 times using a sample length equal
to that of our historical sample. The asset pricing moments in the “Model” columns are
averages across the simulations. The columns labeled “Fitted,”compute moments using the
mode parameter estimates but combine these with the estimated latent states obtained by
…tting the model to the observed historical sample. These …tted values therefore represent
the model’s implications for the asset pricing moments conditional on the observed sequence
of shocks that actually generated the historical data, so they are directly comparable to
the sample “Data” moments that are also reported in the table. Note that the “Fitted”
and “Data” moments are identical by construction for the risk-free rate, earnings growth,
and earnings share growth, because we use these series as observables and …t their behavior
exactly over the sample with no measurement error.
   For moments pertaining to other series, Table 2 shows that the model …tted moments do
a reasonably good job of matching the sample moments for the excess return on equity and
the log price-payout ratio. The …tted mean log excess return, which is 6.4% per annum, is
lower than the 7.3% per annum for the average excess return in historical data because the
model’s implied series for payout share growth (which was not a target of our estimation)
understates the observed sample mean. Despite this understatement, the …tted means are
in the right ballpark of the actual payout data, which are highly volatile. Since no data on
payout were used in our estimation, these results increase our con…dence that the model is
able to realistically account for the dynamics of payouts over the sample.
   These estimates imply that much of the reward from holding equity in the post-war era


                                             28
has been attributable to a long sequence of distributional shocks that redistributed rewards
to shareholders. Table 2 shows that the model mean log equity premium is 3.7% per annum.
This number is an estimate of the mean risk premium implied by the parameter estimates;
it re‡ects only compensation for bearing risk in the stock market, i.e., covariance with the
SDF. By contrast, the estimated …tted equity premium, or mean excess stock market return,
is 6.6%. This number is a¤ected by covariance with the SDF but also re‡ects persistent
movements in earnings and payout over the sample. The divergence between the two is
attributable to the fact that the model stipulates stationary earnings and payout shares of
output that can’t grow in perpetuity (these shares are bounded below by 0 and above by
unity), while the 65 year sample upon which the model is estimated exhibits strong upward
growth in these shares. We can see this by observing that the …tted means for earnings
growth and payout growth reported in Table 2 are both estimated to be substantially larger
than the model means for these series. Moreover, since the earnings and payout shares have
a constant steady state mean in the model, the model means of the steady state growth in
the shares is zero, while the …tted means over our sample are estimated to be large and
positive.
   In short, our estimates imply that the high returns to holding equity in the post-war
period have been driven, in large part, by a highly unusual sample, one characterized by a
long string of factors share shocks that redistributed rewards from productive activity toward
shareholders. Taken together, the estimates imply that roughly 2.9% of the post-war mean
log return on stocks in excess of a T-bill rate is attributable to this string of factors share
shocks, rather than to genuine compensation for bearing risk. The results here suggest that
such sample averages for the excess return overstate the true equity risk premium by over
44%. These …ndings are a cautionary tale for the common practice of using the sample mean
excess return, or components of the sample mean return such as the dividend-price ratio or
dividend-earnings ratio, to infer an equity risk premium, even over samples as long as that
of the post-war period.




                                              29
5.3    Dynamics of Equity Values

The results in Table 2 tell us about the full sample moments but are silent on the dynamic
forces that have given rise to sharply increasing equity values over time in the sample. To
consider these dynamic forces, it is instructive to study a graphical representation of our
observed variables over time, juxtaposed by the estimated portion of variation attributable
to each latent component in the model. This is accomplished by either …xing one component
at its mean during a particular period, or by allowing only one component to vary. The
shaded areas around each estimated component source are 90% credible sets that take into
account both parameter and latent state uncertainty.
   The next several …gures decompose our target variable, the log market equity-to-output
ratio, pyt , into sources of variation attributable to di¤erent latent components. This is
accomplished, as above, by either …xing one component during a particular period, or by
allowing only one component to vary. In all …gures, the red (solid) line shows the model
point estimate, based on the posterior mode parameter values.
   Figure 6 shows the observed pyt series, which has a low frequency upward trend in it over
our sample that is captured by the low frequency factors share component sLF;t , as exhibited
in panel (a). The high frequency component sHF;t , produces some “wiggles” in the series
but contributes nothing to the trend, as shown in panel (b). Panel (c) shows that if we …x
both components of the factor share process at its value at the beginning of our sample in
1952:Q1, the model is unable to capture any of the upward trajectory in the price-output
ratio since about 2000. Panel (d) exhibits a similar pattern by showing the actual series since
1989 against what the model would imply if st were …xed at its value in 1989: only a small
part of the upward trend in the market equity-to-output ratio since 1989 can be explained
if there is no role for a changing earnings share. Taken together the results show a large role
for factors share shifts in driving upward the market value of equity relative to output.
   Figure 7 shows the part of the observed equity value-to-output ratio variation that can
be attributed to movements in the risk-free rate. Panels (a)-(d) show that the estimates
attribute only a small role to risk-free rate variation in explaining the rise in equity values
relative to output over our sample. The last two panels show that shutting down either


                                              30
component does little to the model’s ability to match the trend movements in pyt , which are
driven primarily by other variables. Panel (d) suggests a small role for lower risk-free rates
in the last 30 years, especially since around 2000: by the end of the sample, the price-output
ratio would be about two-tenths of a log point lower had there been no change in risk-free
rates since 1989.16
       Figure 8 shows the part of the observed pyt variation that can be attributed to ‡uctuations
in the component of the one-step-ahead equity risk premium, Et [rt+1 ]                rf;t , that is driven
by the orthogonal component of the risk price, x?;t . Panel (a) shows that this component of
risk premium variation explains almost all of the transitory booms and busts in equity values
relative to output over our sample, including the technology boom/bust, the boom in equity
values leading up to the …nancial crisis of 2008-2009, and the sharp decline in those values
during the …nancial crisis. In particular, Panel (a) shows that an estimated decline in the
risk premium explained almost all the boom in equity values during the run-up to the tech
bust in 2000. (Recall that a decline in x?;t translates into a rise in pyt .) Panel (b) shows
that high frequency component of the risk price explains virtually none of the big swings
in the price-output ratio. Panel (c), which …xes x?;t at its value in 1952, indicates that the
lower-frequency component of the orthogonal risk price explains some, but not nearly all,
of the rise in the price-output ratio over the full sample, since if x?;t is …xed at its 1952
value, the model does not match the full increase in pyt over the sample. The rest of the
rise thus comes from other factors, namely the factor share component. Panel (d) shows
what happens if x?;t is …xed at the value it took in 1989:Q1. The counterfactual in panel
(d) suggests that only a small portion of the rise in pyt since 1989 is explained by a decline
in x?;t , based on the posterior mode parameter values. But the credible sets indicate that
there is signi…cant uncertainty over whether this component contributed at all to the rise in
the market equity-to-output ratio over the last 30 years.
  16
       These …ndings are not directly comparable to those in Bianchi, Lettau, and Ludvigson (2016), who …nd
evidence of a low-frequency component in interest rates driven by monetary policy, since the monetary policy
component they uncover is correlated with risk-premium variation, whereas we identify only the mutually
uncorrelated components of risk-free rate and equity premium variation.




                                                     31
5.4        Growth Decompositions

In this section we quantify the importance of di¤ering drivers of equity values over the post-
war period by calculating a set of growth decompositions that decompose the total growth in
equity values into distinct sources attributable to each latent state variable in the model. The
contributions are computed by taking the total growth in the target variable and dividing it
into parts attributable to only a single component (…xing all other components at their values
at the beginning of the sample). By construction, these components sum to 100% of the
observed variation in equity values, since the model along with the …tted latent components
perfectly matches at each point in time the observed log market equity-to-output ratio, pyt ,
as well as output growth           yt : Table 3 presents the decompositions for the total change in
the log of real market equity pt ; either over the whole sample or over the period since 1989.17
       The estimates indicate that about 43% of the market increase since 1989 and 19% over
the full sample is attributable to the sum of the two factors share components sLF;t and
sHF;t , with the vast majority of this coming from the low frequency component. Over the
period since 1989, the roles of the other components are smaller. For example, persistently
declining interest rates contributed 8.5%, while the decline in the equity risk premium driven
by orthogonal movements in the price of risk contributed about 24%. Over the full sample,
real interest rates contributed a much smaller 2.1%, while the declining risk price contributed
20%.
       In contrast to factor share movements, growth in the real value of what was actually
produced by the sector is a far less important driver of equity values since 1989. Indeed
economic growth explains just 25% of the increase in equity values since 1989 and, as a
result of this weak contribution, explains only 54% over the full post-war sample. This
may be contrasted with the previous subsample, from 1952 to 1988, where economic growth
account for 111% of the rise in the stock market, while factor share movements contributed
negatively to the market’s rise. But the 37 year subperiod from 1952 to the end of 1988
  17
       The growth decompositions for the log level of real market equity pt are computed by adding back the
growth      yt in real output (net value added) to the growth   pyt . Since   yt is de‡ated by the implicit price
de‡ator for net value added, the decomposition for pt pertains to the value of market equity de‡ated by the
implicit NVA price de‡ator.


                                                      32
created less than a third of the wealth generated in the 29 years 1989:Q1-2017:Q4. These
…ndings underscore a striking aspect of post-war equity markets: in the longer 37 year
subsample for which equity values grew comparatively slowly, economic growth propelled
the market, while factor shares played a negative role. But the market made far greater
gains in much shorter time from 1989 to present day, when factor share shocks reallocated
rewards to shareholders even as economic growth slowed.
   Since the corporate earnings share has been the most important driver of the price-output
ratio in recent decades, we now discuss the model’s implications for what has been driving
the corporate earnings share. As above, we do so by showing the observable series, along
with the component attributable to di¤erent sources of variation. This is accomplished by
…xing one component or the other at its value at the beginning of the sample. Recall that
the total earnings share in levels St = StD Zt + Ft is in‡uenced by the domestic pro…t share
StD (one minus the labor share), the tax/interest/other share Zt , and the foreign earnings
share Ft .
   Figure 9 shows four panels. In panel (a), the data on ln (St ) = st are plotted over time
along with counterfactuals that allow only one component to vary over time. All other
components are held …xed at their values at the beginning of the sample in 1952. Panel (b)
does the same but zeros in on the post 1989 period by …xing components at their values
in that year. Both panels, but especially when zeroing in on the last 30 years in panel (b),
show that a declining domestic labor share accounts for the bulk of the rise in the corporate
earnings share. The tax and interest share plays virtually no role. The foreign earnings
share played a modest role from 2000-2007, but has played a lesser role in the sample since
the Great Recession. Next, panel (c) shows st along with counterfactuals that leave one
component …xed at its value in 1952 while allowing all others to vary. Panel (d) shows
the same but …xes the component at its value in 1989. A similar pattern emerges: …xing
the labor share component, we explain very little of the sustained run-up in the corporate
earnings share since 1989 nor can we explain most of its variation over the whole sample
(panel (a)). The tax and interest share explains virtually none of the variation, and the
foreign earnings component only a small part. Putting this all together, these results imply
that the declining domestic labor share has played the largest role in the sustained rise in

                                             33
the corporate earnings share.
   We close this section by considering the role of the earnings share components in driving
the equity market when they are restricted to be uncorrelated with the equity risk premium.
As noted above, our estimates of     indicate that persistently rising corporate pro…ts shares
have coincided with a growing willingness to tolerate stock market risk over time, helping to
rationalize the observed postive correlation between the price-earnings ratio and the earnings
share of output. Indeed, this result is one reason why rising corporate pro…t shares have
been such a powerful force for stock market gains. What the next …gure shows is that, even
without this correlation, factor shares remain a powerful force. Figure 10 shows the role of
factor shares when we restrict     = 0. We see that the low-frequency factor share process
continues to play a large role in the longer term gains in the market, and the counterfactuals
are similar to those for the baseline model where       is freely estimated. In terms of the
quantitative decomposition presented above, the restricted model implies that factor share
shocks remain the most quantitatively important source of the market’s rise since 1989, albeit
accounting for a smaller 29% in this case.


5.5    Contrast to Existing Literature

Our results di¤er in important ways from contemporaneous papers such as Farhi and Gourio
(2018) and Corhay, Kung, and Schmid (2018). While these papers …nd a crucial role for
falling interest rates in driving the increase in asset prices over recent decades, we …nd that
interest rates account for only 8% of stock market growth since 1989. Moreover, while these
papers both conclude that risk premia have risen over this period, Panel (a) of Figure 5
shows that we estimate risk premia to have fallen to historically low levels.
   We believe these opposing results are mostly due to the di¤erent estimation approaches
behind them. Importantly, while we estimate our model directly on the time series, allowing
for shocks to enter with a variety of estimated persistences, Farhi and Gourio (2018) and
Corhay, Kung, and Schmid (2018) measure changes across steady states, in which parameters
can change only permanently. As a result, these papers interpret the observed drop in risk-
free rates as a permanent shift, causing major changes in how long-term cash ‡ows are


                                              34
discounted, and leading to a huge increase in market value. Since the implied increase
in market value from falling risk-free rates would be even larger than the actual increase
observed, these models infer that risk premia must have risen at the same time to match the
realized growth in asset prices.
       In contrast, our model views changes in interest rates as far from permanent, since we
estimate the quarterly persistence of the low frequency component of interest rates to be
0.93. As a result, investors in our model did not believe that interest rates would remain
permanently high in the 1980s, nor do they expect them to remain permanently low today,
strongly dampening the e¤ect of the fall in rates on the value of market equity. This smaller
direct e¤ect from interest rates allows us to match the observed rise in asset prices in an
environment with falling risk premia.
       We view our approach, and therefore our …ndings, as strongly preferred by the data. To
support this claim, we appeal to Figure 11, which compares the observed autocorrelations
of our observable series to the implied autocorrelations generated from a long simulation
of the model.18 Panel (c) shows that the autocorrelation of the real risk-free rate decreases
rapidly with the lag order, falling below 50% after 12 quarters, and falling close to zero at the
10-year horizon. This pattern is deeply inconsistent with a process dominated by permanent
changes, which would instead imply autocorrelations close to unity at all horizons. Our
model is able to match this pattern well, and does not understate the autocorrelation at
long horizons. More broadly, the other panels of Figure 11 demonstrate that the earnings
share and ME/Y ratio are also far from a unit root. Since the persistences of the underlying
shocks are critical for pricing long-term assets, we believe that our estimation approach,
which is able to closely match their autocorrelograms, is likely to generate more realistic
asset behavior than approaches that assume permanent changes across regimes.
  18
       We include all four observable series that are available over the full sample. We omit the SVIX risk
premium, which is available only on a much shorter sample, and is therefore unsuitable for computing longer
autocorrelations.




                                                     35
6    Conclusion

We investigate the reasons for rising equity values over the post-war period. We do this by
estimating a ‡exible parametric model of how equities are priced that allows for in‡uence
from a number of mutually uncorrelated latent components, while at the same time inferring
what values those components must have taken over our sample to explain the data. The
identi…cation of mutually uncorrelated components and the speci…cation of a log linear model
allow us to precisely decompose the observed market growth into distinct component sources.
The model is ‡exible enough to explain 100% of the rise in equity values over our sample
and at each point in time.
    We confront our model with data on equity values, output, the earnings share of output,
interest rates, and a measure of the conditional equity premium implied by options data.
We …nd that the high returns to holding equity over the post-war era have been attributable
in large part to an unpredictable string of factor share shocks that reallocated rewards away
from labor compensation and toward shareholders. Indeed, our estimates suggest that at
least 2.9 percentage points of the post-war average annual log equity return in excess of
a short-term interest rate is attributable to this string of reallocative shocks, rather than
to genuine compensation for bearing risk. This estimate implies that the sample mean log
excess equity return overstates the true risk premium by at least 44%.
    Factors share shocks alone would have driven a 543% increase in the value of market
equity since 1989, an increase equal to 43% of the actual rise. Equity values were modestly
boosted since 1989 by persistently declining interest rates and a decline in risk premia, which
contributed 8.5 and 24%, respectively, to rising equity values. But growth in the real value
of aggregate output contributed just 25% since 1989 and just 54% over the full sample.
By contrast, economic growth was overwhelmingly important for rising equity values from
1952 to 1988, where it explained over 100% of the market’s rise. But that 37 year period
generated less than half the wealth created in the 29 years since 1989. In this sense, factor
shares, more than economic growth, have been the preponderant measure of fundamental
value in the stock market over 60 years.




                                              36
References

Ait-Sahalia, Y., J. A. Parker, and M. Yogo (2004): “Luxury Goods and the Equity
  Premium,”Journal of Finance, 59, 2959–3004.

Autor, D. H., D. Dorn, L. F. Katz, C. Patterson, and J. Van Reenen (2017):
  “Concentrating on the Fall of the Labor Share,” American Economic Review Papers and
  Proceedings, 107(5), 180–85.

Bianchi, F., M. Lettau, and S. C. Ludvigson (2016): “Monetary Policy and Asset
  Valuaton,”http://www.econ.nyu.edu/user/ludvigsons/reg.pdf.

Campbell, J. Y., and J. H. Cochrane (1999): “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-
  Based Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy,
  107, 205–251.

Campbell, J. Y., A. W. Lo, and C. MacKinlay (1997): The Econometrics of Financial
  Markets. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Campbell, J. Y., and R. J. Shiller (1989): “The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations
  of Future Dividends and Discount Factors,”Review of Financial Studies, 1(3), 195–228.

Chen, X., J. Favilukis, and S. C. Ludvigson (2014): “An Estimation of Economic
  Models with Recursive Preferences,”Quantitative Economics, 4(1), 39–83.

Cochrane, J. H. (2005): Asset Pricing, Revised Edition. Princeton University Press,
  Princeton, NJ.

Constantinides, G. M., and D. Duffie (1996): “Asset Pricing With Heterogeneous
  Consumers,”Journal of Political Economy, 104, 219–40.

Corhay, A., H. Kung, and L. Schmid (2018): “Q: Risk, Rents, or Growth?,”Discussion
  paper, Technical Report.

Crouzet, N., and J. Eberly (2020): “Rents and Intangible Capital: A Q+ Framework,”
  Unpublished manuscript, Northwestern University.

Danthine, J.-P., and J. B. Donaldson (2002): “Labour Relations and Asset Returns,”
  Review of Economic Studies, 69(1), 41–64.

                                           37
Durbin, J., and S. J. Koopman (2002): “A simple and e¢ cient simulation smoother for
  state space time series analysis,”Biometrika, 89(3), 603–616.

Estrada, J. (2012): “Blinded by growth,” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, 24(3),
  19–25.

Farhi, E., and F. Gourio (2018): “Accounting for Macro-Finance Trends: Market Power,
  Intangibles, and Risk Premia,”Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Favilukis, J., and X. Lin (2013): “The Elephant in the Room: The Impact of Labor Oblig-
  ations on Credit Risk,”https://sites.google.com/site/jackfavilukis/WageCreditRisk.pdf.

           (2015): “Wage Rigidity: A Quantitative Solution to Several Asset Pricing Puzzles,”
  The Review of Financial Studies, 29(1), 148–192.

           (2016): “Does wage rigidity make …rms riskier? Evidence from long-horizon return
  predictability,”Journal of Monetary Economics, 78, 80–95.

Gelman, A., H. S. Stern, J. B. Carlin, D. B. Dunson, A. Vehtari, and D. B.
  Rubin (2013): Bayesian Data Analysis. Chapman and Hall/CRC.

Gomez, M. (2016): “Asset prices and wealth inequality,” Unpublished paper: Princeton.
  http://www. princeton. edu/˜mattg/…les/jmp. pdf.

Greenwald, D., M. Lettau, and S. C. Ludvigson (2014): “Origins of Stock Market
  Fluctuations,”National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 19818.

Guvenen, M. F. (2009): “A Parsimonious Macroeconomic Model for Asset Pricing,”
  Econometrica, 77(6), 1711–1740.

Haario, H., E. Saksman, J. Tamminen, et al. (2001): “An Adaptive Metropolis Algo-
  rithm,”Bernoulli, 7(2), 223–242.

Hartman-Glaser, B., H. Lustig, and M. Z. Xiaolan (2016): “Capital Share Dynamics
  When Firms Insure Workers,”Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Herbst, E., and F. Schorfheide (2014): “Sequential Monte Carlo Sampling for DSGE
  Models,”Journal of Applied Econometrics, 29(7), 1073–1098.



                                              38
Karabarbounis, L., and B. Neiman (2013): “The Global Decline of the Labor Share,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1), 61–103.

Kehrig, M., and N. Vincent (2018): “The Micro-Level Anatomy of the Labor Share
  Decline,”Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Klein, L. R., and R. F. Kosobud (1961): “Some econometrics of growth: Great ratios
  of economics,”The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 75(2), 173–198.

Lansing, K. J. (2014): “Asset Pricing with Concentrated Ownership of Capital and Dis-
  tribution Shocks,”Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2011-07.

Lettau, M., and S. C. Ludvigson (2001): “Consumption, Aggregate Wealth and Ex-
  pected Stock Returns,”Journal of Finance, 56(3), 815–849.

         (2009): “Euler Equation Errors,” The Review of Economic Dynamics, 12(2), 255–
  283.

Lettau, M., and S. C. Ludvigson (2013): “Shocks and Crashes,”in National Bureau of
  Economics Research Macroeconomics Annual: 2013, ed. by J. Parker, and M. Woodford,
  vol. 28, pp. 293–354. MIT Press, Cambridge and London.

Lettau, M., S. C. Ludvigson, and S. Ma (2018): “The Momentum Undervalue Puzzle,”
  Unpublished paper, NYU.

         (2019): “Capital Share Risk in U.S. Asset Pricing,”The Journal of Finance, 74(4),
  1753–1792.

Lettau, M., and J. A. Wachter (2007): “Why is Long-Horizon Equity Less Risky? A
  Duration Based Explanation of the Value Premium,”Journal of Finance, LXII(1), 55–92.

Ludvigson, S. C. (2012): “Advances in Consumption-Based Asset Pricing: Empirical
  Tests,”in Handbook of the Economics of Finance Vol. II, ed. by G. Constantinides, M. Har-
  ris, and R. Stulz, pp. 799–906. Elsevier Science B.V., North Holland, Amsterdam.

Lustig, H., and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2008): “The Returns on Human Capital: Good
  News on Wall Street is Bad News on Main Street,” Review of Financial Studies, 21,
  2097–2137.


                                            39
Malloy, C. J., T. J. Moskowitz, and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2009): “Long-run
  Stockholder Consumption Risk and Asset Returns,”Journal of Finance, 64, 2427–2479.

Mankiw, N. G. (1986): “The Equity Premium and the Concentration of Aggregate Shocks,”
  Journal of Financial Economics, 17, 97–112.

Mankiw, N. G., and S. P. Zeldes (1991): “The Consumption of Stockholders and Non-
  stockholders,”Journal of Financial Economics, 29(1), 97–112.

Marfe, R. (2016): “Income Insurance and the Equilibrium Term Structure of Equity,”
  http://robertomarfe.altervista.org/.

Martin, I. (2017): “What is the Expected Return on the Market?,”The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 132(1), 367–433.

Ritter, J. R. (2012): “Is Economic Growth Good for Investors? 1,” Journal of Applied
  Corporate Finance, 24(3), 8–18.

Siegel, J. J. (2014): Stocks for the Long Run: The De…nitive Guide to Financial Market
  Returns and Long-term Investment Strategies. McGraw Hill, New York, NY, 5 edn.

Summers, L. H. (1985): “On economics and …nance,” The Journal of Finance, 40(3),
  633–635.

Vissing-Jorgensen, A. (2002): “Limited Asset Market Participation and Intertemporal
  Substitution,”Journal of Political Economy, 110(4), 825–853.




                                          40
Figures and Tables

                                                             Figure 1: Stock Market Ratios

   4.0
                                                                                                      1989.Q1 = 1

   3.5



   3.0



   2.5



   2.0



   1.5



   1.0



   0.5



   0.0
         1952   1955   1958   1961    1964    1967   1970   1973   1976   1979   1982   1985   1988    1991    1994   1997   2000   2003   2006   2009   2012   2015   2018

                                     ME/GDP                               ME/C                                ME/NVA                              ME/E

Notes: To make the units comparable, each series has been normalized to unity in 1989:Q1. The sample spans the period 1952:Q1-
2018:Q2. ME: Corporate Sector Stock Value. E: Corporate Sector After-Tax Pro…ts. GDP & C: Current Dollars GDP and
personal consumption expenditures. NVA: Gross Value Added of Corporate Sector - Consumption of Fixed Capital.




                                                                                        41
                                      Figure 2: Earnings Share and Valuations




Notes: ln(E/Y) denotes the logarithm of the after-tax pro…t (earnings) share of output for the corporate sector. ln(ME/E) is the
log of the market equity-to-earnings ratio. ln(PD) is the log of the CRSP price-dividend. Each plot present the correlation between
the series (levels) and the correlation of the cycle of each series obtained using a band pass …lter that isolates cycles between 8 and
50 years. The sample spans the period 1952:Q1-2017:Q4.




                                       Figure 3: Earnings Share Components

                                (a)                                                                  (b)
                                                                     1.6     Log Earnings Share
                                                                             Factor Share (HF) Only Since 1952

                                                                     1.8


                                                                     2.0


                                                                     2.2


                                                                     2.4


                                                                     2.6

                                                                             1960       1970        1980         1990   2000   2010

Notes: The …gure exhbits the observed earnings share series along with the model-implied variation in the series attributable to
certain latent components. The label “Fixed Since” followed by a date describes a counterfactual path where this variable was held
…xed from that date on. The notation “Only Since” followed by a date describes a counterfactual path where all other variables
were held …xed from that date on. The red center line corresponds to point estimates, obtained from the Kalman smoother at the
parameter mode. The shaded regions are 66.7% (darker bands) and 90% (lighter bands) credible sets. The sample spans the period
1952:Q1-2017:Q4.




                                                               42
                                               Figure 4: Risk-Free Rate Components

                                        (a)                                                                                 (b)

                                                                                        0.06
       0.06

                                                                                        0.04
       0.04


       0.02                                                                             0.02


       0.00                                                                             0.00


       0.02                                                                             0.02

                                               Real Risk-Free Rate                                                                   Real Risk-Free Rate
       0.04                                    Risk-Free Rate (LF) Only Since 1952      0.04                                         Risk-Free Rate (HF) Only Since 1952
               1960       1970          1980    1990        2000        2010                      1960        1970          1980         1990     2000        2010

Notes: The real risk-free rate is computed as the three-month T-bill rate minus the …tted value from a regression of GDP de‡ator
in‡ation on lags of in‡ation and interest rates. The …gure exhbits the observed risk-free rate series along with the model-implied
variation in the series attributable to certain latent components. The label “Fixed Since” followed by a date describes a coun-
terfactual path where this variable was held …xed from that date on. The notation “Only Since” followed by a date describes a
counterfactual path where all other variables were held …xed from that date on. The red center line corresponds to point estimates,
obtained from the Kalman smoother at the parameter mode. The shaded regions are 66.7% (darker bands) and 90% (lighter bands)
credible sets. The sample spans the period 1952:Q1-2017:Q4.




                      Figure 5: Estimated Risk Premium and Risk Price Component

                                        (a)                                                                                 (b)

     0.200     Estimated Risk Premium                                                 0.200      Orth. Risk Price (HF) Only Since 1996
               SVIX Risk Premium                                                                 SVIX Risk Premium
     0.175                                                                            0.175

     0.150                                                                            0.150

     0.125                                                                            0.125

     0.100                                                                            0.100

     0.075                                                                            0.075
     0.050                                                                            0.050
     0.025                                                                            0.025

               1960      1970       1980        1990       2000        2010               1996   1998     2000       2002     2004       2006    2008     2010       2012

Notes: Panel (a) plots the estimated risk premium over the sample along with the risk premium implied by the SVIX, available for
the subperiod 1996:Q1-2012Q1. Panel (b) plots the component of the risk-premium driven only by the high-frequency orthogonal
risk price along with the risk preimium implied by the 3-month SVIX. The label “Only Since” followed by a date describes a
counterfactual path where all other components of the risk premium were held …xed from that date on. The red center line
corresponds to point estimates, obtained from the Kalman smoother at the parameter mode. The sample spans the period
1952:Q1-2017:Q4.




                                                                                 43
               Figure 6: Market Equity-Output Ratio and Factors Share Component

                                       (a)                                                                  (b)

               Log ME/Y                                                               Log ME/Y
               Factor Share (LF) Only Since 1952                                      Factor Share (HF) Only Since 1952
       1.25                                                                    1.25

       1.00                                                                    1.00

       0.75                                                                    0.75

       0.50                                                                    0.50

       0.25                                                                    0.25

       0.00                                                                    0.00

       0.25                                                                    0.25

               1960       1970         1980          1990   2000   2010               1960       1970        1980         1990   2000   2010

                                       (c)                                                                  (d)

               Log ME/Y
               Factor Share (All) Fixed Since 1952
       1.25

       1.00

       0.75

       0.50

       0.25

       0.00

       0.25

               1960       1970         1980          1990   2000   2010

Notes: The …gure exhbits the observed market equity-to-output series along with the model-implied variation in the series at-
tributable to certain latent components. The label “Fixed Since” followed by a date describes a counterfactual path where this
variable was held …xed from that date on. The notation “Only Since” followed by a date describes a counterfactual path where
all other variables were held …xed from that date on. "(LF)" and "(HF)" refer to the low- and high-frequency components, while
"(All)" refers to both components. The red center line corresponds to point estimates, obtained from the Kalman smoother at the
parameter mode. The shaded regions are 66.7% (darker bands) and 90% (lighter bands) credible sets. The sample spans the period
1952:Q1-2017:Q4.




                                                                          44
              Figure 7: Market Equity-Output Ratio and Risk-Free Rate Component

                                       (a)                                                                         (b)

               Log ME/Y                                                                   Log ME/Y
               Risk-Free Rate (LF) Only Since 1952                                        Risk-Free Rate (HF) Only Since 1952
       1.25                                                                     1.25

       1.00                                                                     1.00

       0.75                                                                     0.75

       0.50                                                                     0.50

       0.25                                                                     0.25

       0.00                                                                     0.00

       0.25                                                                     0.25

               1960        1970        1980          1990   2000   2010                   1960       1970          1980          1990          2000      2010

                                       (c)                                                                         (d)

               Log ME/Y                                                        1.4     Log ME/Y
               Risk-Free Rate (All) Fixed Since 1952                                   Risk-Free Rate (All) Fixed Since 1989
       1.25
                                                                               1.2
       1.00
                                                                               1.0
       0.75
                                                                               0.8
       0.50
                                                                               0.6
       0.25
                                                                               0.4
       0.00
                                                                               0.2
       0.25
                                                                               0.0
       0.50
               1960        1970        1980          1990   2000   2010                1992      1996       2000          2004          2008      2012      2016

Notes: The …gure exhibits the observed market equity-to-output series along with the model-implied variation in the series at-
tributable to the risk-free rate component. The label “Fixed Since” followed by a date describes a counterfactual path where this
variable was held …xed from that date on. The notation “Only Since” followed by a date describes a counterfactual path where
all other variables were held …xed from that date on. "(LF)" and "(HF)" refer to the low- and high-frequency components, while
"(All)" refers to both components. The red center line corresponds to point estimates, obtained from the Kalman smoother at the
parameter mode. The shaded regions are 66.7% (darker bands) and 90% (lighter bands) credible sets. The sample spans the period
1952:Q1-2017:Q4.




                                                                          45
          Figure 8: Market Equity-Output Ratio and Orthogonal Risk Price Component

                                       (a)                                                                                     (b)

       1.50                                       Log ME/Y                                            Log ME/Y
                                                  Orth. Risk Price (LF) Only Since 1952               Orth. Risk Price (HF) Only Since 1952
                                                                                            1.25
       1.25
                                                                                            1.00
       1.00

       0.75                                                                                 0.75

       0.50                                                                                 0.50

       0.25                                                                                 0.25

       0.00                                                                                 0.00

       0.25                                                                                 0.25

       0.50
               1960        1970        1980         1990        2000        2010                      1960       1970          1980          1990          2000      2010

                                        (c)                                                                                    (d)

               Log ME/Y                                                                                                                 Log ME/Y
               Orth. Risk Price (All) Fixed Since 1952                                     1.4                                          Orth. Risk Price (All) Fixed Since 1989
       1.25

       1.00                                                                                1.2

       0.75                                                                                1.0

       0.50                                                                                0.8

       0.25                                                                                0.6

       0.00                                                                                0.4

       0.25                                                                                0.2

       0.50                                                                                0.0
               1960        1970        1980         1990        2000        2010                   1992      1996       2000          2004          2008      2012       2016

Notes: The …gure exhibits the observed market equity-to-output series along with the model-implied variation in the series at-
tributable to the component of the risk premium driven by shocks to the price of risk that are mutually uncorrelated with shocks
to all other state variables in the model. The label “Fixed Since” followed by a date describes a counterfactual path where this
variable was held …xed from that date on. The notation “Only Since” followed by a date describes a counterfactual path where
all other variables were held …xed from that date on. "(LF)" and "(HF)" refer to the low- and high-frequency components, while
"(All)" refers to both components. The red center line corresponds to point estimates, obtained from the Kalman smoother at the
parameter mode. The shaded regions are 66.7% (darker bands) and 90% (lighter bands) credible sets. The sample spans the period
1952:Q1-2017:Q4.




                                                                                      46
                              Figure 9: Role of Components in Earnings Share

                                (a)                                                           (b)




                                (c)                                                           (d)




Notes: The …gure decomposes the corporate earnings share St into contributions from changes in the domestic labor share S D ,
the tax and interest share Z, and the foreign share F . Series denoted “only” show the result of allowing only that component to
vary, while the others are held …xed at their initial values for that period (1952 or 1989). Series denoted “Fixed” show the result of
leaving that one component …xed at the start of the period while allowing all of the other components to vary. The sample spans
the period 1952:Q1-2017:Q4.




                                                               47
                                                     Figure 10: Role of Factor Shares when                                                                            =0

                Log ME/Y                                                                                                                   Log ME/Y
1.25            Factor Share (LF) Only Since 1952                                                                       1.25               Factor Share (HF) Only Since 1952
                 = 0 Estimation                                                                                                             = 0 Estimation
1.00                                                                                                                    1.00
0.75                                                                                                                    0.75
0.50                                                                                                                    0.50
0.25                                                                                                                    0.25
0.00                                                                                                                    0.00
0.25                                                                                                                    0.25

               1960            1970            1980            1990            2000            2010                                       1960            1970            1980            1990            2000           2010

                Log ME/Y                                                                                              1.4              Log ME/Y
1.25            Factor Share (All) Fixed Since 1952                                                                                    Factor Share (All) Fixed Since 1989
                 = 0 Estimation                                                                                       1.2               = 0 Estimation
1.00
                                                                                                                      1.0
0.75
                                                                                                                      0.8
0.50
                                                                                                                      0.6
0.25
                                                                                                                      0.4
0.00
                                                                                                                      0.2
0.25
                                                                                                                      0.0
               1960            1970            1980            1990            2000            2010                                 1992           1996           2000            2004           2008           2012          2016
       T h e …g u re e x h ib its th e o b se rve d lo g m a rke t e q u ity -to -o u tp u t (M E / Y ) se rie s a lo n g w ith th e m o d e l-im p lie d va ria tio n in th e se rie s a ttrib u ta b le to th e
       la te nt fa c to rs sh a re c o m p o n e nts, u n d e r th e re stric te d m o d e l w ith la m b d a e q u a l to z e ro . T h e sh a d e d re g io n s a re 6 6 .7 % (d a rke r b a n d s) a n d 9 0 % (lig hte r
       b a n d s) c re d ib le se ts. T h e sa m p le sp a n s th e p e rio d 1 9 5 2 :Q 1 -2 0 1 7 :Q 4 .




                                                                                                              48
                                                           Figure 11: Observable Autocorrelations

                                                    (a)                                                                                 (b)

                        1.0                                           Real PC Output Growth                         1.0                                    Log Earnings Share
                                                                      Simulation                                                                           Simulation
                                                                                                                    0.9
                        0.8
                                                                                                                    0.8
                        0.6
                                                                                                                    0.7
     Autocorrelation




                                                                                                  Autocorrelation
                        0.4                                                                                         0.6

                                                                                                                    0.5
                        0.2
                                                                                                                    0.4
                        0.0
                                                                                                                    0.3

                        0.2                                                                                         0.2
                                  0       5   10   15      20    25    30       35      40                                0   5   10   15      20    25   30     35      40
                                                          Lags                                                                                Lags

                                                    (c)                                                                                 (d)

                       1.0                                               Real Risk-Free Rate                        1.0                                            Log ME/Y
                                                                         Simulation                                                                                Simulation

                       0.8                                                                                          0.9


                       0.6                                                                                          0.8
     Autocorrelation




                                                                                                  Autocorrelation




                                                                                                                    0.7
                       0.4

                                                                                                                    0.6
                       0.2
                                                                                                                    0.5
                       0.0

                              0       5       10   15      20    25    30      35       40                                0   5   10   15      20    25   30     35      40
                                                          Lags                                                                                Lags

Notes: The …gure compares the data autocorrelations for the observable variables available over the full sample, compared to the
same statistics from the model, obtained from a long simulation of 100,000 periods. The sample spans the period 1952:Q1-2017:Q4.




                                                                                             49
                                          Table 1: Parameter Estimates

                Variable                           Symbol          Mode       5%        Median       95%
                Risk Price Mean                        x        4.0460      3.3619       4.5315      6.5421
                Risk Price (HF) Pers.                 x;HF      0.6705      0.5337       0.6916      0.8074
                Risk Price (HF) Vol.                  x;HF      1.5370      1.2031       1.8191      2.9421
                Risk Price (LF) Pers.                 x;LF      0.9864      0.9781       0.9855      0.9915
                Risk Price (LF) Vol.                  x;LF      0.4933      0.3525       0.5841      0.9693
                Risk-Free (HF) Pers.                   ;HF      0.5639      0.1590       0.6630      0.8849
                Risk-Free (HF) Vol.                    ;HF      0.0012      0.0002       0.0011      0.0019
                Risk-Free (LF) Pers.                   ;LF      0.9267      0.8739       0.9147      0.9655
                Risk-Free (LF) Vol.                    ;LF      0.0015      0.0004       0.0016      0.0020
                Factor Share (HF) Pers.               s;HF      0.8787      0.7917       0.8735      0.9176
                Factor Share (HF) Vol.                s;HF      0.0534      0.0298       0.0520      0.0576
                Factor Share (LF) Pers.               s;LF      0.9848      0.9363       0.9834      0.9966
                Factor Share (LF) Vol.                s;LF      0.0162      0.0074       0.0175      0.0456
                Productivity Vol.                       a       0.0152      0.0143       0.0153      0.0165
                Risk Loading, Factor Share                      -7.9304    -10.5362     -7.1975     -3.4726
Notes: The table reports parameter estimates from the posterior distribution. Standard deviations are reported in quarterly
raw units. The sample spans the period 1952:Q1-2017:Q4.



                                        Table 2: Asset Pricing Moments

 Variable                            Model Mean        Model StD       Fitted Mean      Fitted StD      Data Mean       Data StD
 Log   Equity Return                     4.852              17.423         7.681           16.791           8.852         15.724
 Log   Risk-Free Rate                    1.114               1.450         1.126           1.932            1.129          1.929
 Log   Excess Return                     3.738              17.499         6.560           16.785           7.389         16.436
 Log   Price-Payout Ratio                3.778               0.404         3.410            0.376           3.434          0.465
 Log   Earnings Growth                   2.226               8.671         2.819           11.819           2.819         11.819
 Log   Payout Growth                     2.226              18.369         3.790           23.845           4.045         33.455
 Log   Earnings Share Growth             0.000               8.310         0.624           10.379           0.624         10.379
 Log   Payout Share Growth               0.001              18.203         1.651           22.621           1.907         32.186
Notes: All statistics are computed for annual (continuously compounded) data and reported in units of percent.
“Model”numbers are averages across 1000 simulations of the model of the same size as our data sample. “Fitted”numbers
use the estimated latent states …tted to observed data in our historical sample. The sample spans the period 1952:Q1-2017:Q4.




                                                              50
                                        Table 3: Growth Decomposition

                                                               Panel: Market Equity
                         Contribution                     1952-2017 1952-1988 1989-2017
                         Total                            1405.81%       151.23%        477.34%
                         Factor Share st                   18.57%        -23.34%        42.53%
                           sLF;t                           17.05%        -21.59%        37.88%
                           sHF;t                           1.52%          -1.75%         4.64%
                         Risk Price x?;t                   25.73%         20.46%        24.42%
                           xLF;t                           0.05%          -0.32%        24.32%
                           xHF;t                           25.68%         20.78%         0.10%
                         Risk-free Rate     t              2.16%          -8.52%         8.48%
                             LF;t                          2.11%          -8.57%         8.35%
                             HF;t                          0.05%           0.05%         0.13%
                         Real PC Output Growth             53.54%        111.41%        24.57%
Notes: The table presents the growth decompositions for the real value of market equity. The sample spans the period 1952:Q1-
2017:Q4.




                                                            51
Appendix: For Online Publication

Data Description

CORPORATE EQUITY
   Corporate equity is obtained from the Flow of Funds Table B103, series code LM103164103,
non…nancial corporate business; corporate equities; liability. Unadjusted transactions esti-
mated by Federal Reserve Board (Capital Markets and Flow of Funds Sections), using data
from the following commercial sources: cash mergers and acquisitions data from Thompson
Financial Services SDC database; public issuance and share repurchase data from Standard
and Poor’s Compustat database; and private equity issuance data from Dow Jones Private
Equity Analyst and PriceWaterhouseCoopers Money tree report. Level at market value is
obtained separately as the sum of the market value of the non…nancial corporate business
(FOF series LM103164103) and the …nancial corporate business (FOF series LM793164105).
Source: Federal Reserve Board.
   FOREIGN EARNINGS
   Total earnings is the sum of domestic after-tax pro…ts from NIPA and earnings of U.S.
multinational enterprises on their overseas operations. Total earnings are de…ned as as share
of domestic net-value-added for the corporate sector. (See the next subsection for the sources
of domestic data.)



                                  Et       St Yt

                                       =    StD Zt + Ft Yt :

   In the above, Ft is the foreign pro…t share of domestic output. The measure of foreign
pro…ts in the numerator of Ft is based on data from Table 4.2 of the U.S. International
Transactions in Primary Income on Direct Investment, obtained from BEA’s International
Data section. We refer to this simply as corporate “direct investment.” Speci…cally, these
data are from the “income on equity” row 2 of Direct investment income on assets, as-
set/liability basis. Note that U.S. direct investment abroad is ownership by a U.S. investor
of at least 10 percent of a foreign business, and so excludes household portfolio investment.
This series is available from 1982:Q1 to the present. To extend this series backward, we …rst
take data on net foreign receipts from abroad (Corporate pro…ts with IVA and CCAdj from
BEA NIPA Table 1.12. (A051RC) or from Flow of Funds (FOF) Table F.3 (FA096060035.Q
less corporate pro…ts with IVA and CCAdj, domestic industries from BEA NIPA Table 1.14
(A445RC)), which is available from the post-war period onward. This series includes port-
folio investment income of households as well as direct investment, but its share of domestic
net-value-added for the corporate sector is highly correlated with the foreign direct invest-
ment share of net-value-added. We regress the direct investment share of net-value-added on
the foreign receipts share of domestic net-value-added and then use the …tted value from this
regression as the measure of Ft in data pre-1982. Because the portfolio income component
is relatively small, the …t of this regression is high, as seen in Figure A.1, which compares
the …tted series with the actual series over the post-1982 period.

                   Figure A.1: Net Foreign Income Share: Data vs. Fitted value



              0.045           BEA Net Foreign Inc. Share
                              Fitted Value
              0.040
              0.035
              0.030
              0.025
              0.020
              0.015
              0.010
                      1950        1960       1970     1980   1990   2000   2010
Notes: The sample spans the period 1952:Q1-2018:Q2.




    DOMESTIC VARIABLES: CORP. NET VALUE ADDED, CORP. LABOR COMPEN-
SATION, CORP. AFTER-TAX PROFITS, TAXES AND INTEREST
   De…ne domestic corporate earnings EtD as

                                 EtD        StD (1       t) N V   At ;

which is equivalent to
                            2                                 3
                           6               LCt                7
                     EtD = 6
                           41
                                                              7 (1
                                                              5          t) N V   At :
                                       AT Pt + LCt
                                       |    {z   }
                                 Labor share of labor+pro…t


Data for the net value added (N V A) comes from NIPA Table 1.14 (corporate sector series
codes A457RC1 and A438RC1). We use per capita real net value added, de‡ated by the
implicit price de‡ator for net value added. After tax pro…ts (ATP) for the domestic sector
come from NIPA Table 1.14 (corporate sector series code: W273RC1). Corporate sector
labor compensation (LC) for the domestic sector is from Table 1.14 (series code A442RC).
The doestic after-tax pro…t share (AT P S) of N V A is identically equal to

                    AT P   AT P + LC      AT P      NV A                     (taxes and interest)
      AT P S =                       =
                  AT P + LC N V A      |AT P{z+ LC}                             NV A
                                             S
                    2                      3 t
                    6        taxes and interest          7
              = StD 6
                    41
                                                         7
                                                         5
                                   NV A
                           |         {z              }
                                        t

              = StD Zt ;

where StD is the domestic after-tax pro…t share of combined pro…t plus labor compensation,
“taxes and interest”is the sum of taxes on production and imports less subsidies (W325RC1),
net interest and miscellaneous payments (B471RC1), business current transfer payments
(Net) (W327RC1), and taxes on corporate income (B465RC1). Source: Bureau of Economic
Analysis.

NET DIVIDENDS PLUS NET REPURCHASES (EQUITY PAYOUT)
   Net dividends minus net equity issuance is computed using ‡ow of funds data. Net divi-
dends (“netdiv”) is the series named for corporate business; net dividends paid (FA096121073.Q).
Net repurchases are repurchases net of share issuance, so net repurchases is the negative of
net equity issuance. Net equity issuance (“netequi”) is the sum of Equity Issuance for Non-
…nancial corporate business; corporate equities; liability (Table F.103, series FA103164103)
and Equity Issuance for domestic …nancial sectors; corporate equities; liability (Table F.108,
series FA793164105). Since netdiv and netequi are annualized, the quarterly payout is com-
puted as payout=(netdiv-netequi)/4. The units are in millions of dollars. Source: Federal
Reserve Board.

PRICE DEFLATORS
   Implicit price de‡ator and GDP de‡ator. A chain-type price de‡ator for the non…nancial
corporate sector (NFCS) is obtained implicitly by dividing the net value added of non…nancial
corporate business by the chained real dollar net value added of non…nancial corporate
business from NIPA Table 1.14. This index is used to de‡ate net value added of the corporate
sector. There is no implicit price de‡ator available for the whole corporate sector, so we use
de‡ator for the non-…nancial corporate sector instead. The GDP de‡ator is used to construct
a real returns and a real interest (see below). GDPDEF is retrieved from FRED. Our source
is the Bureau of Economic Analysis.

   INTEREST RATE
   The nominal risk-free rate is measured by the 3-Month Treasury Bill rate, secondary
market rate. We take the (average) quarterly 3-Month Treasury bill from FRED [TB3MS].
A real rate is constructed by subtracting the …tted value from a regression of GDP de‡ator
in‡ation onto lags of in‡ation from the nominal rate. Our source is the board of governors
of the Federal Reserve System and the Bureau of Economic Analysis.

   RISK PREMIUM MEASURE
   Our measure of the risk premium comes from Martin (2017). This paper uses option data
to compute a lower bound on the equity risk premium, then argues that this lower bound is
in fact tight, and a good measure of the true risk premium on the stock market. We obtain
this series from the spreadsheet epbound.xls on Ian Martin’s website, which corresponds to
the value
                                                           2
                        EP Boundt!T = 100        Rf;t SV IXt!T    1
which is equivalent to the bound on the annualized net risk premium, in percent. To translate
these measures to our model’s quarterly frequency, we use the risk premium measure com-
puted over the next three months. We then convert this variable into a log return, average it
over the quarter, and label is rpt . Since sample for this variable spans 1996:Q1 to 2012:Q1,
which is shorter than our full sample period, our state-space estimation uses two measure-
ment equations to accommodate the missing data. Speci…cally, we use the measurement
equation
                           h                                     i0
                               st rf t pyt        yt rpt              = H01    t   + G1

for periods where this risk premium data is available, and
                                h                           i0
                                 st rf t pyt           yt        = H0     t   + G0

for periods where this data is not available, where H0 and G0 are identical to H1 and G1 ,
except that they omit the rows corresponding to the missing data rpt .

A Stylized Model of Workers and Shareholders

We consider a stylized limited participation endowment economy in which wealth is con-
centrated in the hands of a few asset owners, or “shareholders,” while most households
are “workers” who …nance consumption out of wages and salaries. The economy is closed.
Workers own no risky asset shares and consume their labor earnings. There is no risk-sharing
between workers and shareholders. A representative …rm issues no new shares and buys back
no shares. Cash‡ows are equal to output minus a wage bill,

                                           C t = Yt          w t Nt ,

where wt equals the wage and Nt is aggregate labor supply. The wage bill is equal to Yt
times a time-varying labor share      t,


                                w t Nt =   t Yt   => Ct = (1                  t ) Yt :    (A. 1)

We rule out short sales in the risky asset:

                                                   i
                                                   t        0:
Asset owners not only purchase shares in the risky security, but also trade with one another in
a one-period bond with price at time t denoted by qt . The real quantity of bonds is denoted
Bt+1 , where Bt+1 < 0 represents a borrowing position. The bond is in zero net supply
                                                                                          i
among asset owners. Asset owners could have idiosyncratic investment income               t;   which is
idependently and identically distributed across investors and time. The gross …nancial assets
of investor i at time t are given by

                                             i
                                   Ait       t    (Vt + Ct ) + Bti :

The budget constraint for the ith investor is

                                         i                          i
                      Cti + Bt+1
                             i
                                 qt +    t+1 Vt      = Ait +        t                            (A. 2)
                                                            i                        i
                                                     =      t   (Vt + Ct ) + Bti +   t;


where Cti denotes the consumption of investor i.
   A large number of identical nonrich workers, denoted by w, receive labor income and
do not participate in asset markets. The budget constraint for the representative worker is
therefore
                                            Cw =           t Yt :                                (A. 3)

Equity market clearing requires
                                             X
                                                      i
                                                      t   = 1:
                                                 i
Bond market clearing requires
                                            X
                                                     Bti = 0:
                                              i

Aggregating (A. 2) and (A. 3) and imposing both market clearing and (A. 1) implies that
aggregate (worker plus shareholder) consumption CtAgg is equal to total output Yt . Aggre-
gating over the budget constraint of shareholders shows that their consumption is equal to
the capital share times aggregate consumption CtAgg :

                                  CtS = Ct = (1    )C AGG :
                                             | {z t} t
                                                          KSt

A representative shareholder who owns the entire corporate sector will therefore have con-
sumption equal to CtAgg KSt . This reasoning goes through as an approximation if workers
own a small fraction of the corporate sector even if there is some risk-sharing in the form of
risk-free borrowing and lending between workers and shareholders, as long as any risk-sharing
across these groups is imperfect. While individual shareholders can smooth out transitory
‡uctuations in income by buying and selling assets, shareholders as a whole are less able to
do so since purchases and sales of any asset must net to zero across all asset owners.

Model Solution

This section derives the coe¢ cients of the main asset pricing equation (17). To begin, de…ne
for convenience the variables

                                                    ut+1 = log(P Ct+1 + 1)                        pct

                                                    qt+1 = mt+1 +                ct+1

so that mt+1 + rt+1 = ut+1 + qt+1 . Applying the log linear approximation to log(P Ct+1 + 1)
and substituting in our guessed functional form (17) yields

    ut+1       log(P Ct+1 + 1)                pct

           =    0   +    1                             ~ t+1 + A0 ~ t
                                 A0 + A0s ~vt+1 + A0x? x                                                              ~ t + A0 ~ t
                                                                                                   A0 + A0s~st + A0x? x

           =    0   +(       1        1)A0 + A0s (      1   s    I) ~st + A0x? (              1    x?         xt + A 0 (
                                                                                                            I)~            1    I) ~ t
                           0                     0                           0
                 +      1 As "s;t+1       +   1 Ax? "x;t+1      +       1A       "   ;t+1 :


Now turning to qt+1 , we can expand the expression to yield

                                                                         1 2
           qt+1 =                t   + xt g   xt 0 (I           s )~
                                                                   st     x               0
                                                                                              s    +    2
                                                                                                              + (1    xt ) ct+1 :
                                                                         2 t                            y


Next, we apply our fundamental asset pricing equation 0 = log Et [qt+1 + ut+1 ], which under
lognormality implies

                                            1              1
               0 = Et [qt+1 ] + Et [ut+1 ] + Vart (qt+1 ) + Vart (ut+1 ) + Cov(qt+1 ; ut+1 ):
                                            2              2
These moments can be calculated as

                                                                      0                                                1 2             0                  2
         Et [qt+1 ] =                       t   +g                        (I                      s )~
                                                                                                     st                 x                      s    +
                                                                                                                       2 t                                y


        Et [ut+1 ] =                    0   +(               1        1)A0 + A0s (                             1       s           I) ~st + A0x? (                   1   x?         x t + A0 (
                                                                                                                                                                                  I)~                                1      I) ~ t
                                                                      0
      Vart (qt+1 ) = (1                             xt )2                         s           +       2
                                                                                                      y

                                        2
      Vart (ut+1 ) =                    1       A0s              s As         + A0x?                      x? A x?              + A0                 A
                                                                          0
Covt (qt+1 ; ut+1 ) =                   1 (1             xt )(                    s As ):


Substituting, we obtain

                                                                                  1           0                                        1
0=g      10 +               0   +(          1           1)A0 +                                        s    +           2
                                                                                                                       y       +               2
                                                                                                                                               1    A0s          s As     + A0x?               x? Ax?                + A0   A        +       0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1 (As   s
         h                                                                        2        i                                           2
                   0                        2                        0
                        s       +           y       +            1 (As            s       ) 10 x
          h                                                                                                                                                                               i
               0                           0                                                                       0                       2                0                         0
                   (I               s ) + As (I                                   1       s) +                             s       +       y       +  1 (As               s   )            ~st
          h                                                                                                                                              i
                                                                              0
              A0x? (I                   1       x? )         +                            s       +        2
                                                                                                           y       +               0
                                                                                                                               1 (As           s    ) 10 x ~t
          h                                                   i
              10 + A0 (I                            1        ) ~t

Applying the method of undetermined coe¢ cients now yields the solutions
                                        h                                                                                                      ih                                                        i       1
                                                0                                                  0                                       0                                                         0
                       A0s =                        (I                    s) +                             s       +           2
                                                                                                                               y                    (I           1       s) +     1        s
                                        h                                                                                              i
                                                         0                            2                       0
               A x? =                                            s        +           y       +           1 (As            s       ) 10 (I                   1       x? )
                                                                                                                                                                              1


                       A0r =            10 (I                     1           )       1



while the constant term must solve
                                                                                    1                                              h                                                                         i
                                                                                                                                           0
       0=g                 10 +                 0+(               1           1)A0 + (1                                2x)                          s    +       2
                                                                                                                                                                 y       +        0
                                                                                                                                                                              1 (As              s       )
                                                                                    2                                                                                                                                    (A. 4)
                            1   2
                       +        1       A0s                            0
                                                             s A s + A x?                         x? A x? + A
                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                   A
                            2

Equilibrium Selection

The parameters                  0   and                 1    determine the steady state pc (price-payout ratio), which depends
on A0. But since                    0       and              1    are both themselves nonlinear functions of A0 , the equilibrium
condition (??) is also nonlinear, leading to the possibility that multiple solutions, or no
solution, exists. In fact, we con…rm that both of these outcomes can occur in our numerical
solutions. However, our numerical results indicate that, when there is more than one solution
there are at most two, and one can be discarded because it is economically implausible. To
see this, rewrite (??) as

                                      1        1
                     0 = E[m] + E[r] + Var(m) + Var(r) + Cov(m; r)
                                      2        2

where m and r are the log SDF and equity return. We are interested in the relationship
between the steady state pc and the other terms that depend on it in equilibrium. The terms
E[m] and Var(m) do not depend on the pc ratio, so we can ignore these and focus on the
remaining terms. Alternatively, consider the log risk premium, given in equilibrium by

                                           1
                       E[rt+1 ]   rf;t =     Var(rt+1 )   Cov(mt+1 ; rt+1 ):
                                           2

In the case where there are two solutions, one solution typically has a plausible level for the
steady state pc; and implies that higher pc ratios (which take di¤erent values depending on
where in the posterior distribution of model parameters we evaluate the function) coincide
with lower risk premia E[rt+1 ]    rf;t and a lower absolute covariance with the SDF (i.e., a
less negative Cov(mt+1 ; rt+1 )). This solution is economically reasonable. By contrast, when
there is a second solution, it is always characterized by values for pc that are higher than the
economically reasonable solution, and for typical parameter values delivers a value for pc that
are extremely implausible (e.g., a value for exp (pc) of almost 3,000 at the posterior mode).
In addition, this solution has the property that the higher pc ratios coincide with lower
risk premia vis-a-vis the plausible solution, but also higher absolute covariances with the
SDF (i.e., a more negative Cov(mt+1 ; rt+1 )). Thus the higher pc ratios in this solution must
be explained by a lower absolute covariance with the SDF and a Jensen’s term 12 Var(rt+1 )
that in some cases converges to in…nity. In summary, since the higher pc solution typically
implies extreme values and unreasonable behavior of pc, we select between these solutions
by enforcing that the equilibrium chosen always chooses the lower pc solution.
Expected Returns

Combining the relations

              0 = log Et [Mt+1 Rt+1 ]
                                           1              1
                = Et [mt+1 ] + Et [rt+1 ] + Vart (mt+1 ) + Vart (rt+1 ) + Covt (mt+1 ; rt+1 )
                                           2              2
            rf;t = log Et [Mt+1 ]
                              1
                = Et [mt+1 ] + Vart (mt+1 )
                              2
and rearranging, we obtain
                                                         1
                          Et [rt+1 ] = rf;t                Vart (rt+1 )      Covt (mt+1 ; rt+1 )
                                                         2
which is the usual decomposition of the expected log return into the risk-free rate, a Jensen
term, and the risk premium. Since

            rt+1 = constt +           0
                                   1 As "s;t+1       +          0
                                                             1 Ax? "x;t+1   +      1A
                                                                                        0
                                                                                            "   ;t+1     + 0 "s;t+1 + "y;t+1
                               |                                  {z                                 }    |        {z      }
                                                              pc growth                                      cash ‡ow growth

            mt+1 = constt      xt 0 "s;t+1           xt "y;t+1

we obtain

           Vart (rt+1 ) = ( 1 As + )0 s ( 1 As + ) +                            2 0
                                                                                1 A x?              s A x?   +   2 0
                                                                                                                 1A       rA   +   2
                                                                                                                                   y
                              h                    i
     Covt (mt+1 ; rt+1 ) = xt 0 s ( 1 As + ) + 2y

which can be substituted to obtain
                                    h                                                           i        1
                                                 0                     0                    2
               Et [rt+1 ] rf;t = xt                      s    +    1        s As   +        y              Vart (rt+1 )
                                                                                                         2

Estimation Details

This section describes the procedure used to obtain the parameter draws. First, because
some of our variables are bounded by de…nition (e.g., volatilities cannot be negative), we
de…ne a set of parameter vectors satisfying these bounds denoted                                           . We exclude parameters
outside of this set, which formally means that we apply a Bayesian prior
                                        8
                                        >
                                        <const for 2
                                 p( ) =
                                        >
                                        :0        for 2=
Our restrictions on        are as follows: all volatilities ( ), the average risk price x, the average
growth rate g, and the average real risk-free rate are bounded below at zero. All persistence
parameters ( ) and the average pro…t share exp(s) are bounded between zero and unity.
   With these bounds set, we can evaluate the posterior by

                                              ( ) = L(yj )p( ):

so that the posterior is simply proportional to the likelihood over                 and is equal to zero
outside of   .
   To draw from this posterior, we use a Random Walk Metropolis Hastings algorithm. We
initialize the …rst draw        0   at the mode, and then iterate on the following algorithm:

  1. Given       j,   draw a proposal        from the distribution N ( j ; c      ) for some scalar c and
      matrix          de…ned below.

  2. Compute the ratio
                                                            ( )
                                                      =          :
                                                            ( j)

  3. Draw u from a Uniform [0, 1] distribution.

  4. If u < , we accept the proposed draw and set                    j+1   =   . Otherwise, we reject the
      draw and set        j+1   =    j.



   For the covariance term, we initialize             to be the inverse Hessian of the log likelihood
function at the mode. Once we have saved 10,000 draws, we begin updating                       to be the
sample covariance of the draws to date, following Haario, Saksman, Tamminen, et al. (2001),
with the matrix re-computed after every 1,000 saved draws. For the scaling parameter c,
we initialize it at 2:4=length( ) as recommended in Gelman, Stern, Carlin, Dunson, Vehtari,
and Rubin (2013). To target an acceptance rate for our algorithm of 25%, we adapt the
approach of Herbst and Schorfheide (2014) in updating

                                                            exp(16(x 0:25))
                           cnew = cold       0:95 + 0:1
                                                          1 + exp(16(x 0:25))

after every 1,000 saved draws, where cold is the pre-update value of c.
