                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF IMMIGRATION ENFORCEMENT:
                CONFLICT AND COOPERATION UNDER FEDERALISM

                                       Alberto Ciancio
                                     Camilo García-Jimeno

                                      Working Paper 25766
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25766


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2019




We especially thank Holger Sieg, who encouraged us to pursue this research project. We are also
grateful to Elizabeth Cascio, Frank DiTraglia, Pablo Montagnes, Petra Todd, Ken Wolpin, and to
participants at the Politics, Race, and the Economy session at the 2019 ASSA meetings, at USC,
and Emory for their suggestions, and to the Institute for Quantitative Theory and Methods at
Emory University for its financial support. We also thank the Transactional Records Access
Clearinghouse (TRAC) at Syracuse University for sharing their database with us as fellows of the
center. We thank Ashwin Kambhampati for excellent research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Alberto Ciancio and Camilo García-Jimeno. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Political Economy of Immigration Enforcement: Conflict and Cooperation under Federalism
Alberto Ciancio and Camilo García-Jimeno
NBER Working Paper No. 25766
April 2019
JEL No. D73,D78,H73,H77,J15,J61,K37

                                           ABSTRACT

We study how the shared responsibilities over immigration enforcement by local and federal
levels in the US shape immigration enforcement outcomes, using detailed data on the Secure
Communities program (2008-2014). Tracking the movement of arrested unlawfully present
immigrants along the several steps of the immigration enforcement pipeline, and exploiting a
large shift in federal enforcement priorities in mid 2011, we disentangle the three key components
of the variation in deportation rates: federal enforcement efforts, local enforcement efforts, and
the composition of the pool of arrestees. This decomposition allows us to recover the local
(county) level response to changes in federal enforcement intensity. Among urban counties, 80
percent, mostly Democratic but with small shares of Hispanics, exhibit strategic substitutabilities.
The inverse relationship between federal and local efforts allowed most counties to reduce
opposition to the policy, and was accompanied by an increased alignment of local and federal
preferences. The federal level was very effective in directing its enforcement efforts towards
counties where it expected local collaboration, but conflict was mostly driven by a change in the
types of unlawfully present immigrants it prioritized for removal.


Alberto Ciancio
Population Studies Center
University of Pennsylvania
ciancio@sas.upenn.edu

Camilo García-Jimeno
Institute for Quantitative Theory and Methods
Emory University
Tarbutton Hall, of. 217B
1555 Dickey Dr.
Atlanta, GA 30307
and NBER
camilo.garcia-jimeno@emory.edu
1       Introduction
A long tradition in the social sciences has studied the allocation of tasks and policies across
different levels of government in the context of federalism and decentralization (Hooghe and
Marks (2003); Inman and Rubinfeld (1997b); Oates (1999)). Scholars have emphasized that the
extent of decentralization should be driven by the degree of spatial heterogeneity in preferences
and the salience of local information, because the social value of locally tailored policies must
be traded-off against the benefits of coordination when externalities are important, or against
scale economies in public goods provision (Tullock (1969)). From a positive standpoint, the
existence of such trade-offs suggests that we should observe more decentralization and more
conflict where there is more preference heterogeneity (Besley and Coate (2003); Strumpf and
Oberholzer-Gee (2002)), and increased spatial sorting across jurisdictions where policy is more
decentralized, as people will then find it valuable to vote with their feet (Tiebout (1956)).
    Other important aspects of federalism, however, have not received as much attention. In
several dimensions of policy, rather than allocating disjoint tasks to different levels of govern-
ment, both the federal and the local levels undertake overlapping actions that jointly determine
policy outcomes (either because it is difficult for the federal level to implement policy without
the aid of the local level1 , or because the local level is able to exercise some discretion). More-
over, the local level is often not just an agent of the federal level. In the US, for example, this
is clearly established in the 9th and 10th Amendments to the Constitution, which allocate to
the states and the people any rights not explicitly delegated to the federal government. In such
circumstances, we may expect coordination to take place when local and federal-level prefer-
ences are aligned. Otherwise, the local level may partly or fully undo the actions of the federal
level2 . As such, variation in the extent of preference alignment between levels of government
should be a major driver of the heterogeneity in policy outcomes across jurisdictions.
    In this paper we explore precisely this possibility by studying immigration enforcement pol-
icy in the US. Immigration enforcement is an ideal policy setting to study strategic interactions
under federalism. Although from a legal standpoint immigration policy falls under the purview
of the federal government3 , in practice many margins of its enforcement are directly and indi-
    1
      In Federalist No. 44, James Madison recognized that in many instances the federal government would
be dependent upon state and local governments to cary out policy, which in his view justifies the Supremacy
Clause of the Constitution (Madison (1788)). In the case of immigration enforcement which will concern us
here, while the payroll of ICE in 2010 was approximately 20 thousand employees, the number of state and local
law enforcement officers across the US was more than 800 thousand (Reaves (2010)).
    2
      De Tocqueville raised this issue early on: “Among the weaknesses inherent in all federal systems, the most
obvious of all is the complexity of the means it employs. This system necessarily brings two sovereignties
into confrontation” ((DeTocqueville, 2003 [1840], p.192)). Recently, legal scholars concerned with the lack of
uniformity in the application of the law have also pointed out that when the local level can act as a gatekeeper
of federal responsibilities, law enforcement will be geographically less systematic (Motomura (2011)).
    3
      Under current law immigration violations are federal offenses. Current federal immigration law is regulated
by the 1952 Immigration and Nationality Act, its 1965 amendments, the Immigration Reform and Control Act


                                                       1
rectly affected by local-level decisions. Moreover, demographics, partisanship, and proximity to
borders all shape local preferences over immigration policy. As a result, there is ample variation
in the extent of alignment of preferences over immigration enforcement between the federal and
the local levels (counties in the US).
    Although we expect strategic interactions between levels of government to arise in many
settings, a central challenge is to understand the nature of the strategic environment, and
to distinguish the different margins of enforcement from each other and from the underlying
economic environment shaping both policy choices and policy outcomes. Perhaps except for
Bohn et al. (2015); Garcı́a-Jimeno (2016); Knight (2002), there is scant empirical literature
exploring these issues or highlighting how strategic responses across levels of government are
key to understand heterogeneity in policy outcomes.
    More precisely, we consider the enforcement of immigration policy under the Obama ad-
ministration during the period of operation of the Secure Communities program. Under this
program, whose rollout began under the George W. Bush administration, the fingerprints of
every person arrested by local police are automatically sent to the Department of Homeland
Security’s Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency (ICE), where they are automatically
compared with a variety of law enforcement databases to establish the immigration status of
the arrestee. This allows ICE to locate potential targets of deportation, without requiring the
acquiescence of local law enforcement. ICE then has full discretion to issue or not a detainer
request to the jail where the arrestee is being held. The detainer asks local law enforcement to
hold the arrestee for up to an additional 48 hours, giving ICE time to take the arrestee into
federal custody. At this point a deportation process may begin. Between 2009 and 2014 un-
der the Secure Communities program, ICE issued 485 thousand detainers, held in custody 479
thousand people (with and without issued detainers), and removed 396 thousand individuals.4
    Our main interest is to understand how the observed variation in the outcomes of immi-
gration enforcement itself (removal rates of unlawfully present immigrants) is shaped by the
intensity of immigration enforcement at the local and federal levels. To do this we exploit sev-
eral unique features of the design of the Secure Communities program and how ICE operates.
These allow us to disentangle the three main components of the variation in removal rates:
the composition of the pool of individuals subject to potential removal, federal immigration
enforcement intensity, and local immigration enforcement intensity.
    The period covered by the Obama administration is especially convenient for our purposes
because midway into the eight-year term, the administration undertook a major shift in immi-
of 1986, the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996, the Illegal Immigration
Reform and Immigration Responsibility Act of 1996, and the REAL ID Act of 2005.
   4
     These are numbers for interior removals; they do not include border removals (source: FOIA requests to
the Department of Homeland Security).



                                                     2
gration enforcement policy at the federal level5 . The new guidelines explicitly advocated a shift
in the focus of federal enforcement efforts away from the prosecution of unlawfully present immi-
grants accused of misdemeanors and minor crimes, and towards those accused of serious crimes.
Trends in average federal immigration enforcement outcomes indeed show a dramatic reversal
following the policy change, allowing us to leverage this large change in the overall intensity
of federal immigration enforcement to trace the heterogeneous responses of local immigration
enforcement to it.
    Our starting point is to exploit the institutional details of the immigration enforcement
process by modeling its main component: the pipeline taking unlawfully present immigrants
arrested by local law enforcement into ICE custody, and subsequently into being (or not)
deported.6 The immigration enforcement process effectively operates in a cascade fashion.
After an individual is arrested by local law enforcement for any of a variety of possible offenses,
government agents at the local and federal levels undertake efforts that may result in this
individual being taken (or not) into federal custody. At that stage, the federal level, immigration
courts and the immigrant (or his legal representation) jointly undertake efforts that determine
whether he or she is removed from the US. Thus, observed removal rates depend on local and
federal enforcement efforts, on how these interact along the immigration enforcement pipeline,
and on the underlying composition of the pool of arrested illegally present individuals (because
their characteristics may make them more or less favored by the local and federal levels).
The key empirical challenge, thus, is to disentangle the roles of local and federal immigration
enforcement efforts on the one hand, and of the composition of the arrest pool on the other, as
drivers of the observed variation, across time and jurisdictions, in the observed removal rates.
This is particularly difficult because local and federal enforcement choices are likely endogenous
to each other (for example if the local level strategically responds to choices of the federal level),
and are likely dependent on the characteristics of the arrest pool.
    The unique institutional details of the Secure Communities program allow us to isolate
enforcement choices from selection (unobserved characteristics of the pool of arrested undoc-
umented individuals), and to isolate local from federal enforcement decisions. The automatic
receipt of fingerprints by ICE after a local arrest implies that local level enforcement choices
have no (direct) effect on the likelihood of a detainer request, allowing us to isolate federal
enforcement efforts from this first step in the process. After a detainer request has been issued
by ICE, the local level has full discretion to comply with the request (by holding the arrestee
   5
    See the policy memoranda issued by ICE’s director John Morton (Morton (2011a,b)).
   6
    A parallel branch of federal immigration enforcement consists in the raiding of homes and workplaces by
ICE. Because this branch of immigration enforcement does not involve the local level, we do not consider it
here directly. For a discussion of the increasing use of ICE raids during the Bush administration, see Schmall
(2009). During the Obama administration, however, ICE raids were a small component of all federal immigration
enforcement activity: between 2009 and 2016, only 12 percent of removed individuals were in ICE custody as a
result of a raid (our own estimate based on Freedom of Information Act requests to ICE).


                                                      3
until ICE picks him up) or not (by releasing the arrestee before ICE picks him up), allowing
us to isolate the local enforcement efforts from this second step in the process. Tracing how
the composition of the pool of arrestees is filtered through the several steps of the immigration
enforcement process (arrests to detainers, detainers to custodies, custodies to removals), we
are also able to disentangle the variation in the composition of the pool of arrestees from the
variation in these enforcement choices.
    We use a rich data set of detailed information on the universe of fingerprint matches under
Secure Communities, the issuance of ICE detainers, the number of individuals under ICE
custody, and the number of removals covering the period 2009-2014. We complement these
data with information on a variety of county-level demographics.
    We first show that federal immigration enforcement did weaken considerably after the policy
change, but that it cannot fully account for the pattern of changes in immigration enforcement
outcomes along the deportation pipeline. In particular, strong selection forces in the composi-
tion of the pool of individuals facing prospects for removal, possibly endogenous to the changes
in enforcement, were present. We also show that the choices of the local level had screening
effects explaining part of these selection patterns, and that the changes in local immigration
enforcement are related to local characteristics.
    We then estimate our model of the immigration enforcement pipeline under Secure Com-
munities, and find most counties exhibit strategic substitutabilities in their response to federal
enforcement efforts. This is true for cases of individuals accused of both minor and serious
crimes. We find that local responses, however, were heterogeneous: more democratic and less
Hispanic counties were more eager to undo the federal enforcement efforts by weakening their
collaboration with ICE. We also find that increased conflict between local and federal levels
was mostly driven by a change in the profile of immigration cases prioritized by ICE.
    Our results highlight how conflict over policy across vertical jurisdictional levels constitutes
a first-order driver of the heterogeneity in the outcomes of the policies. They also suggest that
the implementation of enforcement technologies that become too effective may lead to reactive
responses when there is conflict over the outcomes of such enforcement. Secure Communities
is a case in point, as its effectiveness in detecting illegally present immigrants required a large
countervailing response by localities opposed to harsh immigration enforcement, and eventually
led to the official demise of the policy itself.
    Our paper contributes to the broader economics literature studying the effects of policy
changes and interventions. A first concern emphasized early on by Rosenzweig and Wolpin
(1986) in the context of family planning subsidies, is related to the presence of spatial hetero-
geneity that may be correlated with the take-up or the intensity of the policy in question (see
also Lalive and Zweimuller (2004); Meyer (1995)). Besides this form of selection, heterogeneity
in the effects of the policies themselves is also a concern. If the unobserved heterogeneity is

                                                 4
varying over time, using jurisdiction-level fixed effects has significant limitations (Besley and
Case (2000)). In our context, the response of the local level to the federal level is both a main
source of heterogeneity in the intensity of enforcement of the federal policy (the federal level is
likely choosing based on how it expects the local level to react), and a main source of hetero-
geneity in the effects of the policy (complementarities or substitutabilities between federal and
local enforcement margins in the determination of the outcomes of interest may be present.)
By studying an institutional environment with features of federalism and policy overlap across
levels of government, our methodological contribution relative to this literature is to address
these concerns by leveraging the details of the institutional setting.
    This allows us to make an empirical contribution to several areas of inquiry. Within the the
literature on federalism and decentralization (Inman and Rubinfeld (1997a); Lockwood (2002);
Strumpf and Oberholzer-Gee (2002)) we point to the local-federal alignment in preferences as
a key political economy consideration for understanding variation in policy choice and policy
outcomes. To the best of our knowledge ours is the first study recovering the enforcement
responses of the local level to changes in federal-level enforcement. Because all interior enforce-
ment of immigration in the US relies on the contact of illegally present immigrants with law
enforcement, we also build on and contribute to the literature on the economics of crime and
immigration. This literature has pointed out that toughened immigration enforcement drives
immigrants towards illegal activities (Freedman et al. (2018)). Looking specifically at Secure
Communities, however, both Miles and Cox (2014) and Treyger et al. (2014) find no effects
of the program on crime rates. We show that differences in immigration enforcement prefer-
ences over immigrants with different criminal offense accusations are an important driver of the
conflict between the federal and the local levels.
    We also contribute to the literature on the political economy of immigration policy and law
enforcement.7 Scholars have studied the correlates of local and state-level immigration legis-
lation (Boushey and Luedtke (2011); Lewis and Ramakrishnan (2007); Steil and Vasi (2014)).
Their findings suggest that the presence of a large immigrant community and of Hispanics
correlates strongly with policies weakening immigration enforcement ordinances. The ethnic
identity of local law enforcement is also correlated with the willingness to enforce immigration
policies (Lewis et al. (2013)). Republican support, in contrast, is correlated with the adop-
tion of stronger immigration enforcement policies, particularly in communities experiencing
fast growth of the immigrant population (Ramakrishnan and Gulasekaram (2013)). Using a
regression discontinuity design, however, Thompson (2018) finds no evidence of differences in
   7
     A recent related literature studies how immigrants and their families alter their economic choices in response
to increased immigration enforcement, for example in school attendance (Dee and Murphy (2018)), geographic
mobility (Amuedo-Dorantes et al. (2013)), or social welfare program enrollment and take-up (Alsan and Yang
(2018); Vargas (2015); Watson (2014)). Most of this literature suggests these behavioral responses are the result
of “chilling effects”, as immigrants perceive interaction with government officials more risky.


                                                        5
compliance with detainer requests between barely elected Democratic or Republican sheriffs.
Naturally, these are counties with highly competitive elections, where sheriffs of any party may
have strong incentives to follow median-voter preferences closely.
    Finally, a small literature has proposed modeling preferences over law enforcement to ratio-
nalize the observed patterns of policing and crime. An early example is Davila et al. (1999), who
argue that the behavior of the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) was consistent
with an objective function that privileged maximizing revenue instead of minimizing the size
of the illegally present population. More recent research estimating models of law enforcement
choice and crime include Imrohoroglu et al. (2000), Fu and Wolpin (2018), and Garcı́a-Jimeno
(2016). Here we emphasize the importance of preference alignment when enforcement can be
influenced by federal and local levels, and highlight the local-level trade-off between increased
immigration enforcement and the efficiency of law enforcement.
    The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. In section 2 we discuss immigration policy
in the US, with a focus on the Secure Communities program. We introduce and describe the
data in section 3. Based on our background discussion and on the main patterns in the data,
section 4 develops a model of the immigration enforcement pipeline, and section 5 discusses
identification and estimation. In section 6 we then present our main results and discuss its
implications. Finally section 7 concludes. We present proofs and additional tables, figures, and
data description in the online appendices.


2       Immigration Policy under Secure Communities
The centralization of immigration policy and its enforcement in the US occurred gradually,
possibly starting with the 1849 Supreme Court decisions in Smith v. Turner and Norris v.
Boston, the so called Passenger Cases.8 There the court established that levying state taxes on
ships of immigrant passengers violated the 9th and 10th clauses of Article 1 of the Constitution.
This was reinforced by two more decisions 25 years later.9 And although the Immigration
Act of 1882, the first national-level piece of immigration legislation in the US, allocated all
power in determining the excludability and deportability of aliens to the federal level, it also
    8
     According to Gulasekaram and Ramakrishnan (2015), the absence of an explicit mention of Immigration
Law in the Constitution made it a subject of gradual evolution. As a result, the limits of federal and local
enforcement have been decided through precedent over “...more than 135 years of jurisprudence negotiating the
proper scope of state and local immigration policies.”
   9
     In Henderson v. Mayor of the City of New York (1875) the court ruled that other forms of state-levied taxes
were unconstitutional as well. In Chy Lung v. Freeman (1876) the court also struck down an 1874 California
law requiring certain immigrant passengers -those deemed likely to become a public charge or “lewd women”-
to post bonds at their time of arrival.




                                                       6
left most practical enforcement to state-level officials (Hirota (2013); Hutchinson (2016))10 .
Congress passed an additional piece of legislation in 1891 that completed the nationalization of
immigration enforcement. This law granted wide discretion to immigration officers regarding
admission of immigrants, raising early concerns about due process that reemerged recently
under the Secure Communities program.11
    States and localities only began regaining a significant role in immigration policy with
the 1986 and 1996 legislative overhauls of immigration law. Both acknowledged the potential
for local involvement in immigration enforcement. The Immigration Reform and Control Act
(IRCA) of 1986 legalized almost three million unlawfully present immigrants but introduced
employment restrictions for new ones. It also created the Criminal Alien Program (CAP), still
in operation. Under CAP, local officials in prisons, jails, and courthouses share lists of inmates
and allow ICE to perform interviews, after which ICE may issue detainer requests.12
    The Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act (IIRIRA) of 1996, in
turn, allowed states and localities to participate in immigration enforcement. Section 287(g)
of the law allowed for cooperation agreements with the federal government, whereby local law
enforcement officials received training and authority to enforce federal immigration law. This
included the authority to screen individuals for their immigration status, investigate cases, issue
detainers, arrest and issue charges for immigration violations, and access DHS’s databases. Ap-
proximately three percent of counties eventually entered into a 287(g) agreement, most of them
after the 9/11 terrorist attacks. 287(g) agreements were gradually phased out during the Obama
administration in tandem with the rollout of Secure Communities (Kalhan (2013)).13 Beyond
these agreements, several states made further attempts at direct immigration enforcement. In
1993 California passed legislation mandating cooperation between state prisons and federal im-
  10
      The 1882 legislation marked the beginning of what historians of US immigration policy call the Exclusion
Era (Zolberg (2006)).
   11
      Subsequent court rulings further expanded the role of the federal level in immigration policy. Landmark
rulings like Chae Chan Ping v. US (1889), challenging the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882, provided for federal
immigration control to be absolute, exclusive, and beyond judicial review, shifting the basis for the federal
prerogative in immigration from the earlier Commerce Clause rationale to a stronger national sovereignty jus-
tification (Gulasekaram and Ramakrishnan (2015)). This legal doctrine is called “plenary federal immigration
power”. Such a trend was reinforced in 1907 under Roosevelt’s administration with the establishment of the
Immigration Commission and the Naturalization division (Zolberg (2006)). Two subsequent landmark rulings
constraining the role of the state and local levels are Hines v. Davidowitz (1941) and Plyer v. Doe (1982). In
Hines the Court struck down a Pennsylvania law requiring aliens to register with the state and carry documen-
tation; in Plyer, the Court ruled that states and local governments cannot deny public education to unlawfully
present children, striking down a Texas law with such purpose. There, the roles of states and localities were
limited to the regulation of some aspects of the everyday lives of immigrants under what is called ‘alienage law’
(employment, property ownership, access to welfare benefits).
   12
      Through CAP, ICE has presence in every state and federal prision in the US, and in more than 300 local
jails. Currently CAP accounts for around half of all individuals taken into ICE custody (Guttin (2010); Kalhan
(2013))
   13
      The Trump administration, however, has begun implementing new 287(g) agreements. As of 2018, 78 such
agreements are in place (see: https://www.ice.gov/287g).


                                                       7
migration authorities. California voters then approved Proposition 187 in 1994, requiring that
state officials report suspected unlawful presence to federal authorities (Gulasekaram and Ra-
makrishnan (2015)). This proposition was struck down by the courts, but it did trigger similar
efforts in Arizona, Florida, and Texas.


2.1     The Secure Communities Program
Conflict over immigration policy has grown considerably in the 21st century, as local, state, and
federal levels have all attempted to exert increasing influence over immigration enforcement.
This may have been driven by the rising numbers of unlawfully present immigrants -from around
3 million in 1990 to about 12 million in 2008-, increased political polarization and partisanship,
or the drastic changes in the structure of employment in the US economy.14 Local preferences
over immigration policy have grown more heterogeneous across space, leading to sharp contrasts
and reversals in the alignment of preferences between the federal and local levels.
    From one side, states like Arizona led the charge on anti-immigration legislation. This
state’s SB 1070 bill, passed in 2010, became the most prominent piece of legislation empow-
ering local law enforcement to participate in immigration enforcement.15 Colorado, Alabama,
Georgia, and South Carolina undertook similar ‘copycat’ attempts (Gulasekaram and Ramakr-
ishnan (2015)). SB 1070 was particularly controversial; it required state and local police officers
to determine the immigration status of stopped or arrested individuals, and for immigrants to
carry alien registration documents. It also provided officers with arrest discretion based on
their assessment regarding the removability of a stopped non-citizen, leading to the possibility
of warrantless arrests. The bill was, in fact, challenged in court for this reason on the ba-
sis of due process considerations. It was also challenged by the Obama administration as an
encroachment over federal authority, and most of its provisions struck down by the Supreme
Court. On the opposite extreme, several cities and counties have approved “sanctuary” or-
dinances requiring their law enforcement officials not to collaborate with federal immigration
enforcement efforts, and to explicitly ignore immigration violations. Sanctuary legislation is
not new -some cities passed similar ordinances in the 70s-90s-. In recent years, however, new
forms of non-cooperation emerged, partly as a response to federal enforcement efforts under the
Bush and Obama administrations.
    Possibly the most prominent federal effort in immigration enforcement in this period is the
  14
      Using regression analysis for the US, both Gulasekaram and Ramakrishnan (2015) and Steil and Vasi (2014)
find that partisan share of the electorate is a robust predictor of the adoption of local immigration legislation in
this period. Fasani (2009) finds in the Italian context that increases in labor demand led to significant falls in
deportations of immigrants between 1994 and 2004 and suggests a political economy mechanism for this effect.
   15
      The bill’s explicit purpose was “attrition through enforcement”, and was motivated by the premise that the
enforcement inaction of the federal level required the local level to step in.




                                                         8
Secure Communities program, the main focus of our attention in this paper.16 The program
oversaw the largest expansion of local immigration enforcement in U.S. history (Kalhan (2013)).
Participation in Secure Communities is mandatory. Its rollout began in 2008, but the program
was officially discontinued in November 2014 after significant controversy and local and state
resistance.17 However, the Priority Enforcement Program (PEP), a program in the same sprit
and relying on the same institutional structure, replaced Secure Communities. Despite its
demise, Secure Communities constituted a radical innovation, on both the institutional and the
technological fronts. We now go on to describe how the program operated.18

2.1.1    First Step: The Federal Level

Secure Communities restricted significantly the ability of local police to exercise discretion over
immigration enforcement. Under standard procedure following a local law enforcement arrest
for any reason, the arrestee’s fingerprints are scanned and checked against the FBI’s identifica-
tion and criminal records database (IAFIS) during booking. Under Secure Communities, upon
receipt of these fingerprints, the FBI directly and automatically transmits them to the DHS
for comparison against its Automated Biometric Identification System (IDENT)19 . If there is a
match to an unlawfully present individual, or even if there is no match but the individual has
no known place of birth, the system automatically flags the record and notifies ICE. ICE itself
then undertakes further checks on its own and other databases, and informs the corresponding
  16
      ICE designed Secure Communities in response to a 2008 Congressional directive to “identify every criminal
alien, at the prison, jail, or correctional institution in which they are held.” (see Consolidated Appropriations
Act of 2008 ).
   17
      In the memorandum officially ending the Secure Communities program, the Secretary of Homeland Security
Jeh Johnson argued that “The goal of Secure Communities was to more effectively identify and facilitate the
removal of criminal aliens. But the reality is the program has attracted a great deal of criticism, is widely
misunderstood, and is embroiled in litigation; its very name has become a symbol for general hostility toward
the enforcement of our immigration laws. Governors, mayors, and state and local law enforcement officials
around the country have increasingly refused to cooperate with the program, and many have issued executive
orders or signed laws prohibiting such cooperation”(see Johnson (2014)).
   18
      The Trump administration subsequently re-labeled PEP as Secure Communities.
   19
      IDENT currently holds around 150 million records, and grows at around 10 million new entries per year.
It contains information of any individual who has had contact with DHS, including visa applicants in other
countries, non-citizens traveling through the US, non-citizens applying for asylum or other benefits, unlawfully
present immigrants apprehended at the border, anyone participating in ‘trusted traveler’ programs, parents who
have adopted children abroad, naturalized citizens, and anybody whose fingerprints have been collected through
Secure Communities. It aggregates information from ICE, the Customs Border Protection, the US Coast Guard,
the US Citizenship and Immigration Services, the Department of State, the Department of Defense, the Depart-
ment of Justice (including all FBI databases), Interpol, the Five Country Conference (an information sharing
agreement between the US, the UK, Australia, Canada and New Zealand), and the Preventing and Combating
Serious Crime international agreement (see Privacy Office, US Department of Homeland Security, Privacy Im-
pact Assessment for the Automated Biometric Identification System (IDENT) 11–15 (2012), Office of Inspector
General, US Department of Homeland Security, Operations of United States Immigration and Customs Enforce-
ment’s Secure Communities 4–5 (2012), and DHS, Privacy Impact Assessment for the Automated Biometric
Identification System (2012)).



                                                       9
                     (a) Minor offenses                                                (b) Serious offenses

Figure 1: Number of Detainers and Removals, 2003-2015.                                    Figure (a) shows the aggregate number of
detainers issued (red) and removals (blue) for arrestees charged with minor (levels 2 and 3) offenses. Figure (b) shows the aggregate
number of detainers issued (red) and removals (blue) for arrestees charged with serious (level 1) offenses. Data are aggregated at
the quarterly level. Source: TRAC.



ICE field office about any relevant findings.20 The field office then decides whether or not to
submit a detainer request to the local jail where the arrestee is being held. In this way, under
Secure Communities immigration status verification became routine part of law enforcement.
As a crucial first feature of the program, it effectively eliminated all local-level discretion over
immigration status verification: the local level can no longer affect the likelihood that the fed-
eral level learns about the immigration status of an arrestee.21 This is in sharp contrast to the
ample local discretion possible under CAP or 287(g).22
    Once ICE officials have identified a person of interest being held at a local detention facility,
they must decide whether or not to issue a detainer. Detainers are addressed to the local law
enforcement agency, requesting to hold the arrestee in custody for up to an additional 48 hours.
This gives ICE officers time to take the arrestee into custody. The detainer issuance decision is
complex. ICE officials must evaluate all the information they have (and do not have) about the
arrestee. This includes the severity of the offenses charged and any other prior criminal history,
the individual’s likelihood of being removed once under federal custody, and the availability of
  20
     ICE is organized geographically into 24 federal enforcement districts (see Figure B.2).
  21
     Facing some challenges to this aspect of the policy (e.g., Santos v. Frederick County Board of Commissioners
(2013), Doe v. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (2006)), DHS explicitly makes it clear that “a jurisdiction
cannot choose to have the fingerprints it submits to the federal government processed only for criminal history
checks” because “the sharing [of fingerprints] was ultimately between the FBI and DHS”. (see Verini (2012) and
Kalhan (2013).
  22
     The only possibility here would be for the officers to not collect the fingerprints of an arrestee they believe
may by illegally present in the country. This would constitute malpractice and would not allow the police to
establish the criminal status of the individual in custody, making it impractical (Gulasekaram and Ramakrishnan
(2015)). On the other hand, the arresting behavior of the police may have changed in response to the introduction
of Secure Communities, which constitutes a first order source of selection which we will deal with below.


                                                                10
resources required to deploy a team that picks up the individual in the local detention facility.
ICE officers follow a series of priority guidelines issued by ICE directors. They are also likely to
have strategic considerations in mind: issuing a detainer request effectively ‘alerts’ the local level
of the federal level’s interest in the arrestee. If ICE officers deem the locality immigrant friendly,
they may expect local law enforcement to expedite the release of the arrestee in response to
the detainer. Such complete discretion over the issuance of detainer requests is the second key
feature of the institutional design of the program.
    The main source of variation we exploit in the paper is the drastic change in the official
priority guidelines for prosecutorial discretion undertaken by the Obama administration in
the summer of 2011. The first two years of the Obama administration continued a trend of
strengthened federal immigration enforcement, with increasing numbers of detainer requests and
removals across the US.23 Increased federal enforcement led to pressure from local governments
and immigration advocacy groups, which, together with the forthcoming presidential election,
were key factors explaining the policy change. Figure 1 plots the aggregate trends in the
number of detainers and removals by offense severity (see below), showing the striking reversal
around mid 2011. The new policy guidelines, outlined in a series of memos by ICE director
John Morton, were predicated upon refocusing federal efforts and resources away from the
prosecution of unlawfully present immigrants accused of minor offenses or just immigration
violations, and towards those accused of serious crimes. According to Morton,

       “ICE must prioritize the use of its enforcement personnel, detention space, and removal
       assets to ensure... the agency’s enforcement priorities, namely the promotion of national
       security, border security, public safety, and the integrity of the immigration system...
       Because the agency is confronted with more administrative violations than its resources
       can address, the agency must regularly exercise ‘prosecutorial discretion’,... the authority
       of an agency charged with enforcing the law to decide to what degree to enforce the law
       against a particular individual” (Morton (2011a)).

     The memo goes on to specify which ICE officers are allowed to exercise discretion, and a long
list of criteria for them to follow. Additional memos provided further instructions on the subject
(Morton (2011b)). In practice, the Secure Communities program used a four-level classification
for offenses. Level 1 being the most serious, includes convictions for homicide, kidnappings,
sexual assault, terrorist activity among others. Levels 2 and 3 include convictions for less
serious crimes such as burglary, theft, traffic offenses, small drug offenses, and immigration
violations among others (for the full list of categories of offenses, see ICE (2008)). Level 4
includes individuals that have not been yet convicted. The new guidelines redirected federal
enforcement towards level 1 offenses. Our empirical strategy below will rely on this distinction.
  23
    Compared to the pre-program period, Secure Communities saw a tenfold increase in the number of detainers
issued by ICE (Kalhan (2013)).



                                                    11
2.1.2    Second Step: The Local Level

Local law enforcement is able to exercise discretion over immigration outcomes as well, but in the
next stage of the process. Once ICE has submitted a detainer request, local law enforcement is
free to decide whether to ‘honor’ it by holding the arrestee until pick up by ICE, or not to honor
it by either releasing the arrestee before ICE shows up, or by refusing to hand over the immigrant
to ICE. This margin of discretion is significant because at this stage of the process, localities
have a considerable informational and strategic advantage over federal officials. Moreover, after
some legal disputes, the courts made it clear that detainers are not binding, and constitute
only suggestions of collaboration.24 Thus, the third key feature of Secure Communities is the
complete discretion of the local level after a detainer has been issued.
    This is also the stage at which the extent of preference alignment between the local and
the federal levels is made manifest: because ICE moves first when deciding whether to issue
a detainer or not, any arrestee for whom a detainer is issued is necessarily highly desired by
the federal level, irrespective of ICE officers’ beliefs about how the local level may react. This
need not be the case for arrestees for whom ICE abstains from issuing a detainer; this set will
include all arrestees ICE is uninterested in, and other arrestees which are of interest but for
whom the agency issued no detainer based on strategic considerations. If the preferences of
the local level are aligned with those of the federal level, local officials will be likely to honor
the detainer request. Otherwise (i.e., the characteristics of the arrestee are such that the local
level would rather not see this arrestee under ICE custody), we may expect the local officials
not to honor the detainer. As a result, the rate of compliance with detainer requests will be
informative about the extent of alignment of preferences between the local and federal levels.
    Variation in local cooperation is partly driven by local preferences over the presence of ille-
gally present immigrants. It also depends on the costs of compliance. First, holding arrestees
for longer is expensive, and diverts resources from law enforcement towards immigration en-
forcement. Moreover, localities also expressed concern about how participation in immigration
enforcement would erode community trust on law enforcement. Indeed, conflict over Secure
Communities grew rapidly as the federal government rolled it across the US. Several advocacy
groups such as the National Day Laborers Network organized a resistance movement, focused
on crafting legislation and lobbying local governments. In its non-cooperation ordinance, for
example, the Cook county, IL council argued:
   24
      Several appeals and state supreme court rulings have affirmed the right of local level agencies to exercise
discretion at this point under the anti-commandeering doctrine founded on the Tenth Amendment, making
it clear that ICE detainers cannot be mandatory (See Galarza v. Szalczyk (2014), Jimenez-Moreno et al. v.
Napolitano et al. (2014), Buquer v. City of Indianapolis (2011), or Printz v. United States (1997) among
others). ICE officials themselves have acknowledged that detainers constitute only a collaboration suggestion.
Moreover, some counties have argued that holding an arrestee who has not otherwise been charged with a crime,
in response to a detainer request, may constitute a due process violation (Manuel (2012); Pham (2006)).



                                                       12
        “... it costs Cook county approximately $43,000 per day to hold individuals ‘believed to
        be undocumented’ pursuant to ICE detainers, and Cook county can no longer afford to
        expend taxpayer funds to incarcerate individuals who are otherwise entitled to their free-
        dom... having the sheriff of Cook county participate in the enforcement of ICE detainers
        places a great strain on our communities by eroding the public trust the sheriff depends
        on to secure the accurate reporting of criminal activity and to prevent and solve crimes...”
        (Cook county board of commissioners, Sept. 7, 2011)

Most of this legislation has the purpose of limiting the extent to which the local level collaborates
in honoring ICE detainers. Some of the ordinances and regulations instruct local police to honor
only detainers for arrestees charged with serious crimes. The best known example is California’s
TRUST Act, passed in 2013. In other cases, local police is instructed to never comply with any
ICE detainer request.25

2.1.3     Third Step: ICE Custody and Removal

Arrestees in local detention facilities are taken into ICE custody in two ways. They may be
picked up by ICE officers pursuant to a detainer request, which we refer to as the ‘detainer track’.
Or they may be picked up by ICE officers who show up to a local jail or prison unannounced
in search for unlawfully present individuals. We refer to this as the ‘direct track’. A key
distinction between both tracks is that for arrestees with an issued detainer, the likelihood
they are taken into ICE custody depends exclusively on the local level’s decision on detainer
compliance. For arrestees for whom no detainer was issued, both federal and local efforts will
shape the likelihood of being taken into ICE custody.26 This distinction and availability of data
from both tracks will be crucial for the identification strategy we lay down below.
    In either case, individuals under ICE custody go on to a deportation proceeding involving
immigration court. It is worth pointing out that under US law, immigration courts are not part
of the judicial branch. Rather, they constitute a division within the Department of Justice,
and thus, are part of the federal executive branch. As such, we may expect the outcomes at
the removal stage to be correlated with the patterns of federal immigration enforcement earlier
in the process, even though immigration courts are expected to apply the law uniformly and
respect due process and fair treatment. Unlawfully present individuals under ICE custody
are free to waive their right to an immigration proceeding, in which case they are directly
removed. A host of legal aid organizations provide council to those who do not waive their right
  25
     The following counties passed some variation of non-cooperation regulation: Santa Clara, CA, Cook, IL,
Miami-Dade, FL, Newark, NJ, Champaign, IL, Amherst, MA, Berkeley, CA, Los Angeles, CA, Milwaukee, WI,
New York , NY, Multanomah, OR, Alameda, CA, Orleans parrish, LA, San Francisco, CA, Sonoma, CA, San
Bernardino, CA, Mesilla, NM, San Miguel, NM, Taos, NM, King, WA, Philadelphia, PA, Washington, DC.
Connecticut also passed a TRUST Act in 2014 (Gulasekaram and Ramakrishnan (2015)).
  26
     This will depend on the implicit or explicit negotiation between local and federal law enforcement at the
time when ICE officers show up in a local detention facility.



                                                     13
and are unable to hire private counsel. Although technically possible, the IIRIRA restricted
considerably the possibility of appeals in the immigration court system, as it strips the federal
courts of jurisdiction to hear legal challenges to deportation decisions (Zolberg (2006)).27


3       Data Description
We use two sets of data: First, detailed information on all cases of unlawfully present indi-
viduals along the immigration enforcement pipeline during the period of operation of Secure
Communities. This includes counts of local law enforcement arrests of unlawfully present indi-
viduals, of detainer requests issued by ICE, of individuals under ICE custody, and of removals
from the US. Second, data on county characteristics that may be relevant determinants of local
preferences over immigration enforcement outcomes.


3.1     Data Description and Sources
3.1.1     Data on the Immigration Enforcement Pipeline

Our data on the immigration enforcement pipeline comes from two main sources. First, a series
of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests to DHS, from which we obtained data from the
Secure Communities program at the county level, covering the period October 2008 to February
2015. These detailed data include the number of fingerprint submissions from local detention
facilities, the number of matches to the DHS’s IDENT database, the number of detainers issued
by ICE, the number of individuals in ICE custody28 , the number of removals, and the ICE level
of priority based on crime severity. For our purposes, we will consider level 1 as serious crimes,
and levels 2 and above as minor crimes. We use the number of fingerprint matches as our
measure of local arrests of unlawfully present individuals.29 Second, we collected data from the
Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse (TRAC) at Syracuse University. Based on several
FOIA requests, TRAC has built updated record-by-record datasets of detainers, removals and
Secure Communities removals with information from 2002 to the present. All datasets have
information on the most serious crime conviction, priority level for ICE, country of birth, age,
and sex of the immigrant.
  27
     This was reaffirmed by the Supreme Court in 1999.
  28
     More specifically, the information from these FOIAs report the number of arrests made by ICE and not
the number of people under ICE custody. However, individuals arrested by ICE under the Secure Communities
program are held in custody, so that under Secure Communities, ICE arrests and ICE custodies should coincide.
  29
     Naturally, false positives can arise when ICE flags a US citizen by mistake. Similarly, false negatives can arise
when ICE fails to flag an unlawfully present immigrant. The former are likely to establish their citizenship later,
and the latter will not be subject of ICE prosecution so these cases will introduce little error on our counts of
detainers, custodies, and removals. On the other hand, fingerprints from an arrestee may be submitted multiple
times. We have no reason to believe such occurrences may be related to immigration enforcement concerns. We
are unable to identify any such cases from these data.

                                                         14
    Combining these two sources, and aggregating the data at the county-semester level, we
reconstruct measures by crime severity (serious and minor) of counts of arrests of unlawfully
present individuals, detainers issued by ICE, individuals entered into ICE custody following
a detainer request, and removed individuals under ICE custody for whom the federal agency
issued a detainer request. The TRAC dataset allows us to assign the detainer requests to
counties, and to establish whether a given removal followed a detainer request or not. Most
importantly, this dataset allows us to assign ICE custody and removals cases to the detainer and
the direct tracks (the data from DHS does not contain this information). We do the assignment
by applying the TRAC-based shares of individuals under ICE custody or removed with detainers
to the FOIA-based counts. Overall both sources agree, although we need to undertake some
adjustments (described in Appendix C) in a subset of cases where inconsistencies arise.
    In Table 1 we present descriptive statistics for the several stages of the immigration enforce-
ment process. The table reports counts of events, where the unit of observation is the county-
semester, and divide the data between the pre and post policy guidelines change. Panels A and
B contain information on arrests tagged as minor offenses, of which the largest component is an
immigration violation (without any other cited offense). Panels C and D contain information
on arrests tagged as serious offenses. The number of observations in the pre guidelines regime
is smaller than in the post guidelines change period for two reasons: first, the pre period covers
five semesters, while the post period covers seven semesters. Second, enrollment into the Secure
Communities program, albeit mandatory for the counties, happened gradually as ICE rolled
out the program starting in October 2008. By January 2013 all US counties were enrolled, and
by the time of the policy change in June 2011, more than 70 percent of the US population was
living in counties enrolled in the program (see Figure B.1 in Appendix B). Naturally, the timing
of enrollment into Secure Communities is correlated with key county characteristics. Partic-
ularly predictive is the share of Hispanics (see Cox and Miles (2013)). Indeed, DHS possibly
targeted counties for enrollment as a function of its own objectives, so entry into the sample is
an important source of selection that may be reflected in these tables.30
    Throughout this paper we restrict attention to counties with an estimated share of undoc-
umented immigrants above median (1 percent of the population), and thus, where there can
be some federal-local conflict over immigration. Elsewhere immigration enforcement is not a
locally salient issue, and we observe no variation in immigration outcomes. We construct a
measure of the undocumented share in each county using three sources: the share of Hispanic
non-citizens from the 2010 census, the number of tax returns filed without a social security
number from Brookings31 , and state-level estimates of illegally present population from Warren
  30
    Neither Cox and Miles (2013) nor us find the county-level Democratic share to be predictive of Secure
Communities activation after controlling for the Hispanic share.
 31
    See https://www.brookings.edu/interactives/earned-income-tax-credit-eitc-interactive-and-resources/.



                                                   15
                                                        Minor offenses
                     Panel A:                               Pre-Policy Change (2009-I – 2011-I)
                                                        Mean Std. dev. Min. Median Max.
                     Arrests                            265.8     1105.0     0       18      17268
                     Detainers                           61.2      236.8     0        4       4250
                     Custodies with detainer             19.8       78.9     0        1       1175
                     Removals with detainers             10.9       62.3     0        0       1027
                     Custodies without detainer          37.6      166.7     0        2       3037
                     Removals without detainer           31.8      155.8     0        0       2632
                     Observations                                         1966

                     Panel B:                              Post-Policy Change (2011-II – 2014-II)
                                                         Mean Std. dev. Min. Median Max.
                     Arrests                             113.0    578.6      0        14     17786
                     Detainers                           24.7     128.0      0         2      4131
                     Custodies with detainer             8.21      56.5      0         0      2430
                     Removals with detainers             4.06      34.6      0         0      1490
                     Custodies without detainer           14.1     62.9      0         2      2666
                     Removals without detainer           10.6      49.8      0         1      1852
                     Observations                                         10040

                                                Serious offenses
                     Panel C:                        Pre-Policy Change (2009-I – 2011-I)
                                                 Mean Std. dev. Min. Median Max.
                     Arrests                     51.8       249.9     0        3      3746
                     Detainers                   13.5        69.0     0        0      1376
                     Custodies with detainer     6.99        32.0     0        0       493
                     Removals with detainers     3.32        22.8     0        0       403
                     Custodies without detainer  14.6        84.4     0        0      1573
                     Removals without detainer   11.9        77.7     0        0      1507
                     Observations                                  2002

                     Panel D:                              Post-Policy Change (2011-II – 2014-II)
                                                         Mean Std. dev. Min. Median Max.
                     Arrests                             52.0     303.7      0        4       9148
                     Detainers                           8.51      57.6      0        0       1999
                     Custodies with detainer             3.54      29.5      0        0       1289
                     Removals with detainers             1.66      16.9      0        0        734
                     Custodies without detainer          7.02      37.4      0        1       1271
                     Removals without detainer           5.60      33.6      0        0       1189
                     Observations                                         10202


Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for Immigration Enforcement Variables.                                            The table presents
summary statistics for the variables related to the immigration enforcement process under Secure Communities. We report counts
of events aggregated at the county-semester level of observation. All variables in panels A and B refer to minor offenses (level 2-4
under ICE’s classification). All variables in panels C and D refer to serious offenses (level 1 under ICE’s classification). Panels A
and C report summary statistics from 2009-I to 2011-I (before the June 2011 policy guidelines change). Panels B and D report
summary statistics from 2011-II to 2014-II (after the June 2011 policy guidelines change). Arrests are measured as the number of
fingerprint matches under Secure Communities. Our source for arrests, detainers, and ICE custodies is a FOIA to DHS. Our source
for removals and for classifying ICE custodies between those with and without detainers is TRAC.




                                                                16
and Warren (2012). We explain the details of our construction of this measure in Appendix C.
In our sample, the mean undocumented share is 2 percent.
    Table 1 illustrates the sequential filtering of arrests along the stages of the immigration
enforcement pipeline, as well as its two ‘branches’: some individuals enter ICE custody following
a detainer request (the detainer track), others do so in the absence of a detainer request (the
direct track). Numbers are, naturally, larger for minor offenses. Falls in all variables are
more pronounced for minor than for serious offenses, however, suggesting a shift away from
enforcement over minor crimes, just as the policy guidelines intended. The tables also highlight
the quantitative importance of the direct track in accounting for ICE custodies and removals.

3.1.2      County Characteristics

Lastly, we collected an array of county-level characteristics. We report summary statistics for
all these variables in Panel A of Table B.1. To capture political preferences, we focus on the
Democratic share of votes from the 2008 and 2012 presidential elections, using David Leip’s atlas
of US presidential elections.32 Besides the well established county-level correlations between
local immigration enforcement regulations and Republican vote share, this relationship holds
as well at the individual level: the 2015 American Trends Panel survey from the Pew Research
Center, for example, found 71 percent of Republican voters believe that immigrants in the US
make crime worse, compared to 34 percent of Democratic voters.33
    We also use other demographic characteristics taken from the American Community Survey
2006-2010 waves, as sources of variation in preferences over immigration enforcement: popu-
lation, Hispanic share, share of adults with a bachelors degree, and share of employment in
the services sector. Finally, Table B.1 also reports summary statistics for whether the county
is considered rural, the county’s distance to its corresponding ICE district headquarters (see
Figure B.2), and for the presence of 287(g) agreements (see Mayda (2006), for a discussion of
the correlates of preferences over immigration policy).


3.2       Patterns of Immigration and Law Enforcement Outcomes
We now present descriptive results illustrating the main changes in the patterns of immigration
enforcement outcomes following the policy guidelines change. Together, these results motivate
our subsequent empirical strategy and modeling approach.
 32
      See www.uselectionatlas.org.
 33
      see http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2015/09/30/on-views-of-immigrants-americans-largely-split-along-party-lines/.




                                                         17
3.2.1   Immigration Enforcement

Our purpose is to establish how immigration enforcement outcomes changed at each step along
the immigration enforcement pipeline following the 2011 guidelines. Along the detainer track,
we must assess at what rates local arrests translated into detainer requests, detainer requests
translated into ICE custodies, and ICE custodies translated into removals. Along the direct
track, we must assess at what rates local arrests without detainers translated into ICE custodies,
and ICE custodies translated into removals. To do this in a flexible way, we focus on measuring
the average slope of the relationship between the outcome of a given step of the process, yct ,
and its corresponding baseline, Bct . For example, in the first step of the direct track, we are
interested in how many detainer requests take place per unlawfully present immigrant in police
custody. Estimating a fixed effects model, we can recover the average rate at which baseline
events translate into outcome events, and also any differences in this rate between the pre and
post policy guidelines change periods. Our models take the form

                    yct = αc + α̃t + βBct + γ(Bct × Guidelinest ) + x0ct η + ct              (1)

where yct is an immigration enforcement outcome (detainers, ICE custodies, removals), and
Bct is its corresponding baseline variable along the pipeline (arrests in the case of detainers,
detainers in the case of ICE custodies, ICE custodies in the case of removals). xct is a vector
of controls that includes log population, and interactions between time period dummies and
each of the following time-invariant county characteristics: state dummies, ICE federal district
dummies, undocumented share of the population, Hispanic share of the population, Democratic
party share of the presidential vote, share of the population with a bachelors degree, a dummy
for rural counties, and log distance to the corresponding ICE district headquarters. Periods
when the baseline variable is zero do not contain information on the rate at which enforcement
is happening, so the models here only include observations for which Bct > 0.
    We estimate γ for the different steps of the deportation process. We use a standard inverse
hyperbolic sine transform over the yct and Bct counts, so the coefficients can be interpreted
approximately as elasticities. Notice, however, that these coefficients do not have a causal in-
terpretation: they will reflect equilibrium changes in enforcement by federal and/or local levels
in response to the change in the guidelines, as well as equilibrium changes in the composi-
tion of the pool of baseline cases along dimensions relevant for enforcement decisions. This
heterogeneity represents characteristics of the arrestees over which the local and federal levels
have differing preferences regarding their willingness to see a removal taking place. The pool
of arrestees changes endogenously for several reasons. First, secular demographic patterns,
such as the steady growth of the Central American population in this period, can impact the
composition of the pool of arrestees. Second, keeping constant the composition of the pool of

                                                18
                Panel A:                                                                                    Detainer Track
                                                                               Minor offenses                                             Serious offenses
                                                               (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)           (7)             (8)
                                                            Detainers      Custodies      Removals      Removals       Detainers      Custodies      Removals       Removals
                Arrests                                       0.614                                       0.187          0.275                                        0.005
                                                             (0.028)                                     (0.025)        (0.031)                                      (0.024)

                Arrests × Guidelines                          -0.066                                       0.001          0.029                                       0.102
                                                             (0.017)                                      (0.022)        (0.022)                                     (0.020)

                Detainers                                                    0.648                                                       0.637
                                                                            (0.030)                                                     (0.036)

                Detainers × Guidelines                                       -0.046                                                      -0.056
                                                                            (0.025)                                                     (0.031)

                Custodies                                                                   0.579                                                      0.287
                                                                                           (0.041)                                                    (0.046)

                Custodies × Guidelines                                                      0.009                                                      0.136
                                                                                           (0.038)                                                    (0.039)
                Observations                                  11269           8243          6294          11269        9656              5433          4010            9656
19




                Adjusted R2                                    0.90           0.84          0.84           0.80        0.86              0.83           0.82           0.81
                Panel B:                                                                                     Direct Track
                                                                               Minor offenses                                             Serious offenses
                                                              (1)                            (2)                          (3)                           (4)
                                                           Custodies                      Removals                     Custodies                     Removals
                Arrests (no detainer)                        0.391                          0.297                        0.325                         0.163
                                                            (0.027)                        (0.032)                      (0.033)                       (0.036)

                Arrests (no detainer)×Guidelines              -0.088                        -0.028                        -0.053                       0.052
                                                             (0.020)                       (0.024)                       (0.025)                      (0.028)
                Observations                                  10476                         10476                          8797                        8797
                Adjusted R2                                    0.88                          0.87                          0.85                         0.85


     Table 2: County Fixed Effects Models for the Steps of the Immigration Enforcement Process The table shows regression coefficients for
     panel fixed effects models for the different steps of the immigration enforcement process by type of arrest according to ICE’s classification. All models include county fixed effects,
     semester fixed effects, log population, and interactions of semester fixed effects with the following time-invariant covariates: state dummies, federal enforcement district dummies,
     undocumented share of the population, Hispanic share of the population, Democratic party share, share of the population with a bachelors degree, a dummy for rural counties,
     and log distance to the corresponding ICE district office. Panel A presents results for the detainer track, while Panel B presents results for the direct track. Arrests correspond to
     the number of fingerprint matches under Secure Communities. Custodies and Removals in Panel A correspond to those for which a detainer was issued. Custodies and Removals
     in Panel B correspond to those for which no detainer was issued. Guidelines is a dummy variable indicating the semesters after the policy guidelines change under the Obama
     administration. All models exclude observations for which the baseline regressor is zero. Standard errors are robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity, and clustered at the county
     level.
immigrants arrested, federal and local preferences over the deportability of different types of
immigrants may change. For example, under the 2011 guidelines ICE prioritized immigrants
without American-born children. Third, immigration enforcement itself can alter the composi-
tion of the pool of arrestees: it can undermine community collaboration with law enforcement
relevant for efficient policing, and it can shift the supply of crime through both deterrence and
incapacitation. For example, suppose the guidelines led to weakened local immigration enforce-
ment, and that this improves policing efficiency, leading to higher apprehension rates for minor
offenses. The pool of arrestees will become selected towards these kinds of offenses, which are
on average less likely to be requested by ICE. Thus, in the regression of detainers on arrests,
γ will be negative partly as a result of weakened enforcement, and partly because the pool
of arrestees endogenously shifted toward people over which ICE has little interest. Moreover,
each step of the immigration enforcement process will generate selection in the downstream
steps. This is especially clear when, for example, changes in the arrests-to-detainers stage
lead to zero detainers, so that we no longer have information about enforcement rates in the
detainers-to-custodies stage.
    Because the new guidelines emphasized a shift in immigration enforcement from minor to
serious offense cases, in Table 2 we report estimates of the models in equation (1) separately
for these two categories. In columns 1-4 of panel A and columns 1-2 of panel B we report
estimates for cases tagged as minor offenses. In columns 5-8 of panel A and columns 3-4 of
panel B we report the corresponding estimates for cases tagged as serious offenses. All models
we report include county fixed effects, the full battery of time (semester) fixed effects capturing
the common trends we illustrated in Figure 1, all time-cross-state and time-cross-enforcement
district fixed effects, and all interactions between time fixed effects and county characteristics.
We believe this leaves changes in local and federal enforcement intensities, and changes in the
composition of the pool of individuals moving along the immigration enforcement pipeline as
the only remaining trends in relevant unobservables. The standard errors are all clustered at
the county level and robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity.

Minor Offenses

Along the detainer track, column 1 of panel A show a significant coefficient on the interaction
term: in the post guidelines change period, the rate at which arrests for minor offenses translate
into detainer requests for the average county falls by more than 10 percent of the pre guidelines
rate (−0.066 (s.e = 0.017) relative to a baseline of 0.614 (s.e. = 0.028)). After controlling for
the vast array of trends along observables which we include in these models, this quantitatively
large fall suggests that ICE did comply with the policy guidelines, by weakening enforcement
towards minor crimes through the channel of reduced numbers of detainer requests.


                                                20
    The next column reports estimates for the second step along the detainer track, where the
local level has discretion to comply or not with the detainer requests. In the post-guidelines
period, detainers also translate into ICE custodies at a smaller rate on average (−0.046, s.e
= 0.025 relative to a baseline of 0.64, s.e = 0.03), although this difference is significant at
the ten percent level only. This less precisely estimated fall may be masking heterogeneous
responses to the federal enforcement change, across counties with different preferences. It may
also be driven by a significant change in the pool of unlawfully present individuals: although
these are people detained for minor offenses, the federal level may already have screened out
the least severe of these offenses when reducing the issuance of detainers.
    Column 3 then moves towards the last step of the immigration enforcement process, where
only immigration courts with perhaps some influence by ICE determine the rate at which un-
lawfully present immigrants in ICE custody are removed. We do not find this rate to be any
different between the pre and the post guidelines periods. On the one hand, the immigration
courts, which are also part of the federal branch, may have weakened their enforcement stan-
dards as well. On the other, the pool of individuals reaching the immigration court proceedings
stage in the post-guidelines period may be composed of individuals with characteristics more
favorable to deportation. As a complement to these results, column 4 reports the compounded
effects implied by the full detainer track pipeline, looking at changes in the rate at which arrests
of unlawfully present immigrants translate into final removals. Removals per arrest are indistin-
guishable between pre and post-guideline change periods for the average county. Considering
how quantitatively large the federal policy change was, this suggests strong selection forces at
play over the pool of people being taken through the immigration enforcement pipeline.
    Columns 1 and 2 in panel B report analogous results for the direct track, still among cases
of unlawfully present immigrants arrested for minor offenses. In this track, the post-guidelines
change period also saw a large and precisely estimated fall in the rate at which arrests translate
into ICE custodies (−0.09, s.e.= 0.02). This fall is proportionally larger than the one observed
along the direct track.

Serious Offenses

In columns 5-8 of panel A we move on to present the main patterns on immigration cases tagged
as serious offenses. The 2011 policy guidelines advocated a strong shift towards immigration
enforcement of serious offenses cases. Column 5 reports a positive coefficient on the differential
rate at which local arrests translate into ICE detainer requests, but the estimate is not statis-
tically significant (0.029, s.e.= 0.022). The large fall in the raw numbers of detainers issued
by ICE, which we illustrated in Figure 1 above, makes this finding particularly striking. It
suggests large changes in the composition of the pool of illegally present individuals arrested


                                                21
for serious crimes.
    While similar to the patter for minor offenses, in the post-guidelines period the rates at
which detainers translate into ICE custodies are smaller (see column 6). In contrast, at the
ICE custody stage we observe a large post-guidelines increase of around 50 percent in the rate
at which individuals are removed (see column 7, where the coefficient on the interaction term
is 0.136, s.e.= 0.039 compared to a baseline coefficient of 0.287, s.e.= 0.046). A similarly
large change at the ICE custody stage can be seen along the direct track. In column 3 of
panel B we show that along the direct track, on average each arrest led to less ICE custodies
after the guidelines were issued: despite this, each arrest led to more removals in the post-
guidelines period. Part of this pattern may be driven by a strongly selected pool of arrestees
with characteristics highly amenable to deportation, and part by increased enforcement across
the board at the immigration court stage.
    A comparison between the detainer and no detainer tracks for serious offenses also suggests
an enforcement response from the local level. If federal enforcement behaved similarly along
both the detainer and the direct tracks, then the lower rates at which detainers and arrests
translate into ICE custodies suggest a resistance response by the local level to the shift in
enforcement towards serious crimes. Moreover, the local level is likely to have resisted the
removal of the least serious among these serious offenses cases. This has a screening effect,
selecting the pool of those who reach the immigration court stage towards individuals the
immigration courts are eager to remove.


4    A Model of the Immigration Enforcement Pipeline
Following our discussion above, we now present a model of the immigration enforcement process
under Secure Communities. The model will allow us to disentangle the three key sources of
variation in the patterns of immigration enforcement outcomes we described in section 3: local
enforcement, federal enforcement, and selection in the composition of the pool of unlawfully
present immigrants moving along the immigration enforcement pipeline. It explicitly models
how arrested individuals are filtered along this pipeline, and captures the key features within its
different stages we highlighted above as critical for our empirical strategy. Most importantly, by
incorporating time-varying unobserved heterogeneity in the composition of the pool of arrested
unlawfully present individuals, the model allows for misalignment of preferences over removals
between the federal and the local levels. Because the 2011 change in policy guidelines explicitly
proposed directing federal enforcement efforts towards arrestees accused of serious crimes, we
condition the immigration enforcement process on the (observed to us) crime severity, effectively
allowing both the federal and the local levels to choose different intensities of immigration
enforcement towards serious and minor offenses.

                                                22
4.1     The Immigration Enforcement Process
Arrested unlawfully present immigrants vary in observed and unobserved (to us) characteristics.
Conditional on their observed characteristics, most prominently the seriousness of the offense
for which they were arrested, the local and federal levels may agree or disagree on whether the
individual should be high or low priority for removal. Because the relevant conflict between
local and federal levels revolves around whether a given individual be removed, the table at the
top of Figure 2 fully describes the distribution of the relevant unobserved heterogeneity in the
pool of arrestees in a given county and time period.34 π L` is the fraction of arrestees who are
low priority for ICE (L) and low priority for the county (`), while π Hh is the fraction of arrestees
who are high priority for both ICE (H) and the county (h). The higher these fractions, the
more aligned the preferences of the federal and the local level. In contrast, π Lh is the fraction
of arrestees whom ICE is not interested in removing (L), but whom the local level would prefer
were removed (h). π H` is the fraction of arrestees whom ICE would like to remove (H), but the
local level would not want to see removed (`). The higher these fractions, the more misaligned
the preferences of the federal and the local level.
    Our detailed knowledge of the immigration enforcement pipeline allows us to track how the
pool of arrestees is filtered along the process itself. For our purposes it will be important to
distinguish between two possible “tracks” along which an unlawfully present arrestee may move
along the process. This will allow us to separately distinguish the federal and local immigration
enforcement efforts.

4.1.1    The Detainer Track

Along the first track, which takes place through the Secure Communities program, the ICE
district office is automatically informed about the arrest of an unlawfully present individual,
and decides whether to issue a detainer. Recall that under Secure Communities the local level
(the jail or prison where the individual is under arrest) has no discretion over whether it reports
the presence of the arrestee to ICE, as fingerprints are automatically sent to ICE by the FBI.
Detainers are not issued for type L arrestees: P(Detainer|L) = 035 . For type H arrestees, ICE
issues a detainer with a probability that depends on the current intensity of federal immigration
enforcement: P(Detainer|H) = f . Conditional on observed characteristics, this probability is
constant within time periods (in our baseline empirical application, this will correspond to
semesters). The Obama guidelines introduced in 2011, for example, directly changed f .

Assumption 1. ICE does not condition on the local level preference type {h, `}.
  34
     All variables are indexed by county and time period (c, t). Because it does not lead to any confusion, we
omit those indices in this subsection.
  35
     Notice that this is not an assumption. It simply corresponds to what the definition of an L type is.


                                                     23
                                                       Pool of Arrestees
                                                       Federal
                                                                       L               H
                                          Local
                                          `                        π L`            π H`
                                          h                        π Lh            π Hh


                     Pool of Detainers                                                         Pool of No Detainers
                   Federal                                                                 Federal
                                            H                                                                  L                   H
       Local                                                               Local
       `                         π H` / (π H` + π Hh )                     `                                π L`               (1−f )π H`
                                                                                                      1−(π Hh +π H` )f       1−(π Hh +π H` )f
       h                         π Hh / (π H` + π Hh )                                                      π Lh               (1−f )π Hh
                                                                           h                          1−(π Hh +π H` )f       1−(π Hh +π H` )f


                  Pool of ICE Custodies
                                                                                              Pool of ICE Custodies
                  Federal
                                            H                                                  Federal
       Local                                                                                                             H
                                                                                 Local
       `                        gπ H` / (gπ H` + π Hh )
       h                        π Hh / (gπ H` + π Hh )                           `                          kπ H` / (kπ H` + π Hh )
                                                                                 h                          π Hh / (kπ H` + π Hh )

                     Pool of Removals
                                                                                                 Pool of Removals
               Federal
                                            H                                               Federal
  Local                                                                                                                  H
                                                                               Local
  `                         q ` gπ H` / (q ` gπ H` + q h π Hh )
  h                         q h π Hh / (q ` gπ H` + q h π Hh )                 `                         q ` kπ H` / (q ` kπ H` + q h π Hh )
                                                                               h                         q h π Hh / (q ` kπ H` + q h π Hh )


Figure 2: The Immigration Enforcement Pipeline.                                  The figure shows a flow chart of the immigration
enforcement pipeline together with the distribution of unobserved heterogeneity along the process. The left side of the chart
illustrates the detainer track. The right side of the chart illustrates the direct track. L and H represent low and high priority
arrestees for the federal level. ` and h represent low and high priority arrestees for the local level. The π’s represent the shares
of each type in the population of arrestees. f is the probability of detainer issuance by the federal level, g is the probability ICE
custody following a detainer, k is the probability of ICE custody in the absence of detainer, and q ` , q h are the probabilities of
removal from the US for individuals in ICE custody of types H` and Hh.



    This is a weak assumption. First, recall it is conditional on the seriousness of the alleged
offense. Moreover, from the point of view of ICE, all H types are on average equally desirable
irrespective of their local type h or ` -this is precisely the definition of an H type-. {h, `} are
residual characteristics of the arrestee directly relevant for the local level only. Assumption 1
thus amounts to ruling out commitment by ICE, at the stage in which it is informed about a
person of interest and must decide to act on this information.36 It follows that

                                    P(Detainer|Arrest) = (π H` + π Hh )f ≡ PD|A .                                                        (2)
  36
     For example, ICE agents could have an ex-ante incentive to promise the local level they will not issue
detainers for individuals ICE believes the local level would not want to remove, in exchange for local-level
collaboration in other dimensions. When a fingerprint match arrives, we believe it unlikely that ICE agents will
be able to keep such a promise.



                                                                  24
    We observe PD|A at the county×time period level. Equation (2) shows that PD|A can vary
over time either through changes in federal immigration enforcement f , or through changes in
the composition of the pool of arrestees. Even when comparing the pre-guidelines period to
the post-guidelines period, we cannot directly attribute changes in the rate at which arrests
translate into detainer requests to changes in federal enforcement; the composition of the pool
of local arrest may have changed as well, for example if the arresting behavior of local law
enforcement or the elasticity of crime by unlawfully present immigrants changed in response or
in anticipation to the changes in federal law enforcement. Key to our empirical strategy will be
to disentangle the changes observed after the introduction of the guidelines between selection
(changes in the distribution of arrests), and enforcement.
    After ICE has issued detainers, the resulting distribution of detainers can be represented
by the second table to the left of Figure 2. This distribution does not depend on f because
the federal level does not select detainers based on the local level preferences. It also does not
have any L types, which the federal level has filtered out. At this point along the pipeline, the
county-level law enforcement authorities must decide whether to honor the detainer. Hh types
are arrestees the county is happy to hand in to ICE, so P(ICE Custody|Detainer, Hh) = 1. In
contrast, there is conflict over the ` types. The county does not want to comply with such
detainer requests. Thus, the county’s willingness to enforce immigration can be captured by
the conditional probability of honoring such detainers: P(ICE Custody|Detainer, H`) = g. As
such, the probability of observing detainers translate into ICE custodies is

                                                   π Hh              π H`
             P(ICE Custody|Detainer) = 1 ×                 + g ×             ≡ PC|D            (3)
                                               π H` + π Hh       π H` + π Hh

We also observe PC|D at the county×time period level. PC|D can vary over time either because
among H types the pool of arrestees is shifting between h and ` types, or because local immi-
gration enforcement g is changing, or both: changes in the rate at which detainers translate
into ICE custodies may be driven by changes in local enforcement or selection. Crucially, the
full discretion of the local level in honoring detainers provides us with an exclusion restriction:
PC|D does not vary with federal immigration enforcement f .
    As a result of this sequential filtering induced by the issuance of detainers by ICE and the
subsequent compliance decision of the county, the composition of the resulting pool of arrestees
in ICE custody is described by the third table to the left in Figure 2. Once in ICE custody,
the removal decision depends on an interaction of efforts made by ICE and the immigration
courts. At this point, every individual in custody is an H type, so from ICE’s point of view all
are equally removable. Preferences of the court system, however, may be somewhat misaligned
with ICE’s, so removal rates may vary with the remaining source of unobserved heterogeneity,
namely the preferences of the local level. Of course, at this stage the county has no further


                                                25
influence in the removal decision.
    For j ∈ {`, h}, we denote by q j = P(Removal|ICE Custody, Detainer, j) the probability of
removal of an Hj type in custody for whom a detainer was issued. Both of these conditional
probabilities will in general be interior because the courts’ preferences may not perfectly align
with either the local or the federal level’s preferences. They will depend on the intensity of fed-
eral enforcement, and on the preferences of the district courts. They will not, however, depend
on local level immigration enforcement, which constitutes an additional exclusion restriction
implied by the immigration enforcement process. We can express the conditional probability
of a removal among those individuals in ICE custody for whom a detainer was issued as

                                                 gπ H`
                                                   `         h     π Hh
        P(Removal|ICE Custody, Detainer) = q              +q                ≡ PR|C,D              (4)
                                             gπ H` + π Hh      gπ H` + π Hh

We also observe this conditional probability. It will vary with court and federal immigration
enforcement (through (q ` , q h )), with local immigration enforcement (through g), and with the
distribution of types in the pool of arrestees. Equation (4) reveals an important pattern of selec-
tion induced by the structure of the immigration enforcement process: if the courts’ preferences
are strongly aligned with the county’s preferences (q h > q ` ), then all else equal, a fall in local
immigration enforcement, g, will increase PR|C,D even if the distribution of types and court and
federal enforcement remain constant. The reason is a screening effect from local immigration
enforcement over the pool of people in ICE custody: when the county reduces enforcement, the
share of H` individuals handed into ICE custody falls. The pool of custodies becomes selected
towards Hh individuals, which courts are more willing to remove.

4.1.2   Partial Identification from the Detainer Track

Our analysis allowed us to relate three observable conditional probabilities, (PD|A , PC|D , PR|C,D )
to four enforcement intensity rates (f, g, q ` , q h ) and the fraction of H` and Hh types in the pool
of arrested immigrants. We can conveniently re-express them in the following way:

                           x1 ≡ PD|A = (π H` + π Hh )f                                            (5)
                           x2 ≡ PD|A PC|D = (gπ H` + π Hh )f                                      (6)
                           x3 ≡ PD|A PC|D PR|C,D = (q ` gπ H` + q h π Hh )f                       (7)

   Equations (5)-(7) provide us with two independent relationships between these observable
probabilities and unobservable enforcement rates: Taking the ratio of equations (5) and (6) for
county-time periods with a positive number of ICE custodies,




                                                 26
                                           π Hh   x2 − x1 g
                                             H`
                                                =           .                                      (8)
                                           π      x1 − x2

Taking the ratio of (6) to (7) for county-time periods with a positive number of removals,

                                         π Hh   (x3 − x2 q ` )g
                                              =                 .                                  (9)
                                         π H`    x2 q h − x3

Equating these ratios we obtain the following relationship between (g, q ` , q h ) and observables:

                                               x3 − x2 q h
                                    g=                                                            (10)
                                         x3 − x2 q ` − x1 (q h − q ` )

Crucially, this relationship does not depend on the composition of the pool of arrestees (π Hh , π H` ).
By exploiting the variation across steps of the immigration enforcement process under the de-
tainer track, we are able to obtain a relationship between local and court-enforcement probabil-
ities that is purged of any selection issues. This is convenient because (π Hh , π H` ) is unobserved
and can be correlated with the enforcement choices at all the different stages. The manifold
described by equation (10) provides a partial identification set for the three probabilities, pro-
vided that x1 , x2 , x3 > 0. Finally, notice also that the ratio π Hh / π H` is a measure of the extent
of preference alignment between the federal and the local levels. From equation (8), if we can
recover g, we will also have recovered the preference alignment ratio non-parametrically.

4.1.3   The Direct Track

Parallel to the Secure Communities program, which relies on the issuance of detainers and
local-level collaboration, ICE also directly visits jails and prisons attempting to directly bring
unlawfully present individuals into custody. The Criminal Alien Program (CAP) is one of the
main enforcement vehicles through which these efforts are implemented. By its very nature,
this track is much less structured than the detainer track. As a result, we will need to make a
few additional assumptions about the process. In the first place, we will assume that the ICE
district office first considers whom to issue detainer requests for. The ‘direct track’ is possibly
employed over those for whom no detainer was issued. Recall that resource and political
economy constraints limit the extent to which ICE issues detainers towards H types. However,
it may still desire to take some of the remaining H types into custody through other means.

Assumption 2. ICE employs the direct track over arrestees for whom no detainers were issued.

   This is effectively a timing assumption. Under Assumption 2, the leftover pool of arrested
individuals over which the direct track may apply can be represented by the distribution in

                                                   27
the second table to the right of Figure 2. Similar to the detainer track, only H types are
at play because ICE has no interest over L types. Although ICE and the county have aligned
preferences over the Hh types, ICE has limited resources and will in general not be undertaking
visits to all prisons continually. We will call v d the district level probability that ICE visits a
jail or prison. Conditional on a visit, the local level will want to collaborate over any Hh types
requested. Thus, unconditionally, P(ICE Custody|No Detainer, Hh) = v d . In contrast, the
local level may attempt to resist handing over H` arrestees. We will call k the probability that
an H` type is successfully taken into ICE custody conditional on a visit. Thus, unconditionally,
P(ICE Custody|No Detainer, H`) = v d k. As such,

                                          (1 − f )π Hh                (1 − f )π H`
  P(ICE Custody|No Detainer) = v d                         + v d
                                                                 k                     ≡ PC|N D (11)
                                       1 − (π Hh + π H` )f         1 − (π Hh + π H` )f

    In general k will depend on both federal and local-level immigration enforcement efforts, and
thus, should be correlated with f and g. PC|N D is observable. It varies with federal immigration
enforcement efforts (through v d , k, and f ), with local immigration enforcement efforts (through
k), and with the composition of types in the population of arrestees. As a result of this filtering,
the resulting pool of individuals in ICE custody from the direct track is represented by the third
table to the right of Figure 2. This distribution does not depend on v d because the likelihood of
a prison visit applies equally for both h and ` types. Once in ICE custody, ICE and the court
system determine whether these individuals are deported. Our last substantial assumption will
be that once under ICE custody, conditional on observables and type {h, `}, the track through
which the arrestee reached ICE custody is irrelevant for the removal decision:

Assumption 3. The probability of removal conditional on being under ICE custody does not
depend on the track. For j ∈ {h, `},

    P(Removal|ICE Custody, Detainer, j) = P(Removal|ICE Custody, No Detainer, j) ≡ q j .

    We believe assumption 3 is very weak. Once in ICE custody, all unlawfully present indi-
viduals are H types that federal law enforcement is interested in removing. The submission
of a detainer is likely to signal a special interest of ICE in the unlawfully present individual.
Conditional on crime severity, however, it is unclear that the courts would want to discriminate
between people already in federal custody simply because they landed into ICE custody with
the use of a detainer or not. Moreover, recall from section 3 that both detainer and direct
tracks exhibit very similar patterns of change in the rates at which ICE custodies translate into
removals, suggesting similar behavior by the immigration courts. Under this assumption, we




                                                28
can express the probability of a removal conditional on being in ICE custody as

                                                                  kπ H`               π Hh
   P(Removal|ICE Custody, No Detainer) = q `                                + q h
                                                                                               ≡ PR|C,N D   (12)
                                                               kπ H` + π Hh       kπ H` + π Hh

The probability in equation (12) is observable as well, and varies with court enforcement -
through (q ` , q h )-, with federal enforcement -through (q ` , q h ), and k-, with local enforcement
-through k-, and with changes in the distribution of types.

4.1.4    Partial Identification from the Direct Track

Our analysis of the immigration enforcement pipeline along the direct track allows us to relate
two conditional probabilities (PC|N D , PR|C,N D ) to five enforcement intensity rates (v d , f, k, q ` , q h ),
and the fraction of H` and Hh types in the pool of unlawfully present individuals arrested by
local law enforcement. We can re-write these probabilities as:

                                            1−f
                    y1 ≡ PC|N D = v d
                                                          H`     Hh
                                                                     
                                                          kπ  + π                                           (13)
                                     1 − (π Hh + π H` )f
                                                     1−f
                    y2 ≡ PR|C,N D PC|N D = v d
                                                                ` H`
                                                                q kπ + q h π Hh
                                                                                
                                                     Hh    H`
                                                                                                            (14)
                                               1 − (π + π )f

Taking their ratio for observations where the number of removals is not zero, dividing both
numerator and denominator by π H` , and using equation (8), we can replace for the preference
alignment ratio π Hh / π H` , and solve for k:

                                                     (x2 − x1 g) (y1 q h − y2 )
                                            k=                                                              (15)
                                                      (x1 − x2 ) (y2 − y1 q ` )

Equation (15) shows that k is completely pinned down by the observables of both detainer
and direct tracks, and (g, q h , q ` ). Finally, dividing equation (13) through by equation (5) and
replacing for k from equation (15), we can again eliminate the preference alignment ratio and
obtain a relationship between v d , f , g, q h and q ` :

                                                         (1 − x1 )(1 − g) (y2 − y1 q ` )
                                                
                                   d       1−f
                               v                     =                                                      (16)
                                            f               (x2 − x1 g)    (q h − q ` )

Equation (16) shows that the inverse odds ratio of federal enforcement f is pinned down up to
scale by the observables of both detainer and direct tracks, and (g, q h , q ` ). The comparison of
rates at which individuals with and without detainers in ICE custody are removed contains the
information that allows us to learn about f .




                                                              29
5     Identification and Estimation
5.1     Immigration Enforcement Probabilities
The detainer and direct tracks provide us for each county-time period (c, t), with three rela-
tionships (equations (10), (15), (16)) between observable conditional probabilities of transition
across stages of the immigration enforcement pipeline, (x1ct , x2ct , x3ct , y1ct , y2ct ), and the six key
                                                                     `     h
unobserved immigration enforcement probabilities (gct , fct , kct , qct , qct , vtd ). Crucially, our strat-
egy has allowed us to purge these relationships from the composition of the pool of arrestees
   Hh    H`
(πct  , πct  ) period by period, so even changes over time in what constitutes a high or low prior-
ity individual for the federal or local levels are controlled for. When allowing for unobserved
preference misalignment, the structure of the immigration enforcement process and the ob-
served data allow us to control for selection, but it does not provide enough information to
non-parametrically identify each enforcement probability separately. However, equations (10),
(15), and (16) do pin down gct , kct and vtd (1 − fct )/fct for any pair (qct        h    `
                                                                                       , qct ). Moreover, for
any sequence {gct }Tt=1 , we recover non-parametrically the time series of preference alignments
   Hh       H` T                                                                                h    `
{πct   / πct   }t=1 using equation (8). We now characterize the identified set for (qct           , qct ):

Proposition 1. Suppose that x1ct > x2ct > x3ct > 0 and y1ct > y2ct > 0, and define m ≡
min{x3ct /x2ct , y2ct /y1ct }, m ≡ max{x3ct /x2ct , y2ct /y1ct }, and q̃ = (x1ct y2ct − x3ct y1ct )/y1ct (x1ct −
x2ct )). The observed vector of conditional probabilities wct = (x1ct , x2ct , x3ct , y1ct , y2ct ) for a given
county-period is consistent with any pair (q h , q ` ) ∈ R(wct ), where R(wct ) is given by:

                                            R(wct ) = R1 ∪ R2 ,

                           R1 = (q h , q ` ) : q h < m, and q ` > max{m, q̃}
                                

                           R2 = (q h , q ` ) : q h > m, and q ` < min{m, q̃} .
                               


Proof. See Appendix A.

    The result in Proposition 1 follows from jointly imposing all of the constraints relating ob-
served moments to unobserved probabilities. This includes the three relationships in equations
(10), (15), and (16) implied by the immigration enforcement pipeline, together with all prob-
abilities lying inside the unit interval. Each identified set has the same geometric structure,
which we illustrate in Figure 3: two disjoint rectangles, one above and one below the 45 degree
line. The shape of the identified set illustrates the reason for the lack of non-parametric point
identification of the enforcement probabilities from the immigration pipeline alone: observed
conditional probabilities will in general be consistent with a high removal rate for ` types and
a low removal rate for h types, or vice versa.

                                                      30
Figure 3: Example identified set for (q h , q ` ).                  The figure shows the identified set for (q h , q ` ) from a sample
observation.The top left rectangle is R1 . The bottom right rectangle is R2 . The color shade represents the value of the implied g,
with higher values of g represented by warmer colors and lower values of g represented by cooler colors. Dark blue represents the
region outside the identified set.



5.2       Recovering Enforcement Efforts
We have not yet, however, incorporated into our analysis any of the relationships between the
                                                    `
enforcement probabilities (gct , fct , kct , vtd , qct     h
                                                       , qct ) that are also implied by the immigration en-
forcement process, and driven by the unobserved enforcement effort choices of the local and
federal levels. First, the sources of covariation between probabilities: across the detainer and di-
rect tracks, i) gct should covary with kct through the immigration enforcement effort of the local
level within a county-period; ii) fct should covary with kct through the immigration enforce-
                                                                         `      h
ment effort of the federal level within a county-period; iii) qct          and qct should also covary with fct
through the immigration enforcement effort of the federal level within a county-period. Second,
the following exclusion restrictions: i) gct should not vary with federal enforcement efforts; ii)
fct should not vary with local enforcement efforts; iii) vtd should not vary across counties within
                                        `             h
a federal enforcement district; iv) qct     and qct       should not vary with local enforcement efforts.
    We exploit the information from these additional implications of the deportation process
through parametric restrictions. We denote the local level enforcement effort by ct , and the
federal level enforcement effort by ξct . It will be computationally convenient to model the
enforcement probabilities as logistic functions of observable county characteristics xct , and the
corresponding enforcement efforts. We can directly work with the log odds forms:
                                                        
                                                   fct
                                           log             ≡ f˜ct = x0c β f + ξct                                               (17)
                                                 1 − fct
                                                        
                                                   gct
                                           log             ≡ g̃ct = x0c β g + ct                                               (18)
                                                 1 − gct




                                                                 31
                                  
                             kct
                      log            ≡ k̃ct = x0c β k + κ ct + κξ ξct + ηct                                    (19)
                           1 − kct
                           τ 
                             qct
                      log        τ
                                         τ
                                     ≡ q̃ct = x0c β qτ + γ τ ξct + ζctτ ,     τ ∈ {`, h}                         (20)
                           1 − qct

where β ≡ (β f , β g , β k , β qh , β q` ), the (β, κ , κξ , γ h , γ ` ) are regression coefficients, and (ηct , ζct )
are errors. The ζctτ are closely related to the enforcement efforts of immigration courts unrelated
to ICE efforts. Recall from equation (16) that we do not directly have an expression for fct ,
but rather for f ct ≡ vtd (1 − fct )/fct . Re-writing equation (17) in terms of f ct ,

                                    log(f ct ) ≡ f˜ct = log(vtd ) − x0c β f − ξct                                (21)

so district fixed effects in equation (21) recover the district-level ‘prison visit’ probabilities.
                                            `     h
    Suppose we knew the values of (qct        , qct ) for all (c, t), which we collect in the vectors (q` , qh ).
Then we could directly compute gct , f˜ct , and kct for all (c, t), allowing us to estimate the
regressions in equations (18) and (21). From these we could then recover the ct and ξct as their
residuals:
                        ξˆct = δt,ols
                                d
                                      − x0c β fols − f˜ct ,           ˆct = g̃ct − x0c β gols
             d
where δt,ols     are federal district by period fixed effects. A plot of the ct on the ξct over time
for a given county would then reveal the shape of the county’s best response. The vectors
of immigration enforcement efforts ξ̂(q` , qh ; W, X) and ˆ(q` , qh ; W, X) are thus closed-form
                                                                 0         0 0
functions of (q`ct , qhct ), W = (w1 , ..., wn ) where wc = (wc1   , ..., wct ) , and X = (x01 , ..., x0n )0 .
Using these enforcement efforts as regressors, we could then estimate regressions (19)-(20).
The minimized sums of squared residuals of these regressions are thus closed-form functions of
(q`ct , qhct ), W, and X exclusively:
                                              XX
                     S k (q` , qh ; W, X) =               (k̃ct − x0c β kols − κ,ols ˆct − κξ,ols ξˆct )2
                                                c     t
                                              XX
                                                                               ` ˆ 2
                       `   `   h
                     S (q , q ; W, X) =                      `
                                                          (q̃ct − x0c β q`
                                                                        ols − γols ξct )
                                                c     t
                                              XX
                                                                               ` ˆ 2
                      h    `   h
                    S (q , q ; W, X) =                       h
                                                          (q̃ct − x0c β qh
                                                                        ols − γols ξct )
                                                c     t


We can define S = S k + S ` + S h , and proceed to choose the vectors (q` , qh ) to maximize the
fit of equations (19)-(20) over the identified sets R(wct ) for each observation:

                                               min            S(q` , qh ; W, X)                                  (22)
                                        (q` ,qh )∈×ct R(wct )


This is a high-dimensional search. However, our objective function is in closed form, and easily


                                                             32
evaluated at any given (q` , qh ). It is also strictly convex and thus has a unique minimum.
Moreover, the search over each element of the vectors (q` , qh ) is highly constrained by its
corresponding identified set R(wct ). Our ability to go from the partial identification result
in Proposition 1 to the point identification result from the solution to equation (22) relies on
two features of equations (17)-(20): i) the exclusion restrictions provided by the immigration
enforcement pipeline allowing us to recover the unobserved enforcement efforts of the local
and federal levels at a given pair (q` , qh ); ii) the assumption that the coefficients β on the
county characteristics in these equations (which capture the heterogeneity along observables in
the response of the enforcement probabilities to the local and federal efforts) are homogeneous
across counties. The constancy of these coefficients across counties implies that at a given
(q`−ct , qh−ct ) for all county-periods except for (c, t), the implied value of β, common across all
                                                          `    h
observations, pins down what the best pair (qct             , qct ) ∈ R(wct ) must be for solving equation (22).
      We use a particle swarm optimizer to minimize equation (22), which is ideal for optimizing
a high-dimensional function inside a bounded support. We implement this procedure sepa-
rately for minor and serious offenses, recovering federal immigration enforcement efforts over
minor and serious offense cases (ξ m , ξ s ), and local immigration enforcement efforts over mi-
nor and serious offense cases (m , s ). We then recover the implied immigration enforcement
probabilities for minor and serious offense cases {g, f , k, q` , qh , vd }m , {g, f , k, q` , qh , vd }s , and
the corresponding strengths of covariation between these probabilities –(κm                     m
                                                                                            , κξ , γ
                                                                                                      `,m
                                                                                                          , γ h,m ) and
(κs , κsξ , γ `,s , γ h,s )–, together with the coefficients (β m , β s ) capturing the patterns of heterogene-
ity in the effects of local and federal enforcement efforts across observable characteristics, on
the immigration enforcement probabilities.


6      Estimation Results
Our empirical strategy allows us to recover the local immigration enforcement response to
changes in federal immigration enforcement efforts. We do so exploiting the variation in rates
at which arrested unlawfully present individuals move along the deportation process, allowing
us to control for selection. This strategy, however, is demanding on the data. As Proposition 1
indicates, we can only purge selection from periods in which we observe strictly positive counts
of immigration enforcement activity at all stages of the immigration enforcement pipeline.
This, naturally, limits the external validity of our findings. The sample for which periods with
positive counts of detainers, ICE custodies with and without detainers, and removals with and
without detainers are all positive, is composed of counties with relatively large populations,
and relatively large populations of illegally present immigrants.
    In panel B of Table B.1 we report summary statistics for the resulting sample of counties
with observed data satisfying the conditions required for identification. Our estimation sample

                                                          33
is composed of counties with somewhat larger populations than the average county, and 30
percent larger undocumented population than the average county (2.2 compared to 1.7 percent
undocumented share). It is also slightly more educated, but not much more Democratic than the
average county (43 compared to 41 percent Democratic share). However, the average county
in our sample is considerably less rural than average, and has a significantly larger services
sector. The results below are not representative of the smaller, more rural communities in the
US. Figure B.3 similarly presents a county-level map of the US, where we highlight the counties
included in this sample. Despite the limitations just highlighted, the map reveals a wide regional
coverage. As expected, Texas, Florida, the Southwestern US and the Northeast are heavily
represented in our estimation sample. In Appendix Table B.3 we also report summary statistics
for the data moments wct in our estimation sample. On average, enforcement outcomes are
lower in the post-guidelines period at every stage along the immigration enforcement pipeline,
except for minor offenses in the direct track. Perhaps surprisingly, these average falls are larger
for serious offenses. Along the detainer track, for example, the probability of a removal at the
mean fell from 8.3 to 5.1 percent; it fell even more along the direct track, from 33 to 19 percent.
Our empirical strategy allows us to decompose the sources of variation driving these changes.


6.1     Enforcement Probabilities and Best Responses
In panel A of Table 3 we present average estimates of the immigration enforcement rates by
type of offense and period. Panel B reports the estimated coefficients from equations (19) and
(20) capturing the covariation between local and federal enforcement along the detainer and
direct tracks, and between federal efforts and immigration court outcomes.37 Average detainer
issuance rates f fell 3 percentage points for minor offenses after the guidelines were issued, and
increased 2 percentage points for serious offenses. These changes are in line with the purported
objective of ICE’s change in guidelines, but are smaller than the guidelines themselves suggested.
Especially for serious offenses, we find a large change in the average rate of compliance with
detainers, g, which fall by 12 percentage points. On the other hand, we estimate falls in average
preference alignment π Hh /π H` for both levels of offenses, with an especially large fall for serious
offenses. This suggests that while the fall in immigration enforcement outcomes related to
minor offenses following the change in guidelines was mostly driven by the relaxation of federal
efforts, the fall in immigration enforcement outcomes related to serious offenses was driven by
an offsetting response of the local level to increased federal efforts over these types of cases,
and a concomitant increase in conflict between the local and federal levels.
    It is likely that a major driving force of the fall in alignment over serious offenses was a
  37
    In Tables Table B.4 and Table B.5 we report the corresponding estimates of the β coefficients on our vector
of covariates in equations (17), (18), (19), and (20).



                                                      34
        Panel A:            Pre-Policy Change (2009-I – 2011-I)             Post-Policy Change (2011-II – 2014-II)
                            Minor Offenses     Serious Offenses              Minor Offenses     Serious Offenses
                           Mean      Std. dev.      Mean     Std. dev.      Mean      Std. dev.     Mean       Std. dev.
        f                  0.24         0.29        0.05        0.13        0.25        0.29        0.06          0.16
        g                  0.28         0.26        0.54        0.31        0.27        0.27        0.43          0.29
        ql                 0.51         0.31        0.43        0.31        0.57        0.29        0.49          0.28
        qh                 0.68         0.28        0.72        0.28        0.68        0.25        0.73          0.28
        vd                 1.83         2.72        0.41        0.50        2.19        4.69        0.52          0.69
        k                  0.16         0.31        0.07        0.23        0.22        0.34        0.13          0.30
        π Hh /π H`         0.33         0.89        0.36        0.99        0.30        0.65        0.23          0.68
        Observations                448                     189                     1900                      912

        Panel B:                                          Coefficients of Interest
                                                     Minor Offenses     Serious Offenses
        κ                                          -0.23      (0.020)      -0.22      (0.030)
        κξ                                          1.11       (0.057)      0.98       (0.052)
        γl                                          0.28       (0.071)      0.13       (0.057)
        γh                                          -0.21      (0.061)      -0.31      (0.037)
        Observations                                        2348                    1101


Table 3: Summary Statistics for the Enforcement Probabilities and Estimated Coeffi-
cients. The table presents summary statistics for selected enforcement variables and the coefficient estimates for key parameters
of interest. The first two columns of Panel A report means and standard deviations for minor offenses in the pre-guidelines period,
i.e. from the first semester of 2009 to the first semester of 2011. The second two columns of Panel A refer to serious offenses for
the same period. The first two columns of Panel B present means and standard deviations for minor offenses in the post-guidelines
period, i.e. from the second semester of 2011 to the second semester of 2014. The second two columns of Panel B refer to serious
offenses for the same period. Panel C reports coefficients for the logistic regressions in equations (19) and (20), for minor and
serious offenses. Standard errors for these coefficients, reported in parentheses, account for the presence of generated regressors in
equations (19) and (20) (see subsection A.2).



change in what from the point of view of ICE constituted serious offenses worth pursuing. If
an individual who previously was not of interest to ICE, and thus, about whom there was little
disagreement between the federal and local levels, becomes of interest to ICE, this creates a
divergence in the preferences of both levels over the case. The table also suggests that the
federal level increased enforcement over serious offenses along both detainer and direct tracks
(average k increased by 4 percentage points). This is consistent with the decreased collaboration
of the local level, because avoiding the use of detainers through the direct track partially allows
ICE to undermine local level resistance.
    Turning our attention to Panel C, we find that federal efforts lead to a positive covariation
between f and k, while local efforts lead to a negative covariation between g and k. The table
also suggests that immigration court preferences did not change with the introduction of the
federal guidelines. These also appear to be more aligned with county level than with federal
level preferences: at the mean, q h > q ` . On the other hand, we find that ξ leads to a negative
covariation between f and q h , and to a positive covariation between f and q ` . In periods
of strong federal enforcement, the courts do move in the direction of making more likely the
removal of individuals that the local level would rather not deport.

                                                                 35
                                                        Dependent Variable: Local Effort 
                                                       Minor Offenses       Serious Offenses
                                                   Pooled     County FE         Pooled     County FE
                                                     (1)           (2)             (3)          (4)
                             Federal effort ξ       -1.24         -1.43          -0.64         -0.73
                                                   (0.05)        (0.06)         (0.05)        (0.06)
                             R squared               0.24          0.48           0.16         0.37
                             Observations                    2348                         1101


Table 4: Local Best Responses: Pooled vs. Fixed Effects.                                  The table presents regression results for the
local immigration enforcement effort of the county  on the federal immigration enforcement effort of ICE ξ. Odd columns present
pooled estimates across all counties, while even columns present county fixed-effects estimates. The first two columns present results
for minor offenses, while the last two columns present results for serious offenses. Standard errors for these coefficients are reported
in parentheses.



    We find strong evidence of strategic substitutabilities in the response of the local level to
increased federal immigration enforcement. Because our approach allows us to recover ξ and
 at different points in time for each county, we can directly reconstruct movements along the
best response curve of the county. In Table 4 we present our main estimates of the average slope
of this best response across counties, from models where we regress  on ξ directly. We report
separately the responses over each type of offense, finding substitutabilities in both cases, but
larger responses for minor offenses. Even columns in the table report county fixed effects models,
that effectively compute the slope for each county and average over those slopes. For minor
offenses, we find that a one standard deviation higher federal enforcement leads to 1.4 standard
deviations less local enforcement. For serious offenses, we find a similarly negative local level
response of 0.7 standard deviations. The local level response in most counties partially undoes
the federal effort. Both coefficients are precisely estimated. We argued that our empirical
strategy allows us to successfully distinguish selection from enforcement. In the odd columns of
the table we report the results of running a pooled regression of  on ξ, allowing us to indirectly
assess the validity of our claim: in the pooled model, county-level fixed effects are in the error
term. For both levels of offenses, the magnitudes of the pooled and fixed effects coefficients
are very close to each other, showing that ξ is effectively uncorrelated with fixed county-level
unobservables. The results from Table 4 motivate us to present in Figure 4 the scatterplots
corresponding to the pooled regressions, where we distinguish between counties above median
in the distribution of Democratic vote share (blue), and counties below median (red).


6.2       Heterogeneity in the Local Enforcement Response
How much heterogeneity is there in the nature of the local-level enforcement response? Figure 5
plots the county-level distribution of slopes, which we recover directly from fitting  to ξ county
by county. For both minor and serious offenses cases, around 80 percent of counties exhibit


                                                                  36
                     (a) Minor offenses                                                (b) Serious offenses

Figure 4: Scatterplot of Local Efforts on Federal Efforts.                             Panel (a) shows the scatterplot corresponding
to column (1) in Table 4, plotting  on ξ for arrestees charged with minor (levels 2 and 3) offenses. Panel (b) shows the scatterplot
corresponding to column (3) in Table 4, plotting  on ξ for for arrestees charged with serious (level 1) offenses. Points in blue
represent counties above median Democratic vote share, and points in red represent counties below median Democratic vote share.
The curves are non-parametric best-fit regression lines for each group of counties.



negative slopes, indicating strategic substitutability. The remainder 20 percent of counties
show positive slopes, indicating strategic complementarity. To investigate the main drivers
of the heterogeneity in the shape of these best responses, in Table 5 we present results of
cross-sectional regressions for the slopes of each county’s best response on a battery of county
characteristics related to local preferences over immigration policy.
    In columns 1 and 4 we include only a constant and the Democratic vote share (−50 percent).
The constant captures the average best response slope for a perfectly competitive county. More
Democratic counties exhibit significantly more negative best responses for serious offenses.
In columns 2 and 5 we then add the Hispanic share of the population. Perhaps surprisingly,
conditional on Democratic support, counties with larger Hispanic populations have less negative
slopes for minor offenses. Lastly, in columns 3 and 6 we include the undocumented share (which
is highly correlated with the Hispanic share), log population, the share with a bachelor’s degree,
a rural county dummy, the share of employment in the services sector, log distance to ICE and
a dummy for the existence of a 287(g) agreement. The inclusion of these controls makes the
coefficient on the Democratic share negative for both kinds of offenses, making it clear that
aggregate partisan preferences are the main driver of the local-level response. In counties
with larger undocumented populations, in contrast, best responses are less negatively sloped.
These findings highlight the importance of the local response to federal enforcement efforts, and
rationalize why the outcomes of immigration enforcement under Secure Communities varied
widely across space.
    The policy guidelines change of 2011 advocated for a redirection of efforts away from the
prosecution of minor offenses and towards serious ones. As such, throughout we have allowed
for these to be two separate margins of immigration enforcement. Our estimates also allow
us to explore the relationship between both of these margins. In panel (a) of Figure 6 we


                                                                37
                     (a) Minor offenses                                                  (b) Serious offenses

Figure 5: Distribution of Best Response Slopes Across Counties.                                       The figures show the distribution
of county slopes for a regression of  on ξ. Panel (a) is for cases of arrestees charged with minor (levels 2 and 3) offenses. Panel (b)
is for cases of arrestees charged with serious (level 1) offenses.



present a county-level scatterplot of minor and serious federal efforts. In sharp contrast to
the claimed objective of the policy, we do not find a substitution between them; both efforts
are positively correlated. The large fall in immigration outcomes for serious offenses that we
illustrated in Figure 1, thus, was not just driven by changes in the composition of arrests of
illegally present immigrants. Reassuringly, the magnitude of the correlation is indistinguishable
between above (in blue) and below (in red) median Democratic support, or any other county-
level characteristic that should only be a relevant determinant of local-level preferences. In
contrast, the correlation between minor and serious local efforts is much stronger for the more
Democratic counties compared to the less Democratic. As panel (b) illustrates, among counties
with the highest Republican support (in red), there is much more variation in enforcement
towards minor than towards serious offenses. This suggests that the most Republican-leaning
counties responded little to changes in federal enforcement targeted towards serious offenses.
The more elastic average best response for minor offenses cases compared to serious ones (see
Table 4) induced more variation in local immigration enforcement efforts across all types of
counties, as panel (b) in Figure 6 illustrates.


6.3       Patterns of Unobserved Heterogeneity
Now we discuss our findings related to the patterns of unobserved heterogeneity in immigra-
tion enforcement. Our measure of preference alignment between the federal and local levels,
π Hh /π H` , is strongly positively correlated with federal immigration enforcement efforts ξ. We
illustrate this in Figure 7 where we plot the unconditional scatterplots between both variables.
Panel (a) presents the scatterplot for minor offenses, and panel (b) for serious offenses. We

                                                                  38
                              Dependent Variable: County’s Best Response Slope
                                                   Minor Offenses          Serious Offenses
                                                      (1)        (2)        (3)      (4)       (5)         (6)
                    Constant                         -1.87      -2.05     -3.91     -0.83     -0.77      -0.93
                                                    (0.06)     (0.10)    (1.35)    (0.06)    (0.09)     (1.40)
                    Democratic party share           -0.17      -0.23     -1.20     -1.84     -1.81      -2.09
                                                    (0.42)     (0.42)    (0.58)    (0.40)    (0.41)     (0.57)
                    Hispanic share                               1.00      0.74               -0.31      -0.01
                                                               (0.41)    (0.53)              (0.34)     (0.45)
                    Undocumented share                                     3.15                         10.17
                                                                         (4.08)                         (4.23)
                    Log population                                         0.19                          -0.03
                                                                         (0.09)                         (0.09)
                    Bachelor degree share                                 -0.41                           1.71
                                                                         (0.91)                         (0.85)
                    Rural                                                 -0.50                          -0.60
                                                                         (0.25)                         (0.36)
                    Services share                                        -0.41                          -0.40
                                                                         (1.45)                         (1.47)
                    Log distance ICE office                               -0.02                           0.01
                                                                         (0.02)                         (0.02)
                    287(g) program                                         0.09                           0.03
                                                                         (0.23)                         (0.20)
                    R squared                       0.0009     0.005       0.03     0.02      0.02        0.05
                    Observations                                429                           201


Table 5: Heterogeneity in Local Best Responses.                            The table shows regression coefficients for the slopes of
the best response of  to ξ, separately for minor and serious offenses. The dependent variable in all specifications is the slope of
a regression of  on ξ and a constant for each county. Each observation corresponds to a county. Regressions are weighted by the
number of time periods used to estimate each slope. The explanatory variables include a constant and several county characteristics.
Log Population is taken from the 2010 Census. Undocumented share is an estimate of the number of unlawfully present individuals
in 2010 (its construction is described in Appendix C). Democratic party share is an average of the 2008 and 2012 Democratic
Presidential vote shares minus 50 percent, taken from David Leip’s Electoral Atlas. Bachelor degree share is measured as the
fraction of the adult population with at least a bachelor’s degree. Hispanic share is measured as the fraction of the population
who is hispanic. Services share is measured as the fraction of the employed population working in the services sector. Bachelor
degree share, Hispanic share, and Services share are taken from the 2006-2010 waves of the American Communities Survey. Rural
is a dummy variable indicating whether the county is considered non-metropolitan according to the National Center for Health
Statistics at the Center for Disease Control. Distance to ICE office is measured as the log of the number of miles between the
county centroid and the county centroid of the corresponding ICE district office seat, and computed directly by us. 287(g) Program
is a dummy variable indicating whether the county or any city in the county was ever part of the 287(g) program, taken from Steil
and Vasi (2014).




                                                                39
                                                                   .
                 (a) Federal enforcement                                              (b) Local enforcement

Figure 6: Margins of Immigration enforcement: Minor vs. Serious Offenses.                                             Panel (a) shows a
scatterplot of both dimensions of federal immigration enforcement effort (ξ s , ξ m ). Panel (b) shows a scatterplot of both dimensions
of local immigration enforcement effort (s , m ). Points in blue represent counties above median Democratic vote share. Points in
red represent counties below median Democratic vote share. The lines are best-fit regressions for each group.



confirm the robustness of this correlation in the first three columns of Table 6. There we report
panel regressions of federal efforts on preference alignment. The first column reports the un-
conditional relationship. In the second column we include county fixed effects, which slightly
increase the magnitude of the estimated coefficient. For minor offenses, the coefficient is 0.95
(s.e. = 0.01), while for serious offenses it is 0.9 (s.e. = 0.01).38 This is a key result of our
analysis. ICE is extremely good at targeting its enforcement efforts towards places where those
efforts will be highly effective (where the composition of the arrest pool is such that ICE can
expect a high degree of local-level cooperation). This is perhaps not as surprising considering
the informational advantage that ICE acquired under Secure Communities and its access to
massive law enforcement databases. At the same time, the strong willingness of the federal
level to direct efforts toward places where it expects collaboration also indicates that the local
level is a key gatekeeper for immigration enforcement.
    In columns 4 to 9 of Table 6 we complement these results showing that the negative un-
conditional correlation between local efforts  and preference alignment π Hh /π H` is completely
driven by federal immigration efforts ξ. Column 4 reports the unconditional regression coef-
ficient, which is negative and statistically significant. This is also the case after introducing
county fixed effects in columns 5-6. In columns 7-9, controlling for federal efforts ξ, the relation-
ship between local efforts and preference alignment vanishes. This reassures us that the best
responses we recovered above can be interpreted causally, and that our model of the immigration
enforcement pipeline is a good approximation to the actual operation of the process.
    We conclude this section examining whether our measure of preference alignment between
the federal and local levels, π Hh /π H` , is correlated with other observables. This allows us to
establish how some characteristics of the pool of unlawfully present arrestees shape the conflict
over immigration policy. In Table 6 we estimate county fixed-effects regressions of log(π Hh /π H` )
  38
       In column three we find no difference in this relationship before and after the change in ICE guidelines.


                                                                 40
                                                                  .
                    (a) Minor offenses                                                (b) Serious offenses

Figure 7: The Nature of Selection: Preference Alignment and Federal Immigration En-
forcement Efforts. The figure shows the relationship between log preference alignment and federal immigration enforcement
efforts, pooled across county-time periods. Panel (a) is for arrestees charged with minor (levels 2 and 3) offenses, and corresponds
to the results reported in column (1) of panel A in Table 6. Panel (b) is for arrestees charged with serious (level 1) offenses, and
corresponds to the results reported in column (1) of panel B in Table 6.



for minor and serious offenses cases on interactions between a post-guidelines dummy and either
the Democratic vote share, the Hispanic population share, and the share with a bachelors degree.
We then additionally include measures of three salient observed characteristics of the pool of
unlawfully present arrestees which vary at the county-semester level: the fraction of detainers
issued against Mexican nationals, the fraction issued against Central American nationals, and
the fraction issued against unlawfully present immigrants less than 30 years old. On average
Mexican and Central American nationals during our period of study constitute the bulk of
unlawfully present immigrants, with the fraction of Central Americans growing over time.39
Around 65 and 18 percent of all detainers in our sample period were issued against Mexicans
and Central Americans. Similarly, young individuals (less than 30 years old) constitute around
40 percent of all detainers in our estimation sample.40 Finally, because the composition of the
pool of unlawfully present arrestees could be affected by community collaboration with law
enforcement, we collected and use county-level data on the number of calls to 911 numbers as
a proxy for the willingness to collaborate with law enforcement.
    Columns 1 and 4 of Table 7 show that the more Democratic a county, the more misaligned
preferences over immigration enforcement became in the post-guidelines period. In contrast,
conditional on the Democratic vote share, the Hispanic share is a positive predictor of increased
preference alignment in the post-guidelines period. Columns 2 and 5 then show that higher
shares of Mexicans, Central Americans, and young individuals in the pool of arrestees, predict
falls in preference alignment, and thus, more conflict over immigration enforcement. These av-
erages, however, mask considerable heterogeneity; among the most Democratic counties, a large
  39
     Central American nationals include individuals from any of the following countries: Belize, El Salvador,
Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Panama.
  40
     Our detainer data also reports the sex of the unlawfully present arrestee. Because more than 95 percent of
them are males on average, we do not include this covariate in the analysis.



                                                                41
 Dependent Variable:                        Federal Effort ξ                                 Local Effort 
 Panel A: Minor Offenses                 (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)       (7)       (8)        (9)
 Log(π Hh /π H` )                       0.84       0.95       0.94       -1.10     -1.36      -1.30     -0.23     0.03        0.07
                                      (0.008)     (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.05)    (0.06)     (0.08)    (0.11)    (0.17)     (0.17)
 Log(π Hh /π H` ) × Guidelines                               0.014                            -0.08                          -0.06
                                                            (0.012)                          (0.06)                         (0.06)
 Federal effort ξ                                                                                     -1.02       -1.46      -1.46
                                                                                                     (0.11)      (0.17)     (0.17)
 County fixed effects                    No       Yes       Yes           No       Yes        Yes       No         Yes        Yes
 R squared                              0.79     0.93      0.93          0.20      0.46      0.46      0.23        0.48       0.48
 Observations                                    2348                                             2348
 Dependent Variable:                        Federal Effort ξ                                 Local Effort 
 Panel B: Serious Offenses               (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)       (7)       (8)         (9)
 Log(π Hh /π H` )                       0.83       0.90       0.89       -0.52     -0.65      -0.66     0.13      0.08        0.07
                                       (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.02)     (0.04)    (0.05)     (0.07)    (0.12)    (0.17)     (0.18)
 Log(π Hh /π H` ) × Guidelines                               0.020                           -0.003                          -0.02
                                                            (0.014)                          (0.05)                         (0.06)
 Federal effort ξ                                                                                     -0.77       -0.82      -0.82
                                                                                                     (0.14)      (0.19)     (0.19)
 County fixed effects                    No        Yes        Yes         No       Yes        Yes       No         Yes        Yes
 R squared                              0.86       0.94       0.94       0.13      0.36       0.36     0.16        0.38       0.38
 Observations                                      1101                                           1101


Table 6: Correlation between preference alignment and immigration efforts.                                            The table shows
regression coefficients for panel regressions of federal and local immigration enforcement efforts on the log of preference alignment
        H`
π Hh/π . Panel A reports results for cases involving minor offenses, while panel B reports results involving serious offenses. In
columns 1-3 the dependent variable is the federal effort ξ. In columns 4-9 the dependent variable is the local effort . Columns 2,
3, 5-9 include county-level fixed effects. Columns 3, 6, and 9 additionally include an interaction term between preference alignment
and a dummy for the period following the federal guidelines change. Columns 7-9 additionally include federal immigration efforts
ξ as a regressor. The reported standard errors are robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity.



share of Mexicans in the pool increases alignment. In contrast, in the most democratic coun-
ties large shares of Central American arrestees sharply decrease preference alignment. These
patterns could arise if, for example, while the federal level is relatively indifferent between oth-
erwise similar Mexicans and Central Americans, more Democratic counties are less willing to
remove Mexicans, and, at the same time, do not favor the rising presence of Central American
immigrants. We are unable to find a relationship between our proxy for community collabora-
tion and preference alignment; however, the sample size for which data on 911 calls is available
is small.


6.4       Counterfactual Exercise: No Change in the ICE Guidelines
Our empirical strategy allowed us to disentangle selection from federal and local enforcement
efforts, and to estimate the local response to the federal enforcement margin. Relying on these
results, we now asses the effects of the 2011 change in ICE enforcement priority guidelines by
implementing a counterfactual exercise exploring how the outcomes of immigration enforcement


                                                                42
                          Dependent Variable: Preference Alignment Log(π Hh /π H` )
                                                          Minor Offenses            Serious Offenses
                                                                (1)         (2)      (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)
            Dem. share × Guidelines                            -0.23      -0.25      6.20      -7.38     -7.19     12.55
                                                              (0.55)     (0.57)    (2.03)     (1.50)    (1.54)     (5.04)
            Hispanic share × Guidelines                         0.52       0.51     -1.51      4.09       3.80      -2.07
                                                              (0.50)     (0.50)    (1.34)     (1.18)    (1.20)     (3.31)
            Bachelor degree share × Guidelines                 -0.72      -0.72     -6.03      3.98       3.66      -9.74
                                                              (0.78)     (0.77)    (2.87)     (1.83)    (1.81)     (6.26)
            Mexican share                                                 -1.53                          -2.39
                                                                         (0.63)                         (1.02)
            Central American share                                        -4.81                          -5.64
                                                                         (0.69)                         (1.25)
            Young share                                                   -1.32                          -1.09
                                                                          (0.4)                         (0.76)
            Mexican share × Dem. share                                     6.71                         15.19
                                                                         (3.77)                         (6.11)
            Central American share × Dem. share                           -4.50                         -17.69
                                                                         (4.43)                         (6.33)
            Young share × Dem. share                                      -3.33                          -3.38
                                                                         (2.59)                         (3.72)
            911 calls                                                                0.55                           -1.56
                                                                                   (0.42)                          (1.20)
            911 calls × Dem. share                                                  -2.72                           4.12
                                                                                   (1.59)                          (4.51)
            R squared                                          0.02       0.03       0.07      0.04      0.05        0.15
            Observations                                       2348       2347       462       1101      1095        235


Table 7: Correlation between preference alignment and observable characteristics.                                                   The
table reports coefficients for county fixed effects models. The dependent variable in all specifications is log of preference alignment
π Hh /π Hl , for minor offenses cases in columns 1-3, and for serious offenses cases in columns 4-6. Each observation corresponds to a
county-semester. Beside the county fixed effects and semester fixed effects, the explanatory variables include county characteristics
interacted with the policy change as well as several time varying county-specific covariates. Democratic party share is an average
of the 2008 and 2012 Democratic Presidential vote shares minus 50 percent, taken from David Leip’s Electoral Atlas. Bachelor
degree share is measured as the fraction of the adult population with at least a bachelor’s degree. Hispanic share is measured as
the fraction of the population who is hispanic. Bachelor degree share and Hispanic share are taken from the 2006-2010 waves of
the American Communities Survey. Guidelines is a dummy variable indicating the semesters after the policy guidelines change
under the Obama administration. Mexican share is the fraction of detainers issued against unlawfully present Mexican nationals
in a given county-semester. Central American share is the fraction of detainers issued against unlawfully present Central American
nationals in a given county-semester. Young share is the fraction of detainers issued against unlawfully present immigrants less
than 30 years old. The Mexican, Central American and Young shares are taken from the TRAC detainers dataset. 911 calls is
the log of the total number of calls to the emergency number 911 at the county-year level. Standard errors are robust to arbitrary
heteroskedasticity.




                                                                 43
under Secure Communities would have evolved in the absence of a change in guidelines. Recall
that within our framework, the policy change manifests itself in two ways: first, changes in
preferences over the pool of arrestees (and in particular over our measure of preference align-
ment) reflect changes in ICE removal priorities. Second, the federal enforcement efforts, which
we have abstained from modeling, may have changed in response to the shock to the policy
environment. In fact, the underlying relationship between preference alignment π Hh /π H` and
federal efforts ξ may have changed in the post-guidelines period.
    Thus, our exercise consists in taking the recovered relationship between ξ and π Hh /π H`
across counties in the pre-guidelines period (by regressing ξ on π Hh /π H` ), and using it to pre-
dict the federal enforcement efforts ξˆ in the post-guidelines period that would have occurred
under the actual π Hh /π H` ’s, were the pre-guidelines regime still to hold. In this way we hold
selection constant. With these counterfactual federal efforts for the post-guidelines period we
then use the best responses for each county to predict the counterfactual local enforcement
efforts ˆ that would have been observed in response to these federal efforts.41 Armed with these
                         ˆ and using our parameter estimates, we recover the implied counter-
counterfactual ˆ’s and ξ’s,
factual enforcement probabilities {fˆ, ĝ, k̂, q̂ h , q̂ ` }. Finally, combining the preference alignments
recovered for all the post-guidelines periods with these counterfactual enforcement probabilities,
we recover the counterfactual immigration enforcement outcomes P(ICE Custody|Detainer),
P(Removal|ICE Custody, Detainer), and P(Removal|ICE Custody, No Detainer) using equa-
tions (3), (4), and (12).42
    In Figure 8 we present the results of this counterfactual exercise. Each subfigure plots
the time evolution of the cross-county distribution of one of the immigration enforcement out-
comes along the immigration enforcement pipeline. The top panel presents the plots for minor
offenses cases, while the bottom panel presents the plots for serious offenses cases. Panel
a illustrates a 5 percentage points across the board downward shift of the distribution of
P(ICE Custody|Detainer). In the absence of the guidelines, federal enforcement efforts ξ minor
are predicted to be higher for most counties (see the scatterplot in Figure B.4). Strategic
substitutability in the local best response of most counties implies that counties would have
cut back even further on local immigration enforcement towards minor offenses cases, resulting
in lower numbers of such `-type arrests being passed down into ICE custody after a detainer
issuance (g, on average, would have fallen considerably).
    The direct consequence of lower local collaboration with ICE can be gauged in panel b.
The distribution of P(Removal|ICE Custody, Detainer) shifts upwards by around 2 percentage
points. This increase in the overall probabilities of removal at the ICE custody stage following
  41                                                                 ˆ based on π Hh /π H` is purely predictive,
     Notice that while the first step where we obtain counterfactual ξ’s
                                                           ˆ is causal.
the second step that recovers counterfactual ˆ’s based on ξ’s
  42
     We cannot recover the baseline rates P(Detainer|Arrest) or P(ICE Custody|No Detainer) from equations
(2) and (11) of each track because we only observe π Hh /π H` but not π Hh and π H` separately.

                                                      44
               (a) P(ICE Custody|Detainer)                            (b) P(Removal|ICE Custody, Detainer)                       (c) P(Removal|ICE Custody, No Detainer)
45




               (d) P(ICE Custody|Detainer)                            (e) P(Removal|ICE Custody, Detainer)                       (f ) P(Removal|ICE Custody, No Detainer)

     Figure 8: Counterfactual Evolution of Immigration Enforcement Outcomes in the Absence of Guideline Changes.                                                              The figure
     plots the evolution over time of the distribution of immigration enforcement outcomes across counties. The distributions of outcomes predicted by the model are depicted in shades
     of blue. The distributions of counterfactual outcomes in the absence of guideline changes are depicted in shades of red. The lightest shade regions represent the 10th to 26th and
     74th to 90th quantiles. The intermediate shade regions represent the 26th to 42nd and 58th to 74th quantiles. The darkest shade region represents the 42nd to 58th quantiles. The
     top three panels depict the distributions for minor offenses cases. The bottom three panels depict the distributions for serious offenses cases.
a detainer issuance results from a selection effect that interacts with court-level preferences:
the weakening of local efforts means that the pool of arrestees that moves onto ICE custody
becomes selected towards more h types relative to ` types. Because on average q h > q ` (see
Table 3), the pool of unlawfully present immigrants facing the removal stage is composed of
people more likely be removed, making the conditional removal rate go up.43
    In contrast, the opposite pattern takes places along the direct track. Panel c illustrates that
the distribution of P(Removal|ICE Custody, No Detainer) shifts down by 3 to 4 percentage
points. This happens because along the direct track, higher federal enforcement efforts ξ minor
and lower local enforcement efforts minor both increase k (see Table 3), generating a selec-
tion effect over the pool of unlawfully present immigrants in ICE custody without a detainer
that shifts its composition towards relatively more `-types. Because q h > q ` , this pool is less
removable from the point of view of the courts.
    Under our counterfactual, outcomes for serious offenses cases behave differently, as the
bottom panels of Figure 8 illustrate. Panel d shows that the counterfactual distribution of
P(ICE Custody|Detainer), exhibits something close to a mean-preserving spread, of around a
fifth of a standard deviation of the predicted distribution. The increased variance under the
counterfactual results from mean reversion of our counterfactual federal enforcement efforts:
as panel b in Figure B.4 illustrates, county-periods with low predicted federal enforcement
have higher than average counterfactual federal enforcement, and vice-versa. As a result, the
local enforcement response is heterogeneous across counties: county-periods with relatively
low predicted federal enforcement see their counterfactual local enforcement fall, while county-
periods with relatively high predicted federal enforcement see their counterfactual local en-
forcement increase. On aggregate, these effects do not shift the counterfactual distribution of
P(ICE Custody|Detainer), but they do increase its variance. The magnitude of this spread,
however, is not as large because, as we reported in Table 4, the average best response slope for
serious offenses cases is considerably smaller than for minor offenses cases, leading to a more
nuanced response from the local level.
    Panel e then shows that along the detainer track, and relative to its predicted distribution
in the absence of guideline changes, an upward shift of around 4 percentage points in the
counterfactual distribution of P(Removal|ICE Custody, Detainer) takes place. This aggregate
shift results from how removal rates respond to changes in federal enforcement efforts, and
not from a systematic selection effect as was the case for minor offenses cases. In particular,
from Table 3, notice that for serious crimes cases, q ` is an increasing function, whereas q h is a
decreasing function of ξ serious . Thus, for counties that would have experienced increased federal
efforts, on average the consequent increase in `-type removals more than offsets the decrease
  43
     Of course, our counterfactual exercise supposes that court-level preferences remain unchanged in the absence
of the guideline changes.


                                                       46
in h-type removals. Analogously, for counties that would have experienced decreased federal
efforts, on average the consequent increase in h-type removals more than offsets the decrease in
`-type removals. Notice that the absence of guidelines would have magnified the local-federal
conflict over immigration enforcement in the following sense: places where the local level reacts
by weakening enforcement end up seeing the removal of relatively more ` types, precisely the
types of unlawfully present immigrants that the county would have preferred not be removed.
    Finally looking at panel f, along the direct track we observe a small downward shift of the
counterfactual distribution of P(Removal|ICE Custody, No Detainer), particularly in the last
semesters under consideration. Besides q ` and q h , k also changes with both federal and local
efforts. For serious offenses cases along the direct track, the local strategic substitutability
of most counties reinforces the effect that federal efforts have on the rate at which arrested
individuals move onto ICE custody (we estimate k to be increasing in ξ and decreasing in ).
As a result, in counties where q ` falls in response to weakened federal enforcement, k also falls
leading to relatively less ` types removed, and on aggregate a lower removal rate. Overall,
this exercise illustrates that even holding the distribution of the underlying pool of arrestees
constant, the selection forces induced by the immigration enforcement process under Secure
Communities interact with preferences at the court stage in such way that had the guidelines
not changed in 2011, the patterns of immigration enforcement outcomes resulting from the
equilibrium responses of the local level would have antagonized the average large and urban
county even more than we observed.


6.5     Model Validation: The California Trust Act
We conclude with a validation exercise for our model, based on California’s Trust Act. This
law passed in 2013 and came into effect on January 2014. It imposed stringent limits on local-
level collaboration with detainer requests from ICE. Under the Trust Act, local police are only
allowed to honor detainers falling into a specific list of relatively serious offenses.44 Our model
does not account for the passage of the Trust Act, giving us an opportunity to assess whether
our estimates of local immigration enforcement efforts do capture the patterns we expected
to have taken place under this law. Figure 9 presents the evolution over time of the median
of our estimated local immigration enforcement efforts , distinguishing between California
counties (in red) and all other counties (in blue) in our sample. The vertical line indicates the
activation of the Trust Act. As expected, local efforts over minor offenses cases fall sharply
for California counties at the time of the policy change, which we illustrate in panel a. The
Trust Act allowed local law enforcement to collaborate with ICE for the most serious offenses
  44
    For a detailed description of the Trust Act and the list of offenses for which the county officials are allowed
to cooperate with ICE, see California (2014).



                                                        47
                   (a) Minor offenses                                            (b) Serious offenses

Figure 9: Evolution of Local immigration enforcement efforts and the California Trust
Act. The figure plots the evolution over time of the median of the estimated local immigration enforcement efforts  across
counties. The red line depicts the median for California counties. The blue line depicts the median for all other US counties. The
vertical black line represents the semester of implementation of the Trust Act. Panel a reports the medians for minor offenses cases.
Panel b reports the medians for serious offenses cases. The number of California counties is 30 for minor offenses and 24 for serious
offenses. The number of non-California counties is 447 for minor offenses and 199 for serious offenses.



cases, however. Consistent with our expectations, panel b shows that for serious offenses cases,
California counties experienced a decline in local effort not dissimilar to what happened in the
rest of the US. We see these results as validating the ability of our model to capture accurately
the patterns of immigration enforcement under Secure Communities.


7       Concluding Remarks
In this paper we study immigration enforcement under the Secure Communities program, as a
window onto conflict over policy under federalism. We emphasize the importance of the strategic
interaction between local and federal levels, and propose an empirical strategy to disentangle the
roles of selection, local, and federal enforcement efforts, as drivers of the variation in immigration
enforcement outcomes. We do this by modeling in detail the immigration enforcement process.
Our strategy relies on rich data from the Secure Communities program, describing in detail
the pipeline taking unlawfully present immigrants arrested by local law enforcement onto ICE
custody and eventually deportation. We find strong evidence of strategic substitutabilities in
the response of the local level (county) to changes in federal level immigration enforcement,
particularly among the most Democratic counties. We also find that a large fraction of the
variation in the observed changes in the outcomes of immigration enforcement, such as the
rates at which individuals are handed into ICE custody and are deported, are driven by changes
in the composition of the pool of individuals entering into the enforcement pipeline. ICE is
very efficient at directing its enforcement efforts towards counties where it can expect local


                                                                48
collaboration (possibly because of the considerable informational advantage it acquired under
Secure Communities). In ongoing research we are exploring empirically the local-level trade-off
between law enforcement and immigration enforcement. Subsequent research should also be
directed at understanding the drivers of federal-level preferences over immigration outcomes.


References
Alsan, M. and C. Yang (2018): “Fear and the Safety Net: Evidence from Secure Communities,” NBER
  Working paper no. 24731.

Amuedo-Dorantes, C., T. Puttitanun, and A. Martinez-Donate (2013): “How do Tougher Immigra-
 tion Measures Impact Unauthorized Immigrants?” Institute for the Study of Labor Discussion Paper No.
 7134.

Besley, T. and A. Case (2000): “Unnatural Experiments? Estimating the Incidence of Endogenous Policies,”
  The Economic Journal, 110, 672–694.

Besley, T. and S. Coate (2003): “Centralized versus Decentralized Provision of Local Public Goods: A
  Political Economy Approach,” Journal of Public Economics, 87, 2611–2637.

Bohn, S., M. Freedman, and E. Owens (2015): “The Criminal Justice Response to Policy Interventions:
  Evidence from Immigration Reform,” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 105, 214–219.

Boushey, G. and A. Luedtke (2011): “Immigrants across the US Federal Laboratory: Explaining State-Level
  Innovation in Immigration Policy,” State Politics and Policy Quarterly, 11, 390–414.

California (2014): “Immigration Law -Criminal Justice and Immigration Enforcement -California Limits
  Local Entities’ Compliance with Immigration and Customs Enforcement Detainer Requests. - Trust Act,
  2013 Cal. Stat. 4650,” Harvard Law Review, 127, 2593–2600.

Cox, A. and T. Miles (2013): “Policing Immigration,” University of Chicago Law Review, 80, 87–136.

Davila, A., J. Pagán, and M. Grau (1999): “Immigration Reform, the INS, and the Distribution of Interior
  and Border Enforcement,” Public Choice, 99, 327–345.

Dee, T. and M. Murphy (2018): “Vanished Classmates: The Effects of Local Immigration Enforcement on
  Student Enrollment,” NBER Working paper no. 25080.

DeTocqueville, A. (2003 [1840]): Democracy in America, London, UK: Penguin Classics.

Fasani, F. (2009): “Deporting Undocumented Immigrants: The Role of Labor Demand Shocks,” Unpublished.

Freedman, M., E. Owens, and S. Bohn (2018): “Immigration, Employment Opportunities, and Criminal
  Behavior,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 10, 117–151.

Fu, C. and K. Wolpin (2018): “Structural Estimation of a Becker-Ehrlich Equilibrium Model of Crime:
  Allocating Police Across Cities to Reduce Crime,” Review of Economic Studies, 85, 2097–2138.

Garcı́a-Jimeno, C. (2016): “The Political Economy of Moral Conflict: An Empirical Study of Learning and
  Law Enforcement under Prohibition,” Econometrica, 84, 511–570.

Gulasekaram, P. and S. K. Ramakrishnan (2015): The New Immigration Federalism, New York, NY.:
  Cambridge University Press.

Guttin, A. (2010): “The Criminal Alien Program: Immigration Enforcement in Travis County, Texas,” Im-
  migration Policy Center Special Report.

                                                   49
Hill, L. and H. Johnson (2011): Unauthorized Immigrants in California: Estimates for Counties, San
  Francisco, CA: Public Policy Institute of California.

Hirota, H. (2013): “The Moment of Transition: State Officials, the Federal Government, and the Formation
  of American Immigration Policy,” The Journal of American History, 99, 1092–1108.

Hooghe, L. and G. Marks (2003): “Unraveling the Central State, but How? Types of Multi-level Gover-
  nance,” American Political Science Review, 97, 233–243.

Hutchinson, E. P. (2016): Legislative History of American Immigration Policy, 1798-1965, Philadelphia, PA:
  University of Pennsylvania Press.

ICE (2008): “Immigration and Customs Enforcement Standard Operating Procedures,” Government document,
  Washington D.C.

Imrohoroglu, A., A. Merlo, and P. Rupert (2000): “On the Political Economy of Income Redistribution
  and Crime,” International Economic Review, 41, 1–25.

Inman, R. and D. Rubinfeld (1997a): Perspectives on Public Choice, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
  Press, chap. The Political Economy of Federalism.

——— (1997b): “Rethinking Federalism,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 11, 43–64.

Johnson, J. (2014): “Secure Communities,” Memorandum. US Department of Homeland Security.

Kalhan, A. (2013): “Immigration Policing and Federalism Through the Lens of Technology, Surveillance, and
  Privacy,” Ohio State Law Journal, 74, 1106–1165.

Knight, B. (2002): “Endogenous Federal Grants and Crowd-out of State Government Spending: Theory and
  Evidence from the Federal Highway Aid Program,” The American Economic Review, 92, 71–92.

Lalive, R. and J. Zweimuller (2004): “Benefit Entitlement and Unemployment Duration. The Role of
  Policy Endogeneity,” Journal of Public Economics, 88, 2587–2616.

Lewis, P., D. M. Provine, and M. Varsanyi (2013): “Why do (Some) City Police Departments Enforce
  Federal Immigration Law? Political, Demographic, and Organizational Influences on Local Choices,” Journal
  of Public Administration Research and Theory, 23, 1–25.

Lewis, P. and K. Ramakrishnan (2007): “Police Practices in Immigrant-Destination Cities,” Urban Affairs
  Review, 42, 874–900.

Lockwood, B. (2002): “Distributive Politics and the Benefits of Decentralization,” Review of Economic Stud-
  ies, 69, 313–338.

Madison, J. (1788): Restrictions on the Authority of the Several States (Federalist Paper No. 44), U.S.
 Congress.

Manuel, K. (2012): “Immigration Detainers: Legal Issues,” Crs report for congress, Congressional Research
 Service, Washington D.C.

Mayda, A. M. (2006): “Who is Against Immigration? A Cross-Country Investigation of Individual Attitudes
 Toward Immigrants,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 88, 510–530.

Meyer, B. (1995): “Natural and Quasi-Natural Experiments in Economics,” Journal of Business and Economic
 Statistics, 13, 151–161.

Miles, T. and A. Cox (2014): “Does Immigration Enforcement Reduce Crime? Evidence from Secure
  Communities,” The Journal of Law and Economics, 57, 937–973.


                                                    50
Morton, J. (2011a): “Exercising Prosecutorial Discretion Consistent with the Civil Immigration Enforcement
 Priorities of the Agency for the Apprehension, Detention, and Removal of Aliens,” Memorandum 10075.1,
 US Immigration and Customs Enforcement.

——— (2011b): “Prosecutorial Discretion: Certain Victims, Witnesses, and Plaintiffs,” Memorandum 10076.1,
 US Immigration and Customs Enforcement.

Motomura, H. (2011): “The Discretion that Matters: Federal Immigration Enforcement, State and Local
 Arrests, and the Civil-Criminal Line,” UCLA Law Review, 58, 167–206.

Oates, W. (1999): “An Essay on Fiscal Federalism,” Journal of Economic Literature, 37, 1120–1149.

Passel, J. (2005): Estimates of the Size and Characteristics of the Undocumented Population, Washington
  D.C.: Pew Hispanic Center.

Pham, H. (2006): “The Constitutional Right Not to Cooperate?: Local Soveraignty and the Federal Immigra-
  tion Power,” University of Cincinnati Law Review, 74, 1374–1413.

Ramakrishnan, K. and P. Gulasekaram (2013): “The Importance of the Political in Immigration Feder-
  alism,” Arizona State Law Journal, 44, 1431–1488.

Reaves, B. (2010): Census of State and Local Law Enforcement Agencies, Washington D.C.: Bureau of Justice
  Statistics.

Rosenzweig, M. and K. Wolpin (1986): “Evaluating the Effects of Optimally Distributed Public Programs:
  Child Heath and Family Planning Interventions,” The American Economic Review, 76, 470–482.

Schmall, L. (2009): “ICE Effects: Federal Worksite Non-Enforcement of U.S. Immigration Laws, 2007-2008,”
  University of San Francisco Law Review, 44.

Steil, J. P. and I. B. Vasi (2014): “The New Immigration Contestation: Social Movements and Local
  Immigration Policy Makign in the United States, 2000-2011,” American Journal of Sociology, 119, 1104–
  1155.

Strumpf, K. and F. Oberholzer-Gee (2002): “Endogenous Policy Decentralization: Testing the Central
  Tenet of Economic Federalism,” Journal of Political Economy, 110, 1–36.

Thompson, D. (2018): “How Partisan is Local Law Enforcement? Evidence from Sheriff Cooperation with
  Immigration Authorities,” Unpublished.

Tiebout, C. (1956): “A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures,” Journal of Political Economy, 64, 416–424.

Treyger, E., A. Chalfin, and C. Loeffler (2014): “Immigration Enforcement, Policing, and Crime,”
  Criminology and Public Policy, 13, 285–322.

Tullock, G. (1969): “Federalism: Problems of Scale,” Public Choice, 6, 19–29.

Vargas, E. (2015): “Immigration Enforcement and Mixed-Status Families: The Effects of Risk of Deportation
  on Medicaid Use,” Child Youth Services Review, 57, 83–89.

Verini, J. (2012): “Obama’s Deportation Two Step,” .

Warren, R. and J. R. Warren (2012): “Unauthorized Immigration to the United States: Annual Estimates
 and Components of Change, by State, 1990 to 2010,” University of Minnesota.

Watson, T. (2014): “Inside the Refrigerator: Immigration Enforcement and Chilling Effects in Medicaid
 Participation,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6, 313–338.

Wooldrige, J. (2002): Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Zolberg, A. (2006): A Nation by Design: Immigration Policy in the Fashioning of America, Cambridge, MA:
  Harvard University Press.


                                                   51
A       Online Appendix A
A.1      Proof of Proposition 1
Given a vector of observables w = (x1 , x2 , x3 , y1 , y2 ), where x1 > x2 > x3 > 0 and y1 > y2 > 0, the following is
the exhaustive list of constraints on observed probabilities:

                         0<g<1                0<f <1               0 < q` < 1         0 < qh < 1
                         0<k<1                0 < vd < 1            0 < π H` < 1       0 < π Hh < 1

The immigration enforcement process also implies:

                                                          x3 − x2 q h
                                               g=                                                              (A.1)
                                                    x3 − x2 q ` − x1 (q h − q ` )


                                                     (x2 − x1 g)(y1 q h − y2 )
                                               k=                                                              (A.2)
                                                      (x1 − x2 )(y2 − y1 q ` )


                                                            (1 − x1 )(1 − g) y2 − y1 q `
                                                   
                                              1−f
                                     vd                 =                                                      (A.3)
                                               f               x2 − x1 g      qh − q`

    Beginning with g > 0, from equation (A.1) we have two possible cases:
    Case Ia:
                             x3 − x2 q h > 0 and x3 − x2 q ` − x1 (q h − q ` ) > 0, or
    Case Ib:
                                 x3 − x2 q h < 0 and x3 − x2 q ` − x1 (q h − q ` ) < 0.
    Under Case Ia,
                                              x3              x3        x1
                                     qh <        and q ` >         +         qh
                                              x2           x2 − x1   x1 − x2
    Under Case Ib,
                                              x3              x3        x1
                                     qh >        and q ` <         +         qh
                                              x2           x2 − x1   x1 − x2
    From g < 1, equation(A.1) implies two possible cases:
    Case IIa:
                               x3              x3         x1
                         qh <     and q ` >          +         q h and q h < q ` , or
                               x2           x2 − x1    x1 − x2
    Case IIb:
                                                  x3        x1
                                      q` <             +         q h and q h > q `
                                               x2 − x1   x1 − x2
    Now we turn to k > 0 which, together with equation (A.2) yields four possible cases:
    Case IIIa:
                          x2 − x1 g > 0 and y1 q h − y2 > 0 and y2 − y1 q ` > 0, or
    Case IIIb:
                             x2 − x1 g > 0 and y1 q h − y2 < 0 and y2 − y1 q ` < 0, or
    Case IIIc:
                             x2 − x1 g < 0 and y1 q h − y2 < 0 and y2 − y1 q ` > 0, or
    Case Illd:
                               x2 − x1 g < 0 and y1 q h − y2 > 0 and y2 − y1 q ` < 0.
    Under Case IIIa,
                                                x2           y2           y2
                                          g<       and q h >    and q ` <
                                                x1           y1           y1


                                                               52
     Under Case IIIb,
                                              x2           y2           y2
                                         g<      and q h <    and q ` >
                                              x1           y1           y1
     Under Case IIIc,
                                              x2           y2           y2
                                         g>      and q h <    and q ` <
                                              x1           y1           y1
     Under Case IIId,
                                              x2           y2           y2
                                         g>      and q h >    and q ` >
                                              x1           y1           y1
     From k < 1 together with equation (A.2), we have four cases:
     Case IVa: Same constraints as in Case IIIa, which imply

                                                 x2   x1 − x2 y2 − y1 q `
                                            g>      −
                                                 x1      x1 y1 q h − y2
where the second term in the right-hand side is positive.
   Case IVb: Same constraints as in Case IIIb, which imply

                                                 x2   x1 − x2 y2 − y1 q `
                                            g>      −
                                                 x1      x1 y1 q h − y2
where the second term in the right-hand side is positive.
   Case IVc: Same constraints as in Case IIIc, which imply

                                                 x2   x1 − x2 y2 − y1 q `
                                            g<      −
                                                 x1      x1 y1 q h − y2
where the second term in the right-hand side is negative.
   Case IVd: Same constraints as in Case IIId, which imply

                                                 x2   x1 − x2 y2 − y1 q `
                                            g<      −
                                                 x1      x1 y1 q h − y2
where the second term in the right-hand side is negative.
   Now we turn to equation (A.3). Together with 0 < f < 1 and 0 < v d < 1, it implies four possible cases:
   Case Va:
                                        x2            y2
                                    g<      and q ` <     and q h > q ` , or
                                        x1            y1
     Case Vb:
                                            x2           y2
                                       g<      and q ` >    and q h < q ` , or
                                            x1           y1
     Case Vc:
                                            x2           y2
                                       g>      and q ` >    and q h > q ` , or
                                            x1           y1
     Case Vd:
                                              x2           y2
                                         g>      and q ` <    and q h < q ` .
                                              x1           y1
     Collecting cases II, IV, and V, we have four possible regions in (q h , q ` ) space with corresponding ranges for
g:
     Region I:

                                                                        x1 − x2 y2 − y1 q ` x2
                                                                                         
                       h `          h     y2     `    y2           x2
                 I = (q , q , g) : q ∈ 0,      ,q ∈      ,1 ,g ∈      −                    ,
                                          y1          y1           x1      x1 y1 q h − y2 x1




                                                         53
       Region II:

                                                                               x1 − x2 y2 − y1 q `
                                                                                             
                    h `          h    y2      `    y2      h   `       x2 x2
             II = (q , q , g) : q ∈      ,1 ,q ∈      ,1 ,q > q ,g ∈     ,   −
                                      y1           y1                  x1 x1      x1 y1 q h − y2

       Region III:

                                                                                x1 − x2 y2 − y1 q `
                                                                                              
                    h `          h     y2      `     y2     h   `       x2 x2
            III = (q , q , g) : q ∈ 0,      , q ∈ 0,      ,q < q ,g ∈     ,   −
                                       y1            y1                 x1 x1      x1 y1 q h − y2

       Region IV:

                                                                                        x1 − x2 y2 − y1 q ` x2
                                                                                                         
                                                     y2                y2          x2
                   IV =    (q h , q ` , g) : q h ∈      , 1 , q ` ∈ 0,      ,g ∈      −                    ,
                                                     y1                y1          x1      x1 y1 q h − y2 x1

   Now we can turn to 0 < π H` < 1 and 0 < π Hh < 1. Together these imply that π Hh /π H` > 0. From
equation (8), it follows that
                                                 x2
                                             g<
                                                 x1
This rules out regions II and III.
    From equation (9), we have two cases:
    Case VIa:
                                                          x3           x3
                                                   q` <      and q h >    , or
                                                          x2           x2
       Case VIb:
                                                          x3           x3
                                                   q` >      and q h <    , or
                                                          x2           x2
       From equation (8), we have that
                                                       π Hh   y1 q ` − y2
                                                            =             k
                                                       π H`   y2 − y1 q h
which gives two other cases:
   Case VIIa:
                                                          y2          y2
                                                   q` >      and q h < , or
                                                          y1          y1
       Case VIIb:
                                                          y2          y2
                                                   q` <      and q h > , or
                                                          y1          y1
       Collecting cases VI and VII together, we have two regions for (q h , q ` ):
       Region R1:                                                                      
                                                          x3 y2                      x3 y2
                          R1 = (q h , q ` ) : q h < min     ,     , and q ` > max      ,
                                                          x2 y1                      x2 y1
       Region R2:                                                                            
                                                                 x3 y2                     x3 y2
                              R2 =    (q h , q ` ) : q h > max     ,     , and q ` < min     ,
                                                                 x2 y1                     x2 y1
       Notice that the constraints from Cases I and II become redundant relative to the regions defined by R1 and
R2 .
                                                                                                `
                                                                                 2 y2 −y1 q
    Since we have ruled out regions II and III, it follows that g > xx21 − x1x−x
                                                                               1   y1 q h −y2
                                                                                              . From equation (A.1), and
                        h   x3                `         h     `
g > 0, we have that if q < x2 , then x3 − x2 q − x1 (q − q ) > 0. In this case, after some algebra it follows that
g attains this lower bound for any
                                                       x1 y2 − x3 y1
                                                q` >                 .
                                                       y1 (x1 − x2 )
                      x3
Similarly, if q h >   x2 ,   then x3 − x2 q ` − x1 (q h − q ` ) < 0, in which case g attains this lower bound for any

                                                              x1 y2 − x3 y1
                                                       q` <                 .
                                                              y1 (x1 − x2 )

                                                                54
      This, together with R1 and R2 gives us
                                                                                     
                           h `     h         x3 y2          `        x3 y2 x1 y2 − x3 y1
                  R1 = (q , q ) : q < min      ,     , and q > max     , ,
                                             x2 y1                   x2 y1 y1 (x1 − x2 )

and                                                                                            
                                                     x3 y2                     x3 y2 x1 y2 − x3 y1
                  R2 =    (q h , q ` ) : q h > max     ,     , and q ` < min     , ,
                                                     x2 y1                     x2 y1 y1 (x1 − x2 )
so the identified set for (q h , q ` ) is given by R = R1 ∪ R2 . Notice that for any (q h , q ` ) ∈ R, the implied values
                                                                                                      `
                                                                                           2 y2 −y1 q
for g and k are always valid probabilities, and v d (1 − f )/f > 0, and g > xx12 − x1x−x1    y1 q h −y2
                                                                                                        .


A.2        Inference for the coefficients in equations (19) and (20)
In equations (19) and (20), ct and ξct are generated regressors because these residuals are recovered using not
the true (δ d , β f , β g ) coefficients from equations (17) and (18), but estimates of these coefficients. Thus, we
must account for the sampling variation induced by our use of estimates of ct and ξct on the variance of the
estimator for (β k , κ , κξ , β qτ , γ τ ). Our derivation closely follows (Wooldrige, 2002, p. 139-141). We present
below the derivation of the variance-covariance matrix for the OLS estimator of the coefficients in equation
(19) only. The corresponding derivation for the OLS estimator of the coefficients in equation (20) is analogous,
only simpler because while equation (19) has two generated regressors, equation (20) only has one generated
regressor. Consider the log-odds equation

                                              k̃ct = xc β k + κ ct + κξ ξct + ηct                                   (A.4)

with dim(xc ) = K, and re-write it as
                                                       k̃ct = x∗c β + ηct
                                          0
where x∗c ≡ [xc , ξct , ct ], and β ≡ [β k , κξ , κ ]0 . Using equations (18) and (21), we can now notice that x∗c =
F(zct , δ), where
                                                     F(zct , δ) = zct ∆(δ),
               0     0      0
                                             d ˜
where δ ≡ [δ d , −β f , −β g ], zct ≡ [xc , vct             d
                                                , f , g̃], vct  ≡ (0, ...1..., 0) is a vector of dimensions 1 × D where D is
the number of federal districts minus one that has a 1 in the column corresponding to the district that county
c belongs to, and
                                                           IK×K −β f −β g
                                                                                    
                                                          0D×1        δd      0D×1 
                                            ∆(δ) ≡       0
                                                                                     
                                                                        1        0 
                                                               0        0        1
                                                                                                 P
Define Tc as the number of time periods available for county c, and thus N ≡ c Tc as the total number of
                          √                                                           d0      f0          g0
observations. We have a N consistent estimator of δ, namely δ̂ = [δ̂ OLS , −β̂ OLS , −β̂ OLS ], where
                          " d #
                                       X 0 −1 X 0 
                            δ̂ OLS                                        ˜               0
                               f     =        xcF xF   c            xF c f ct ,        xF      d
                                                                                         c ≡ [vct , xc ],
                            β̂ OLS

and                                                                    −1 X
                                              g
                                                      X                                 
                                          β̂ OLS =           x0c xc              x0c g̃ct .

We do not observe the x∗c because we do not observe δ. However, we have a consistent estimate of δ, namely
δ̂, so we can compute
                                             x̂∗c = F(zct , δ̂).
It is these x̂∗c we use to estimate β in the regression equation for k̃ct . Our OLS estimator for β is
                                                     X      0
                                                                      −1 X      0
                                                                                           
                                              β̂ =        x̂∗c x̂∗c            x̂∗c k̃ct



                                                                  55
We can re-write equation (A.4) as
                                                       k̃ct = x̂∗c β + (x∗c − x̂∗c )β + ηct
and replace it above to obtain
                                                  X      0
                                                                   −1 X           0                     X      0
                                                                                                                         
                                 β̂ = β +              x̂∗c x̂∗c                  x̂∗c (x∗c − x̂∗c )β +       x̂∗c ηct

Thus,
                √                    X 0 −1          X 0                           X 0 
                    N (β̂ − β) = N −1  x̂∗c x̂∗c N −1/2  x̂∗c (x∗c − x̂∗c )β + N −1/2  x̂∗c ηct

Notice that                                                           X       0                   0
                                                   Ĉ ≡ N −1               x̂∗c x̂∗c →p E[x̂∗c x̂∗c ]
and                                                    X        0                       X     0
                                          N −1/2              x̂∗c ηct = N −1/2             x∗c ηct + op (1)
The remaining term can be expressed as
                     X 0                      h     X                          i√
              N −1/2   x̂∗c (x∗c − x̂∗c )β = − N −1   (β ⊗ x∗c )0 ∇δ F(zct , δ) N (δ̂ − δ) + op (1)

Defining G ≡ E[(β ⊗ x∗c )0 ∇δ F(zct , δ)], we have that
                                        X 0                         √
                               N −1/2       x̂∗c (x∗c − x̂∗c )β = −G N (δ̂ − δ) + op (1)
                    √
Finally, the term    N (δ̂ − δ) can be expressed as
                                    d d
                                                
        √            √  f         δ̂ OLS
                                      δ                                                                                0
                                                     A−1
                                                                                                                        
                                        f  −1/2      f                                              0(D+K)×K X −xF ct ξct + o (1)
         N (δ̂ − δ) = N β̂       − β =N                                                                                     p
                                                                                                         A−1
                                    
                             OLS                   0K×(D+K)                                                       x0ct ct
                                 
                             g          g                                                                 g
                          β̂          β
                                      OLS

                            0
                 −1                               −1
                         xF   F
                    P                                P
where Af ≡ (N             ct xct ) and Ag ≡ (N          xct xct ). Thus, we can define
                                                                                    0
                                                     A−1
                                                                                      
                                                      f          0(D+K)×K −xF     ct ξct
                                      rct (δ) ≡
                                                 0K×(D+K)           A−1
                                                                     g         x0ct ct

and hence                       √                 n       Xh 0                 io
                                 N (β̂ − β) = C −1 N −1/2   x∗ct ηct − Grct (δ) + op (1)

The Central Limit Theorem implies that
                                    √
                                      N (β̂ − β) ∼ N 0, C−1 MC−1
                                                                 

                     0
where M ≡ Var(x∗ct ηct −Grct (δ)). A consistent estimator for this asymptotic variance is given by (Ĉ−1 M̂Ĉ−1 )/N ,
where                                       X 0                           0
                                 M̂ = N −1     (x̂∗ct η̂ct − Ĝr̂ct )(x̂∗ct η̂ct − Ĝr̂ct )0 ,
                                                 X
                                      Ĝ = N −1        (β̂ ⊗ x̂∗ct )0 ∇δ F(zct , δ̂),

                                                                      r̂ct = rct (δ̂),
and
                                                                    η̂ct = k̃ − x̂∗ct β̂.




                                                                            56
B       Online Appendix B: Additional Figures and Tables




Figure B.1: County Rollout of Secure Communities Activation.                                  The figure shows the yearly (solid
line) and cumulative (dashed line) number of counties activated for Secure Communities (source: Cox and Miles (2013)).




                                                              57
58




     Figure B.2: Immigration and Customs Enforcement Federal Immigration Districts.         The figure shows the geographic boundaries of the 24
     ICE federal immigration districts and their corresponding headquarters. Source: ICE.
                                                                                                                                                                          va
59




     Figure B.3: Counties in the Model Estimation Sample.                 The map highlights the counties (in lavender) and the cbsa’s (in blue) included in the sample
     used to estimate the model of the immigration enforcement process.
                     (a) Minor offenses                                                 (b) Serious offenses

Figure B.4: Scatterplot of Actual vs Counterfactual Federal Efforts.                                     Panel (a) shows a scatterplot
of predicted (x-axis) and counterfactual (y-axis) federal immigration enforcement efforts ξ m for arrestees charged with minor (levels
2-4) offenses. Panel (b) shows a scatterplot of predicted (x-axis) and counterfactual (y-axis) federal immigration enforcement efforts
ξ s for arrestees charged with serious (level 1) offenses. The counterfactual exercise simulates no federal policy guidelines change
after 2011-II.




                                                                 60
                     Panel A:                        All counties above median undocumented share
                                                     Mean Std. dev.       Min.    Median   Max.
                     Log population                  10.9       1.43       6.66     10.7    16.1
                     Undocumented share              0.017     0.018     0.0028    0.011    0.14
                     Hispanic share                  0.12       0.15     0.00023   0.063    0.96
                     Bachelor degree share           0.21      0.100      0.037     0.18    0.71
                     Democratic party share          0.41       0.15      0.081     0.40    0.92
                     Rural                            0.52      0.50        0        1        1
                     Services share                  0.59      0.084       0.28     0.59    0.90
                     Log distance ICE office         4.87       1.85      -9.97    5.18     6.71
                     287(g) Program                  0.029      0.17        0        0        1
                     Observations                                         1547

                     Panel B:                            Counties in the model estimation sample
                                                     Mean Std. dev.        Min.    Median    Max.
                     Log population                  11.8       1.25        8.13     11.8     16.1
                     Undocumented share              0.022     0.020      0.0028    0.016     0.14
                     Hispanic share                  0.16       0.17       0.015    0.093     0.96
                     Bachelor degree share           0.24       0.10       0.075     0.22     0.70
                     Democratic party share          0.43       0.15       0.081     0.42     0.89
                     Rural                            0.28      0.45         0        0         1
                     Services share                  0.62      0.079       0.36      0.62     0.88
                     Log distance ICE office         4.57       2.46       -9.97    5.06      6.65
                     287(g) Program                  0.069      0.25         0        0         1
                     Observations                                           566


Table B.1: Descriptive Statistics for the County Sample.                                   The table presents summary statistics
of the county characteristics of our sample of counties. Panel A reports summary statistics for all counties with undocumented
population above median. Panel B reports summary statistics for all counties above median undocumented population that satisfy
the conditions required for estimation of the immigration enforcement process model. Log Population is taken from the 2010
Census. Undocumented share is an estimate of the number of unlawfully present individuals in 2010 (its construction is described
in Appendix C). Democratic party share is an average of the 2008 and 2012 Democratic Presidential vote shares, taken from David
Leip’s Electoral Atlas. Bachelor degree share is measured as the fraction of the adult population with at least a bachelor’s degree.
Hispanic share is measured as the fraction of the population who is hispanic. Services share is measured as the fraction of the
employed population working in the services sector. Bachelor degree share, Hispanic share, and Services share are taken from the
2006-2010 waves of the American Communities Survey. Rural is a dummy variable indicating whether the county is considered
non-metropolitan according to the National Center for Health Statistics at the Center for Disease Control. Distance to ICE office is
measured as the log of the number of miles between the county centroid and the county centroid of the corresponding ICE district
office seat, and computed directly by us. 287(g) Program is a dummy variable indicating whether the county or any city in the
county was ever part of the 287(g) program, taken from Steil and Vasi (2014).




                                                                61
                                   Panel A:                     Minor Offenses
                                                    ξ              ζl     ζh       π Hh /π H`
                                   ξ              1.00
                                                -0.49    1.00
                                   ζl             0.00    0.04        1.00
                                   ζh             0.00    -0.05      -0.12   1.00
                                   π Hh /π H`     0.36    -0.37      -0.15   0.13      1.00

                                   Panel B:                     Serious Offenses
                                   ξ              1.00
                                                -0.40    1.00
                                   ζl             0.00    -0.05      1.00
                                   ζh             0.00    -0.12      -0.00   1.00
                                   π Hh /π H`     0.33    -0.44      -0.05   0.15      1.00


Table B.2: Correlation Matrix of Enforcement Efforts and Preference Alignment.                                                 The
table shows the correlation matrix of selected enforcement variables. Panel A shows the correlation coefficients for minor offenses
while panel B shows the coefficients for serious offenses.




                                                                62
                                                   Minor offenses
             Panel A:                                     Pre-Policy Change (2009-I – 2011-I)
                                                   Mean Std. dev. Min. Median Max.                              Obs.
             x1   =   P(detainer)                   0.26      0.17      0      0.24      1                      1110
             x2   =   P(ICE custody, detainer)       0.11     0.12      0     0.076      1                      1025
             x3   =   P(removal, detainer)          0.064     0.10      0     0.020      1                       936
             y1   =   P(ICE custody | no detainer)   0.22     0.22      0      0.15      1                      1098
             y2   =   P(removal | no detainer)       0.17     0.21      0      0.10      1                       979

             Panel B:                                             Post-Policy Change (2011-II – 2014-II)
                                                          Mean      Std. dev. Min. Median Max. Obs.
             x1   =   P(detainer)                         0.23         0.17      0      0.19       1     4474
             x2   =   P(ICE custody, detainer)            0.085        0.11      0      0.054      1     4324
             x3   =   P(removal, detainer)                0.054       0.075      0      0.029      1     3866
             y1   =   P(ICE custody | no detainer)         0.23        0.22      0       0.16      1     4449
             y2   =   P(removal | no detainer)             0.18        0.20      0       0.11      1     4312

                                               Serious offenses
             Panel C:                                   Pre-Policy Change (2009-I – 2011-I)
                                                Mean Std. dev. Min. Median Max.                                 Obs.
             x1 = P(detainer)                    0.29       0.25      0      0.23      1                        750
             x2 = P(ICE custody, detainer)       0.20       0.20      0      0.14      1                        634
             x3 = P(removal, detainer)          0.083       0.13      0     0.034      1                        584
             y1 = P(ICE custody | no detainer)   0.40       0.33      0      0.32      1                        716
             y2 = P(removal | no detainer)       0.33       0.32      0      0.23      1                        621

             Panel D:                                             Post-Policy Change (2011-II – 2014-II)
                                                          Mean      Std. dev. Min. Median Max. Obs.
             x1   =   P(detainer)                         0.19         0.16      0      0.15       1     2559
             x2   =   P(ICE custody, detainer)            0.092        0.11      0      0.062      1     2392
             x3   =   P(removal, detainer)                0.051       0.071      0      0.028    0.67 2143
             y1   =   P(ICE custody | no detainer)         0.24        0.21      0       0.18      1     2539
             y2   =   P(removal | no detainer)             0.19        0.20      0       0.13      1     2454


Table B.3: Immigration Enforcement Pipeline: Conditional Probabilities.                                          The table presents
summary statistics for the conditional probabilities related to the immigration enforcement pipeline under Secure Communities,
for the sample of observations used for estimation. We report conditional probabilities at the county-semester level of observation.
All variables in panel A and B refer to minor offenses (level 2-4 under ICE’s classification). All variables in panel C and D refer
to serious offenses (level 1 under ICE’s classification). Panels A and C report summary statistics from 2009-I to 2011-I (before the
June 2011 policy guidelines change). Panels B and D report summary statistics from 2011-II to 2014-II (after the June 2011 policy
guidelines change).




                                                                63
                                                          f          g            k          ql          qh
                                                         (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)         (5)
                       Log population                    0.44      -0.09       -0.59       -0.09        0.17
                                                       (0.11)     (0.20)      (2.12)      (0.65)      (0.62)
                       Undocumented share                9.08      -7.57      -28.73       -9.70       5.95
                                                       (6.94)    (11.24)     (14.30)     (15.17)     (13.28)
                       Hispanic share                    2.74      -0.09        0.33        1.38        0.35
                                                       (1.10)     (1.48)      (3.26)      (2.51)      (2.24)
                       Bachelor degree share             0.78      1.67         1.58        0.07       -0.96
                                                       (1.19)     (2.50)      (3.41)      (3.16)      (3.07)
                       Rural                            -0.38      -0.13        0.48        0.01        0.16
                                                       (0.28)     (0.70)      (2.20)      (1.05)      (0.94)
                       Services share                   -0.53      -1.53       -1.18       1.72         0.64
                                                       (2.03)     (3.82)      (5.06)      (5.00)      (4.46)
                       Democratic party share           -1.28      -1.30        0.42       -2.22       -0.19
                                                       (0.85)     (1.49)      (2.83)      (2.09)      (1.90)
                       Log distance ICE office          0.14       -0.10       -0.11      0.005       0.006
                                                       (0.02)     (0.04)      (2.11)     (0.586)     (0.586)
                       287(g) program                   0.59        1.74       -1.49       -0.82        1.09
                                                       (0.33)     (0.56)      (2.22)      (0.94)      (0.98)
                       Observations                                             2348


Table B.4: Coefficients for the logistic regressions of the enforcement probabilities. Minor
Offenses. The table reports the β coefficients for the logistic regressions in equations (17)-(20) for minor offenses. Democratic
party share is an average of the 2008 and 2012 Democratic Presidential vote shares minus 50 percent, taken from David Leip’s
Electoral Atlas. Bachelor degree share is measured as the fraction of the adult population with at least a bachelor’s degree. Hispanic
share is measured as the fraction of the population who is hispanic. Bachelor degree share and Hispanic share are taken from the
2006-2010 waves of the American Communities Survey. Guidelines is a dummy variable indicating the semesters after the policy
guidelines change under the Obama administration. Mexican share is the fraction of detainers issued against unlawfully present
Mexican nationals in a given county-semester. Central American share is the fraction of detainers issued against unlawfully present
Central American nationals in a given county-semester. Young share is the fraction of detainers issued against unlawfully present
immigrants less than 30 years old. The Mexican, Central American and Young shares are taken from the TRAC detainers dataset.
911 calls is the log of the total number of calls to the emergency number 911 at the county-year level. Standard errors are robust
to arbitrary heteroskedasticity.




                                                                 64
                                                         f           g            k         ql          qh
                                                        (1)         (2)          (3)       (4)         (5)
                      Log population                    1.08       -0.09       -1.08      -0.10        0.19
                                                      (0.28)      (0.33)      (7.30)     (1.04)      (1.00)
                      Undocumented share              18.33       35.48       -63.46     -14.21      31.17
                                                     (17.19)     (17.48)     (50.32)    (20.97)     (20.78)
                      Hispanic share                   -0.06       -0.61        3.86     0.005        0.68
                                                      (2.32)      (2.31)     (10.19)    (2.594)      (2.31)
                      Bachelor degree share             0.24       2.70         0.50      -0.57       0.59
                                                      (3.13)      (4.39)     (10.79)     (4.40)      (3.23)
                      Rural                            -0.10       -0.77       -1.96      -1.20       -0.14
                                                      (1.21)      (1.79)      (7.75)     (2.03)      (1.84)
                      Services share                   -2.21       -8.03        3.43       2.29       -3.48
                                                      (5.43)      (6.47)     (17.03)     (7.01)      (5.20)
                      Democratic party share           -7.72       -6.71        8.75      -0.66       -1.45
                                                      (2.12)      (2.61)      (9.20)     (2.98)      (2.28)
                      Log distance ICE office          0.09       0.003        -0.10     0.005        0.02
                                                      (0.04)     (0.075)      (7.27)    (0.972)      (0.97)
                      287(g) program                   -2.91       -0.09       1.98       -0.30        1.00
                                                      (0.67)      (0.79)      (7.47)     (1.29)      (1.28)
                      Observations                                             1101


Table B.5: Coefficients for the logistic regressions of the enforcement probabilities. Se-
rious Offenses. The table reports the β coefficients for the logistic regressions in equations (17)-(20) for serious offenses.
Democratic party share is an average of the 2008 and 2012 Democratic Presidential vote shares minus 50 percent, taken from David
Leip’s Electoral Atlas. Bachelor degree share is measured as the fraction of the adult population with at least a bachelor’s degree.
Hispanic share is measured as the fraction of the population who is hispanic. Bachelor degree share and Hispanic share are taken
from the 2006-2010 waves of the American Communities Survey. Guidelines is a dummy variable indicating the semesters after
the policy guidelines change under the Obama administration. Mexican share is the fraction of detainers issued against unlawfully
present Mexican nationals in a given county-semester. Central American share is the fraction of detainers issued against unlawfully
present Central American nationals in a given county-semester. Young share is the fraction of detainers issued against unlawfully
present immigrants less than 30 years old. The Mexican, Central American and Young shares are taken from the TRAC detainers
dataset. 911 calls is the log of the total number of calls to the emergency number 911 at the county-year level. Standard errors are
robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity.




                                                                65
C       Online Appendix C: Construction of Variables
C.1      Undocumented Share
We use different sources to construct estimates of the undocumented population at the county level. Warren and
Warren (2012), Passel (2005) and the Department of Homeland Security provide estimates of the undocumented
population at the state level for different years and use a residual method that combine the number of people
entered in the US and the number of non citizens from Census and other survey data. Estimates at substate
level are almost nonexistent. One exception is Hill and Johnson (2011), who use information from tax returns
to estimate the undocumented population at the county and at the zip-code levels in California. Since 1996,
unauthorized immigrants, who lack social security numbers, have been allowed to file federal tax returns using
a unique identifier, the Individual Taxpayer Identification Number, or ITIN. Hill and Johnson (2011) show that
this measure is highly correlated with the estimates of undocumented population at the state level. This is not
surprising; although many undocumented immigrants lack a social security number, they still have an incentive
to file taxes in order to collect tax refunds. Our preferred measure of the undocumented population combines
the number of Hispanic non citizens from the ACS, the state level estimates from Warren and Warren (2012),
and the number of ITIN filers.
                                                               hisp noncitizenscounty
                                                                                                      
                                                          1                              IT INcounty
         undocumentedcounty = undocumentedstate2010 ∗                                 +
                                                          2 hisp noncitizensstate2010   IT INstate2010

C.2      Consistency between Model and Data
C.2.1     Assigning ICE Arrests to Detainer or Direct Track
Secure Communities data on ICE arrests (custodies) do not have information on whether a detainer was issued
or not. To identify custodies from detainers, we use detainers data from TRAC on the universe of detainers,
which include detainers on SC as well as other detainers. TRAC detainers data include information on whether
the individual ended up in ICE custody and we can apply the custody-detainer ratio to the SC detainers to
recover the number of custodies from SC detainers under the assumption that SC detainers and overall detainers
have a similar composition. To avoid inconsistencies in the arrests and removals data between both sources
(TRAC and Secure Communities), we define p as the constant such that C = Dp + (M − D)p = M p, where
C is ICE custodies, D is detainers and M is local arrests. p is the probability that an immigrant is taken into
ICE custody if the probability is the same along the detainer and the direct tracks. It follows that
                                                                           
                                               M −D                        D
                                 C =D p+                +(M − D) p − 
                                                  M                        M
                                        |      {z      }            |   {z    }
                                                p1                        p2

. Now,  allows the probabilities to differ across tracks, while keeping them consistent with the observed C. The
idea is to make  increasing in the custody-detainer ratio from TRAC: s ≡ C|D     trac
                                                                                Dtrac . Using the restrictions that
p1 , p2 ∈ [0, 1] we can recover a lower bound  and an upper bound . Additionally, we can impose the restrictions
R|D ≤ C|D and R|noD ≤ C|noD to construct the two bounds for . Then, we can set  = (1 − s) + s where
the lower bound is  = max{−C/(M − D), −(M − C)/D, −(C − R|D ∗ M/D)/(M − D)} and the upper bound
is  = min{C/D, (M − C)/(M − D), C/D − M ∗ R|noD/(D ∗ (M − D))}.

C.2.2     Consolidating Counties into CBSA
Our empirical strategy puts significant demands on the data. In particular, we need positive counts at each step
of the deportation process. The number of counties that satisfy these requirements is limited (650 in the sample
for minor offenses). In an effort to work with a larger sample, we group neighboring counties not in the initial
sample that fall into core-based statistical areas (CBSA), a census definition that includes both metropolitan
statistical areas and micropolitan areas. We are able to add 19 CBSA that satisfy the requirements for our
estimation strategy, assigning them covariate values computed as weighted averages of the covariates across
counties within each of these CBSA’s. Figure B.3, illustrates in dark blue the CBSA’s in our sample.



                                                        66
