                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     IMPLICATIONS OF LABOR MARKET FRICTIONS FOR RISK AVERSION AND
                             RISK PREMIA

                                        Eric T. Swanson

                                      Working Paper 25764
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25764


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2019




I thank Andrew Ang, Carol Bertaut, Ian Dew-Becker, Jesús Fernández-Villaverde, Kevin Hasker,
Bart Hobijn, SungJun Huh, Ivan Jaccard, Dirk Krueger, Pascal Michaillat, Ayşegül Şahin, and
seminar participants at the University of Oslo, Bilkent University, SITE Summer Workshop on
Labor and Finance, and Society for Economic Dynamics Meetings for helpful discussions,
comments, and suggestions. The views expressed in this paper, and all errors and omissions,
should be regarded as those solely of the author, and are not necessarily those of the individuals
listed above, nor of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Eric T. Swanson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Implications of Labor Market Frictions for Risk Aversion and Risk Premia
Eric T. Swanson
NBER Working Paper No. 25764
April 2019
JEL No. D81,E24,E44,G12

                                         ABSTRACT

A flexible labor margin allows households to absorb shocks to asset values with changes in hours
worked as well as changes in consumption. This ability to partially offset wealth shocks by
varying hours of work can significantly alter the household’s attitudes toward risk, as shown in
Swanson (2012). In this paper, I analyze how frictional labor markets affect that analysis.
Household risk aversion (as measured by willingness to pay to avoid a wealth shock) is higher: 1)
in countries with more frictional labor markets, 2) in recessions, and 3) for households that have
more difficulty finding a job. These predictions are consistent with empirical evidence from a
variety of sources. Quantitatively, I show that labor market frictions in Europe are large enough
to play a substantial contributing role to risk aversion in those countries. Nevertheless, labor
markets in the U.S. and Europe are sufficiently flexible that risk aversion is much closer to the
frictionless benchmark in Swanson (2012) than to traditional measures that assume labor is fixed.


Eric T. Swanson
Department of Economics
University of California at Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
and NBER
eric.swanson@uci.edu
                                                                                                                  1

1. Introduction

A main goal of macro-ﬁnance is to bring macroeconomic models into agreement with basic asset
pricing facts, such as the equity premium.1 In asset pricing, a key parameter is risk aversion, the
compensation households require to hold a risky payoﬀ.2 At the same time, standard macroeco-
nomic models allow households to vary their labor supply endogenously. A signiﬁcant challenge
in macro-ﬁnance research, then, is that traditional studies of risk aversion assume that household
labor is exogenously ﬁxed.3
      Swanson (2012) addresses this problem when households face a frictionless labor market.
In the present paper, I re-examine this question in a frictional labor market, as in Mortensen and
Pissarides (1994). When the labor market is frictional, the household’s ability to partially insure
itself from asset value ﬂuctuations by varying hours of work is reduced.
      A simple example helps to illustrate the importance of the labor market environment on
the household’s attitudes toward risk. Suppose that the household has period utility function
u(ct , lt ) = c1−γ
               t  /(1− γ) − ηlt , where ct denotes consumption, lt hours of work, and γ, η > 0. If
labor lt is exogenously ﬁxed, then the household’s coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion is given
by the usual −c u11 /u1 = γ. However, when labor is ﬂexible and labor markets are frictionless,
the household optimally chooses to insure itself from asset value ﬂuctuations by varying hours
of work rather than consumption, resulting in a coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion that is zero
(Swanson, 2012)—in other words, the household is essentially risk neutral in a frictionless labor
market because it optimally varies its labor supply in response to a shock to asset values and is
clearly risk-neutral with respect to variations in hours.4 When labor markets are frictional rather
than frictionless, the household’s risk aversion lies somewhere in between these two extremes,
because its ability to self-insure lies somewhere in between. In this paper, I ask the interesting
question, Where in between these two extremes does household risk aversion lie, and how much
  1
    For example, Tallarini (2000), Boldrin, Christiano, and Fisher (2001), Uhlig (2007), Backus, Routledge, and
Zin (2008), Rudebusch and Swanson (2008, 2012), Van Binsbergen et al. (2012), Palomino (2012), Andreasen
(2012a, b), Gourio (2012, 2013), Ai, Croce, and Li (2013), Croce (2014), Dew-Becker (2014), Kung (2015), Ai,
Croce, Diercks, and Li (2018), and Swanson (2019) all consider asset pricing in dynamic macroeconomic models
with a variable labor margin.
  2
     Throughout this paper, I deﬁne a household’s coeﬃcient of (absolute or relative) risk aversion in terms of its
willingness to pay to avoid a wealth gamble. See Section 1.1 and Section 3, below for additonal discussion.
  3
    For example, Arrow (1965) and Pratt (1964) deﬁne absolute and relative risk aversion, −u (c)/u (c) and
−c u (c)/u (c), in a static model with a single consumption good (and no labor).
  4
     This example is extreme, due to the linearity of hours in the household’s preferences. More generally, when
u(ct , lt ) = c1−γ
               t   /(1 − γ) − ηlt1+χ /(1 + χ), Swanson (2012) shows that risk aversion is given by (γ −1 + χ−1 )−1 ,
a combination of the parameters on the consumption and labor margins, reﬂecting that the household absorbs
shocks to asset values along both margins.
                                                                                                           2

does risk aversion vary for diﬀerent levels of labor market frictions?
      To answer this question, I derive closed-form expressions for risk aversion when labor mar-
kets are frictional rather than ﬁxed (the traditional case) or frictionless (as in Swanson, 2012).
I show how these closed-form expressions depend on the ratio of labor market ﬂow rates to the
household’s discount rate. Intuitively, labor market frictions only delay, and do not prevent, the
household’s labor adjustment; thus, higher ﬂow rates or a lower discount rate imply that frictions
are less of a concern to the household because this delay is either shorter or less costly.
      The closed-form expressions for risk aversion I derive here have three main implications:
First, risk aversion is higher for households in more frictional labor markets (e.g., Continental
Europe). Second, risk aversion is higher in recessions, when unemployment is higher and it is
more diﬃcult to adjust employment. Third, risk aversion is higher for households that are less
likely to ﬁnd jobs (e.g., retirees, the less educated, and households suﬀering from discrimination).
In all of these cases, it is more diﬃcult for the household to vary its hours in response to shocks,
and so more of the burden of asset ﬂuctuations passes through to consumption.
      These model predictions are consistent with empirical evidence from a variety of sources.
Guiso, Haliassos, and Jappelli (2002) and Ynesta (2008) document that the portfolio holdings
of European households are substantially more conservative than those of U.S. households, con-
sistent with the ﬁrst prediction. Consistent with the second prediction, Guiso, Sapienza, and
Zingales (2017) show that survey estimates of household risk aversion increased substantially
during the 2008–09 recession. Moreover, Fama and French (1989), Cooper and Priestley (2009),
and others show that risk premia on stocks, bonds, and other ﬁnancial assets tend to be higher
in recessions.5 Consistent with the third prediction, the portfolios of households near retirement
are more conservative than those of younger households (Guiso et al., 2002). Although some of
these empirical observations may be driven by other factors as well, diﬀerences in labor market
frictions may play an important contributing role.
      I investigate the quantitative importance of these predictions by calibrating the model’s
parameters to the U.S. and several European countries. For the U.S., labor market ﬂow rates
are suﬃciently high that risk aversion is virtually the same as in the frictionless benchmark
(Swanson, 2012), both in expansions and recessions. For European countries, diﬀerences in labor
market frictions can play a signiﬁcant role in cross-country diﬀerences in relative risk aversion,

  5
    See also Campbell and Cochrane (1999), Campbell (1999), Lettau and Ludvigson (2010), Piazzesi and Swanson
(2008), and Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005).
                                                                                                                  3

accounting for up to a 35% increase. I show that labor market frictions could play an important
role in cyclical variability in risk aversion in these countries as well. However, even in these
countries, labor markets are ﬂexible enough that risk aversion is much closer to the frictionless
benchmark in Swanson (2012) than to traditional measures that assume labor is ﬁxed.
      These quantitative estimates are conservative, because the only cost of labor market frictions
in the model is the cost of delayed labor adjustment, which is completely characterized by the
household’s discount rate r. To the extent that labor market frictions impose additional costs on
households through borrowing constraints, depreciation of human capital, or stigma associated
with longer spells of unemployment, the costs of labor market frictions will eﬀectively increase r
in the model and lead to larger eﬀects.


1.1 Related Literature

Arrow (1965) and Pratt (1964) deﬁne absolute and relative risk aversion, −u (c)/u (c) and
−c u (c)/u (c), as the household’s willingness to pay to avoid a fair gamble over a single good in
a one-period model. Subsequent authors have generalized this deﬁnition to the case of multiple
goods in two diﬀerent ways. The ﬁrst approach, which I follow in this paper, is to measure the
household’s willingness to pay to avoid a fair gamble over money or wealth.6 This approach is also
taken by Stiglitz (1969) in a static model with multiple goods, and by Constantinides (1990) and
Campbell and Cochrane (1999) in a dynamic model with a single good (where consumption in the
diﬀerent periods represent multiple goods). As shown in Swanson (2012) and in Section 3, below,
this money- or wealth-based deﬁnition implies that the household’s coeﬃcient of risk aversion is
determined by the curvature of its indirect utility function (in a static model) or value function
(in a dynamic model).7
      The alternative approach to deﬁning risk aversion over multiple goods is taken by Kihlstrom
and Mirman (1974, 1981), who deﬁne a household’s attitudes toward risk in a multi-dimensional
way that depends only on its preferences and its total consumption bundle. Thus, other features of
the household’s environment that aﬀect its value function but not its preferences do not aﬀect the
household’s attitudes toward risk in this approach. Moreover, the household’s attitudes toward
   6
     Both Arrow (1965) and Pratt (1964) explicitly worked with a “utility function for money” (Pratt, 1964, p.
122) or wealth: “Let Y = wealth, U (Y ) = total utility of wealth Y ” (Arrow, 1965, pp. 91–92), and deﬁned risk
aversion in terms of a fair gamble over money or wealth.
   7
     See also Epstein, Farhi, and Strzalecki (2014), who consider a household’s willingness to pay to resolve uncer-
tainty sooner rather than later (what they call the “timing premium”). As they show, this willingness to pay also
depends on the household’s value function.
                                                                                                               4

risk are multi-dimensional and cannot be summarized by a single “coeﬃcient of risk aversion”
except in very special cases, such as when the household’s preferences are homothetic (Kihlstrom
and Mirman, 1981).
      Throughout this paper, I use the ﬁrst deﬁnition of “risk aversion” above, and not the second.
That is, I deﬁne a household’s coeﬃcient of risk aversion, below, in terms of its willingness to pay
to avoid an idiosyncratic wealth gamble. This deﬁnition has several advantages for asset pricing:
for example, a household’s aversion to a wealth gamble is always well-deﬁned under the technical
conditions I impose below (e.g., twice-diﬀerentiability) and is closely related to the household’s
willingness to hold a risky asset. The alternative, multi-dimensional, Kihlstrom-Mirman (1974,
1981) deﬁnition does not have a single coeﬃcient of risk aversion in general and doesn’t provide
insight into how much compensation a household would require to hold a risky asset, except in
very special cases such as homothetic preferences.8
      Empirically, there is substantial evidence that households vary their labor supply in response
to ﬁnancial shocks. Imbens, Rubin, and Sacerdote (2001) and Cesarini, Lundqvist, Notowidigdo,
and Östling (2017) show that households who win even a moderately-sized lottery prize reduce
their hours of work signiﬁcantly. Cesarini et al. (2017) show that this adjustment takes place on
the intensive as well as extensive margin, and for spouses of lottery winners as well as winners
themselves. Coronado and Perozek (2003) show that households retire earlier after the stock
market performs well, while Coile and Levine (2009) ﬁnd that households are less likely to retire
after the stock market performs poorly. Pencavel (1986) and Killingsworth and Heckman (1986)
provide early surveys of the wealth eﬀect on labor supply and ﬁnd it to be signiﬁcantly negative.
      A recent paper by Petrosky-Nadeau, Zhang, and Kuehn (2018) shows that labor market
frictions can generate rare consumption disasters and a higher equity premium. In their model,
labor supply (the sum of workers plus job searchers) is exogenously ﬁxed, so the traditional,
ﬁxed-labor measure of risk aversion is appropriate. In the present paper, I show how labor market
frictions interact with ﬂexible labor supply to alter the household’s attitudes toward risk.9 My
analysis doesn’t rely on rare disasters and instead focuses on the model’s behavior near the steady
state, although numerical results can be obtained farther away from the steady state as well.
      The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, I deﬁne a general dynamic
   8
     If the household has homothetic preferences and is unconstrained, then there exists a Kihlstrom-Mirman
scalar coeﬃcient of risk aversion which, in fact, agrees with the willingness to pay deﬁnition that I use in this
paper (Kihlstrom and Mirman, 1974, Section 3.1). In this sense, the two deﬁnitions agree.
  9
   Many macroeconomic models with labor market frictions allow labor supply to be ﬂexible, such as Merz (1995),
Andolfatto (1996), Trigari (2009), and Shimer (2010).
                                                                                                                    5

equilibrium framework with labor market frictions. In Section 3, I derive closed-form expressions
for risk aversion in that framework and present a numerical example showing the importance of
the labor margin. In Section 4, I derive the three implications of labor market frictions for risk
aversion described above. I explore the quantitative importance of these results in Section 5.
Section 6 concludes. An Appendix provides details of the model, proofs, and numerical solution
methods that are outlined in the main text.


2. Dynamic Equilibrium Framework with Labor Market Frictions

2.1 The Household’s Optimization Problem and Value Function

Time is discrete and continues forever. At each time t, the household seeks to maximize the
expected present discounted value of utility ﬂows,
                                           ∞
                                           
                                      Et          β τ −t [U (cτ ) − V (lτ + uτ )] ,                               (1)
                                           τ =t

where Et denotes the mathematical expectation conditional on the household’s information set at
time t, β ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor, and cτ , lτ , and uτ denote the household’s state-contingent
plans for future consumption, labor, and unemployment at time τ . The explicit state-dependence
of these plans is suppressed to reduce notation. In contrast to Swanson (2012), period utility in
(1) is assumed to be additively separable in order to make the analysis of labor market frictions
tractable. Let Ωc denote the domain of cτ and Ωlu the set of possible values for lτ + uτ .

Assumption 1. The function U : Ωc → R is increasing, twice-diﬀerentiable, and strictly concave,
and V : Ωlu → R is increasing, twice-diﬀerentiable, and strictly convex.

       A detailed microfoundation for the household’s preferences in (1) is tangential to the present
discussion, but is provided in the Appendix. Brieﬂy, the household consists of a unit continuum of
individuals who pool their income. At each time t, an individual who is not employed can either
search for a job or stay home and produce nonmarket goods and services (including “leisure”).
The household’s home production function is increasing and concave in the number of individuals
staying at home; as a result, V in (1) is increasing and convex in the number of workers not at
home, lt + ut .10
 10
    The labor market search literature often assumes that household leisure or home production is linear in the
number of workers staying at home (e.g., Shimer, 2010). Assumption 1 requires strict convexity of V in order to
guarantee the uniqueness of the household’s optimal choice of (ct , ut ) at each time t, discussed below. Intuitively,
the case of a linear V can be approximated with a V having inﬁnitesimal convexity.
                                                                                                                   6

       The labor market is characterized by search and matching. Household labor lt is a state
variable rather than a choice variable, evolving according to


                                         lt+1 = (1 − s)lt + f (Θt )ut ,                                          (2)


where s ∈ [0, 1] denotes a constant exogenous rate of job destruction, Θt ∈ ΩΘ is a Markovian
state vector that is exogenous to the household and characterizes the state of the aggregate
economy at time t, and f : ΩΘ → [0, 1] is a function of the aggregate state that gives the measure
of jobs found per unit of unemployed workers searching for a job.
       In each period t, the household chooses ct and ut (and a state-contingent plan for future cτ
and uτ ) to maximize (1), subject to the labor market friction (2), the ﬂow budget constraint


                                      at+1 = (1 + rt )at + wt lt + dt − ct ,                                     (3)


and the no-Ponzi condition
                                                T
                                                
                                       lim Et       (1 + rτ +1 )−1 aT +1 ≥ 0,                                    (4)
                                     T →∞
                                                τ =t


where at denotes the household’s beginning-of-period assets and wt , rt , and dt denote the real
wage, real interest rate, and real net transfer payments to the household in each period t, respec-
tively.
       The exogenous Markov state vector Θt governs the processes for wt , rt , and dt . Before
choosing ct and ut in each period, the household observes Θt and hence wt , rt , and dt .11 The
household’s information set and state vector at each date t is thus (at , lt ; Θt ), where at and lt are
endogenous and Θt is exogenous to the household. Let X denote the domain of (at , lt ; Θt ), Ω the
domain of (ct , ut ), and Γ : X → Ω the set-valued correspondence of feasible choices for (ct , ut ) for
each given (at , lt ; Θt ).
       In addition to Assumption 1, a few more technical conditions are required to ensure the
value function for the household’s optimization problem exists, satisﬁes the Bellman equation,
and is unique, continuous, and concave. The details of these conditions are tangential to the
present paper (see Stokey and Lucas (1990), Alvarez and Stokey (1998), and Rincón-Zapatera

 11
    Thus, rt is known to the household at time t. However, at denotes the household’s beginning-of-period assets
and is a state variable, so the household cannot change at in period t. If the household saves in period t, then that
increases at+1 and earns the return rt+1 in the next period. Thus, the return to saving in period t is rt+1 , which
can be either known (risk-free) or unknown (risky) to the household at time t.
                                                                                                                  7

and Rodrı́guez-Palmero (2003) for diﬀerent sets of such suﬃcient conditions), so I simply assume
that:

Assumption 2. There exists a solution V : X → R to the household’s Bellman equation,

             V(at , lt ; Θt ) =       max            U (ct ) − V (lt + ut ) + βEt V(at+1 , lt+1 ; Θt+1 ),       (5)
                              (ct ,ut )∈Γ(at ,lt ;Θt )


where lt+1 is given by (2) and at+1 by (3), and the function V is unique, continuous, and concave.

        The same technical conditions, together with Assumption 1, guarantee a unique optimal
choice for (ct , ut ) at each point in time, given (at , lt ; Θt ). Let c∗t ≡ c∗ (at , lt ; Θt ) and u∗t ≡
u∗ (at , lt ; Θt ) denote these optimal choices as functions of the state (at , lt ; Θt ). Then

                     V(at , lt ; Θt ) = U (c∗t ) − V (lt + u∗t ) + βEt V(a∗t+1 , lt+1
                                                                                  ∗
                                                                                      ; Θt+1 ),                 (6)

where a∗t+1 ≡ (1 + rt )at + wt lt + dt − c∗t and lt+1
                                                  ∗
                                                      ≡ (1 − s)lt + f (Θt )u∗t . To avoid boundary
solutions for c∗t and u∗t , I require that these solutions be interior:

Assumption 3. For any (at , lt ; Θt ) ∈ X, the household’s optimal choice (c∗t , u∗t ) exists, is unique,
and lies in the interior of Γ(at , lt ; Θt ).

Intuitively, Assumption 3 requires that U and V satisfy Inada-type boundary conditions.12
        Assumptions 1–3 imply that V is continuously diﬀerentiable with respect to a, but in order
to deﬁne risk aversion below, I require slightly more than this:

Assumption 4. For any (at , lt ; Θt ) in the interior of X, the second derivatives of V with respect
to its ﬁrst two arguments, V11 (at , lt ; Θt ), V12 (at , lt ; Θt ), and V22 (at , lt ; Θt ), exist.

Santos (1991) provides suﬃcient conditions for Assumption 4 to be satisﬁed; intuitively, U and
V must be strongly concave. Note that Assumption 4 also implies that the policy functions, c∗
and u∗ , are diﬀerentiable with respect to at and lt .


2.2 Representative Household and Steady State Assumptions

The analysis so far considers a single household in isolation, leaving the rest of the economy
unspeciﬁed. Implicitly, the rest of the economy determines the process for Θt (and hence wt ,
rt , and dt ), but the assumptions above and much of the analysis below can abstract from those
 12
    Interiority is a standard assumption to ensure the household’s policy functions are diﬀerentiable (e.g., Santos,
1991).
                                                                                                                 8

details and simply treat Θt as an exogenous process from the point of view of the given household.
However, in order to go from abstract, general expressions for risk aversion to more concrete,
closed-form expressions, I follow Swanson (2012, 2018) and adopt three standard assumptions
from the macroeconomics literature:

Assumption 5. The household is inﬁnitesimal.

Assumption 6. The household is representative.

Assumption 7. The model has a nonstochastic steady state, at which xt = xt+k for all k = 1, 2,
. . . , and x ∈ {c, u, l, a, w, r, d, Θ}.

Assumption 5 implies that the given household’s choices for ct and ut have no eﬀect on the
aggregate quantities wt , rt , dt , and Θt , determined in general equilibrium. (This is consistent
with the earlier deﬁnition of Θt as an exogenous process to the household.) Assumption 6 states
that aggregate consumption demand and labor supply are determined by a household sector that
eﬀectively has the same preferences as the given household (either explicitly or through Gorman
aggregation). Assumption 7 is a restriction on how the general equilibrium of the economy
behaves when there are no aggregate shocks and no aggregate uncertainty. Note that, throughout
the paper, a variable without a time subscript will denote its steady-state value.13 Assumptions 6
and 7 together imply that, when the economy is at the nonstochastic steady state, the household
ﬁnds it optimal to choose the steady-state values c and u, given a, l, and Θ.
      It’s important to note that Assumptions 6–7 do not prohibit us from oﬀering an individual
household a hypothetical idiosyncratic wealth gamble, as described below. The nonstochastic
steady state of the model is only a reference point around which the aggregate variables w, r, d,
and Θ and the other households’ choices of c, u, a and l can be predicted with certainty. This
reference point is important because it’s only there that closed-form expressions for risk aversion
can be computed in general.
      Finally, many dynamic models have a balanced growth path rather than a steady state, as
in King, Plosser, and Rebelo (1988). The results below carry over essentially unchanged to this
case as well. For ease of exposition, Sections 3–5 assume the existence of a nonstochastic steady
state, while the Appendix provides the corresponding results for the more general:

 13
    As in Swanson (2012, 2018), let the exogenous state Θt contain the variances of any shocks to the model,
so that (a, l; Θ) denotes the nonstochastic steady state, with the variances of any shocks (other than the hypo-
thetical gamble described in the next section) set equal to zero; c(a, l; Θ) corresponds to the household’s optimal
consumption choice at the nonstochastic steady state, etc.
                                                                                                            9

Assumption 7 . The model has a balanced growth path that can be renormalized to a non-
stochastic steady state after a suitable change of variables.



3. Risk Aversion

3.1 The Coeﬃcient of Absolute Risk Aversion

As in Swanson (2012, 2018), the household’s attitudes toward risk at time t depend on the
state vector, (at , lt ; Θt ). Given this state, I consider the household’s aversion to a hypothetical,
idiosyncratic, one-shot gamble over wealth:

                               at+1 = (1 + rt )at + wt lt + dt − ct + σεt+1 ,                             (7)

where the gamble εt+1 is a random shock with bounded support [ε, ε], mean zero, unit variance,
independent of Θτ for all times τ , and independent of aτ , lτ , cτ , and uτ for all τ ≤ t. Note
that the gamble is dated t + 1 to clarify that its outcome is not in the household’s information
set at time t, and note also that (7) is equivalent to a one-shot gamble over asset returns rt .
Indeed, thinking of the gamble as being over rt highlights the close connection between (7) and
the household’s willingness to hold a risky asset, which I will discuss further in Section 3.3, below.
      Following Arrow (1964), Pratt (1965), and Swanson (2012, 2018), I ask what one-time fee
μ the household would be willing to pay to avoid the gamble in (7):

                                 at+1 = (1 + rt )at + wt lt + dt − ct − μ.                                (8)

The quantity μ that makes the household indiﬀerent between (7) and (8) is the household’s
“willingness to pay” to avoid the gamble.

Definition 1. Let (at , lt ; Θt ) be an interior point of X. Let V(a     t , lt ; Θt ; σ) denote the value
function for the household’s optimization problem inclusive of the one-shot gamble (7), and let
μ(at , lt ; Θt ; σ) denote the value of μ that satisﬁes V(at − 1+r μ                    t , lt ; Θt ; σ). The
                                                                       , lt ; Θt ) = V(a
                                                                     t
household’s coeﬃcient of absolute risk aversion at (at , lt ; Θt ), denoted Ra (at , lt ; Θt ), is given by
Ra (at , lt ; Θt ) = limσ→0 μ(at , lt ; Θt ; σ)/(σ 2/2).

Note that, in Deﬁnition 1, the household’s willingness to pay μ depends on the state vector
(at , lt ; Θt ) as well as the size of the gamble σ. As in Arrow (1964), Pratt (1965), and Swanson
(2012, 2018), Ra denotes the limit of the household’s willingness to pay per unit of variance as
                                                                                                                  10

this variance becomes small. Note that Ra depends on the state vector (at , lt ; Θt ) because μ
depends on that state.
                                t , lt ; Θt ; σ), μ(at , lt ; Θt ; σ), and Ra (at , lt ; Θt ) in Deﬁnition 1
      Proposition 1 shows that V(a
are all well-deﬁned and that Ra (at , lt ; Θt ) equals the “folk wisdom” value of −V11 /V1 :14

                                                                                      t , lt ; Θt ; σ),
Proposition 1. Let (at , lt ; Θt ) be an interior point of X. Given Assumptions 1–5, V(a
μ(at , lt ; Θt ; σ), and Ra (at , lt ; Θt ) exist and
                                                       − Et V11 (a∗t+1 , lt+1
                                                                          ∗
                                                                              ; Θt+1 )
                                Ra (at , lt ; Θt ) =             ∗     ∗               ,                         (9)
                                                        Et V1 (at+1 , lt+1 ; Θt+1 )

where V1 and V11 denote the ﬁrst and second partial derivatives of V with respect to its ﬁrst
argument. Given Assumptions 6–7, (9) can be evaluated at the steady state to yield
                                                             −V11 (a, l; Θ)
                                         Ra (a, l; Θ) =                     .                                   (10)
                                                              V1 (a, l; Θ)

Proof: See Appendix.

      Equation (9) is valid very generally, without any representative agent or steady state as-
sumptions, but can typically only be solved numerically. Equation (10), which imposes those
additional assumptions, can be solved in closed form, as shown below.
      As in Swanson (2012, 2018), Deﬁnition 1 and Proposition 1 imply that the household’s
coeﬃcient of absolute risk aversion is determined by the curvature of the value function V with
respect to wealth rather than the curvature of U with respect to consumption. Because the
value function depends on the economic state Θt , risk aversion also depends on Θt . This state-
dependence is standard in the literature on risk aversion as measured by willingness to pay
to avoid a monetary or wealth gamble: for example, Stiglitz (1969), Constantinides (1990), and
Campbell and Cochrane (1999) all note this state-dependence as well.15 Similarly, Epstein, Farhi,
 14
    See Swanson (2012), Constantinides (1990), Farmer (1990), Campbell and Cochrane (1999), and Flavin and
Nakagawa (2008). For the more general case of Epstein-Zin (1990) preferences, equation (9) no longer holds and
there is no folk wisdom; see Swanson (2018) for the more general expressions corresponding to that case.
 15
    Stiglitz (1969) shows that absolute and relative risk aversion in his static, multiple-good model are given by
−Uyy /Uy and −yUyy /Uy , where the indirect utility function U “is a function of both [income] y and [prices] p:
U = U (y, p). Arrow and Pratt assumed in eﬀect that p is constant” (Stiglitz, 1969, footnote 11). Thus, in Stiglitz
(1969), risk aversion depends on the economic state—the price vector p. Constantinides (1990) states that “I deﬁne
the RRA coeﬃcient in terms of an atemporal gamble that changes the current level of capital by the outcome of the
gamble. . . RRA = −W Vww /Vw . . . The RRA coeﬃcient is a function of wealth and of the state variables x(t),”
(Constantinides, 1990, p. 527). Campbell and Cochrane (1999) note: “Risk aversion measures attitudes toward
pure wealth bets and is therefore conventionally captured by the second partial derivative of the value function with
respect to individual wealth. . . ” (Campbell and Cochrane, 1999, p. 243), and risk aversion “depends on individual
wealth W and on aggregate variables that describe asset prices or investment opportunities. . . ” (Campbell and
Cochrane, 1999, p. 244). Note that this state-dependence is not a feature of the Kihlstrom-Mirman (1974, 1981)
multi-dimensional deﬁnition of risk aversion mentioned in the Introduction; that approach is independent of the
economic state and depends only on the household’s preferences and total consumption bundle.
                                                                                                                    11

and Strzalecki (2014) analyze a household’s willingness to pay to resolve uncertainty earlier rather
than later and show that this “timing premium” depends on the household’s value function rather
than period utility and thus also depends on the economic state (Epstein et al., 2014, p. 2686).
       A practical diﬃculty with Proposition 1 is that the value function V cannot be solved in
closed form even for very simple models with labor. However, closed-form solutions for V1 and
V11 evaluated at the nonstochastic steady state can be computed even when the function V is
unknown. For example, the Benveniste-Scheinkman equation,


                                             V1 (at , lt ; Θt ) = (1 + rt ) U  (c∗t ),                          (11)


implies that the marginal value of wealth equals the marginal utility of consumption times 1 + rt
(the interest rate appears here because beginning-of-period assets generate income in period t).
In (11), U  is a known function. Although the function c∗ (at , lt ; Θt ) is not known in general, the
point c∗t is known if we evaluate it at the nonstochastic steady state, c. Thus, we can compute V1
at the nonstochastic steady state by evaluating the right-hand side of (11) at that point.16
       The second derivative V11 can be computed by noting that equation (11) holds for general at ;
hence we can diﬀerentiate it to yield

                                                                                     ∂c∗t
                                     V11 (at , lt ; Θt ) = (1 + rt ) U  (c∗t )          .                      (12)
                                                                                     ∂at

All that remains is to ﬁnd the derivative ∂c∗t /∂at .
       Intuitively, ∂c∗t /∂at is just the household’s marginal propensity to consume today out of a
change in assets, which can be deduced from its Euler equation and budget constraint. Diﬀeren-
tiating
                                         U  (c∗t ) = βEt (1 + rt+1 ) U  (c∗t+1 )                               (13)

with respect to at yields17

                                             ∂c∗t                                ∂c∗
                               U  (c∗t )        = βEt (1 + rt+1 ) U  (c∗t+1 ) t+1 .                          (14)
                                             ∂at                                  ∂at
 16
     In Swanson (2012, 2018), I compare the closed-form expressions for risk aversion at the nonstochastic steady
state to numerical solutions to equation (9) over a wide range of values for the state variables in a simple model,
and show that the closed-form expressions are very good approximations. The same is true in the present paper,
although those results are not reported in the interest of space. See the online appendix for details.
                                                                                              
  17              ∂c∗t+1                   ∂c∗t+1 da∗t+1 ∂c∗t+1 dlt+1
                                                                   ∗      ∂c∗t+1           ∂c∗     ∂c∗t+1         ∂ut
     The notation        is taken to mean               +              =           (1+rt )− t +           f (Θt )     ,
                   ∂at                     ∂at+1 dat       ∂lt+1 dat      ∂at+1            ∂at     ∂lt+1          ∂at
                       ∗
                     ∂ct+2 ∂ct+3∗
and analogously for         ,       , etc.
                      ∂at      ∂at
                                                                                                              12

Evaluating (14) at steady state, β = (1 + r)−1 and the U  (c) terms cancel, giving

                              ∂c∗t     ∂c∗      ∂c∗
                                   = Et t+1 = Et t+k ,               k = 1, 2, . . .                        (15)
                              ∂at       ∂at      ∂at

In other words, starting from steady state, whatever the change in the household’s optimal con-
sumption today, it must be the same as the change in the household’s expected optimal consump-
tion tomorrow and at each future date t + k.18
      The household’s budget constraint is implied by asset accumulation equation (3) and the
no-Ponzi condition (4). Diﬀerentiating (3) with respect to at , evaluating at steady state, and
applying (4) gives                               ∗             
                              ∞
                                                           ∗
                                       1         ∂ct+k    ∂lt+k
                                             Et        −w         = 1+r.                                    (16)
                                    (1 + r)k      ∂at      ∂at
                              k=0

In other words, the present discounted value of the change in consumption equals the change in
assets plus the present discounted value of the change in labor income.
      To solve for ∂c∗t /∂at using equations (15)–(16), it only remains to solve for ∂lt+k
                                                                                       ∗
                                                                                           /∂at . I
do this in two steps, using the household’s Euler equation for unemployment and the transition
equation (2) for labor. The details of this computation are tangential to the main points of this
section, so I summarize the result in the following lemma:

Lemma 1. Given Assumptions 1–7 and either s < 1 or f (Θ) < 1, the household’s expected
marginal propensity to work at each future date t + k, k = 1, 2, . . ., with respect to changes in
assets at time t, evaluated at steady state, satisﬁes
                            ∗
                          ∂lt+k     γ l + u f (Θ)                                k   ∂c∗t
                     Et         = −                 1 − 1 − s − f (Θ)                       ,               (17)
                           ∂at      χ c s + f (Θ)                                      ∂at

where γ ≡ −cU  (c)/U  (c) is the elasticity of U  with respect to c, evaluated at steady state, and
χ ≡ (l + u)V  (l + u)/V  (l + u) the elasticity of V  with respect to l + u, evaluated at steady state.

Proof: See Appendix.

Note that, in response to a change in assets, household consumption jumps instantly to a new
steady-state level, but l responds only gradually, approaching a new steady-state asymptotically
as k → ∞. The household adjusts along the labor margin by relatively more when χ is low
(i.e., the marginal disutility of working is ﬂat), γ is high (the marginal utility of consumption is
curved), or the probability of ﬁnding a job f (Θ) is high.
  18
     Note that equation (15) does not follow from the steady state assumption: for example, in a model with
internal habits, considered in Swanson (2009), the household’s optimal consumption response to a change in assets
increases over time, even starting from steady state.
                                                                                                               13

      Substituting (17) into the budget constraint (16) and solving for ∂c∗t /∂at yields
                                   ∂c∗t               r
                                        =                          .                                         (18)
                                   ∂at           γ l+u   f (Θ)
                                             1+w
                                                 χ c r + s + f (Θ)
In response to an increase in assets, the household raises consumption in each period by the
extra asset income, r (as in the permanent income hypothesis), adjusted downward by 1 +
  γ l+u       f (Θ)
w                     , which takes into account the household’s optimal decision to reduce
  χ c r + s + f (Θ)
hours worked and labor income. When f (Θ) is large relative to r + s, (18) converges to the ex-
pression derived in Swanson (2012) for a frictionless labor market. Alternatively, when f (Θ) = 0,
labor is exogenously ﬁxed and (18) equals r, the traditional permanent income hypothesis value.
      We can now express the household’s coeﬃcient of absolute risk aversion, evaluated at the
steady state, in closed form. Substituting (11), (12), and (18) into (10) proves:

Proposition 2. Given Assumptions 1–7, the household’s coeﬃcient of absolute risk aversion,
Ra (at , lt ; Θt ), evaluated at steady state, satisﬁes
                                            −U  (c)            r
                          Ra (a, l; Θ) =                                      .                              (19)
                                             U  (c)        γ l+u   f (Θ)
                                                        1+w
                                                            χ c r + s + f (Θ)

      There are several features of Proposition 2 worth noting. If labor supply is exogenously
ﬁxed, corresponding to s = f (Θ) = 0, then risk aversion in (19) reduces to −rU  /U  , the standard
Arrow-Pratt deﬁnition multiplied by a scale factor r, which translates assets into current-period
consumption units.19 More generally, when f (Θ) > 0, the household can partially oﬀset shocks to
assets by changing its hours of work. Even though consumption and labor are additively separable
in (1), the household’s consumption process is still connected to the labor market through the
household’s budget constraint. As a result, the household’s aversion to a gamble over assets is
related to its ability to oﬀset asset ﬂuctuations by varying hours of work.
      A ﬂexible labor margin implies that risk aversion is less than in the ﬁxed-labor case:

Corollary 1. The coeﬃcient of absolute risk aversion, Ra (at , lt ; Θt ), satisﬁes
                                                            −rU  (c)
                                           Ra (a, l; Θ) ≤              .                                     (20)
                                                             U  (c)
If r < 1, then (19) is also less than −U  /U  .

  19
     A gamble over a lump sum of $x is equivalent to a gamble over an annuity of $rx. Thus, even though V11 /V1
is diﬀerent from U  /U  by a factor of r, this diﬀerence is exactly the same as a change from lump-sum units to
annuity units.
                                                                                                              14

Note that, since r is the net interest rate, r  1 in typical calibrations.
      I discuss the relationship between labor market ﬂexibility, risk aversion, and risk premia
below, after ﬁrst deﬁning relative risk aversion.


3.2 The Coeﬃcient of Relative Risk Aversion

As in Arrow (1964), Pratt (1965), and Swanson (2012, 2018), relative risk aversion is deﬁned by
confronting the household with a one-shot gamble of size At in period t,


                              at+1 = (1 + rt )at + wt lt + dt − ct + At σεt+1 ,                             (21)


and comparing it to a one-time fee At μ, where At is the household’s wealth at time t. The
gamble in (21) and willingness to pay μ are then relative to the household’s wealth at time t.
Proposition 1 easily generalizes to this case and implies that limσ→0 2μ(σ)/σ 2 for this gamble is

                                       − At Et V11 (a∗t+1 , lt+1
                                                             ∗
                                                                 ; Θt+1 )
                                                 ∗      ∗                 .                                 (22)
                                         Et V1 (at+1 , lt+1 ; Θt+1 )

      Note that, in models with labor, the household’s wealth At can be diﬃcult to deﬁne in
some cases because the household’s human capital can be hard to deﬁne (Swanson, 2012, 2018).20
These issues are tangential to the present paper, so for simplicity I deﬁne human capital here to
be the present discounted value of labor earnings, as suggested by Swanson (2018). Equivalently,
from the budget constraint (3)–(4), household wealth equals the present discounted value of
consumption.

Definition 2. Let (at , lt ; Θt ) be an interior point of X. The household’s coeﬃcient of relative
risk aversion, denoted Rc (at , lt ; Θt ), is given by (22) with wealth At ≡ (1 + rt )−1 Et ∞          ∗
                                                                                            τ =t mt,τ cτ ,
the present discounted value of household consumption, where mt,τ = βU  (cτ )/U  (ct ) denotes the
household’s stochastic discount factor.

The factor (1+rt )−1 in the deﬁnition expresses wealth At in beginning- rather than end-of-period-t
units, so that in steady state A = c/r and relative risk aversion is given by

                                    −AV11 (a, l; Θ)                  γ
                   Rc (a, l; Θ) =                   =                             ,                         (23)
                                     V1 (a, l; Θ)               γ l+u   f (Θ)
                                                            1+w
                                                                χ c r + s + f (Θ)

 20
    Note that the household’s ﬁnancial assets at are not a good measure of wealth At , since at for an individual
household may be zero or negative at some points in time.
                                                                                                           15

where (23) makes use of the deﬁnition γ = −c U  (c)/U  (c). Note that if labor is exogenously
ﬁxed, so that s = f (Θ) = 0, equation (23) reduces to the usual Arrow-Pratt deﬁnition. But as
long as the household has some ability to vary its hours of work, risk aversion is reduced by the
factor in the denominator of (23).


3.3 Numerical Example

The relationship between the labor margin, risk aversion, and risk premia can be seen in a
simple real business cycle model with labor market frictions.21 Let the economy consist of a
unit continuum of representative households, each with optimization problem (1)–(4) and period
utility function
                                                      c1−γ
                                                       t        (lt + ut )1+χ
                            U (ct ) − V (lt + ut ) ≡       − χ0              .                           (24)
                                                     1−γ          1+χ

There is a unit continuum of perfectly competitive ﬁrms, each with production function


                                              yt = Zt kt1−φ ltφ ,                                        (25)


where yt , lt , and kt denote ﬁrm output, labor, and beginning-of-period capital, respectively, and
Zt denotes an exogenous aggregate productivity process that follows


                                         log Zt = ρ log Zt−1 + εt ,                                      (26)


where εt is an i.i.d. shock with mean zero and variance σε2 . Firms rent capital from households in
a frictionless competitive market at rental rate rtk . Households accumulate capital according to


                                      kt+1 = (1 + rt )kt + wt lt − ct ,                                  (27)


where rt = rtk − δ and δ denotes the capital depreciation rate.
      Firms hire labor by posting vacancies vt at a cost of κ per vacancy per period. The number
of workers employed by each ﬁrm evolves according to


                                           lt+1 = (1−s)lt + ht ,                                         (28)

 21
    Swanson (2012, 2018) compares risk aversion to the equity premium in several examples where households can
vary their labor supply in a frictionless labor market.
                                                                                                                 16

where lt is the number of workers employed by the ﬁrm and ht the number of new hires.22 New
hires are determined by the Cobb-Douglas matching function,23


                                                 ht = μ u1−η
                                                         t   vtη .                                             (29)


This implies the job-ﬁnding rate for households is

                                                                      η
                                                     ht     vt
                                           f (Θt ) =    = μ               .                                    (30)
                                                     ut     ut

As is typical in these models, the job-ﬁnding rate depends only on the vacancy-unemployment
ratio, vt /ut , which is often denoted by θt . In the present paper, the aggregate state vector Θt is
more general than this, but f (Θt ) nevertheless depends only on vt /ut in this example.
      At the beginning of each period t, workers and ﬁrms who were matched in the previous
period bargain over the wage wt . If negotiations break down, the worker and ﬁrm each can
search for a new match in period t. Let Jt denote the representative ﬁrm’s surplus from hiring
an additional worker in period t:

                                            yt
                                   Jt = φ      − wt + (1−s)Et mt+1 Jt+1 .                                      (31)
                                            lt

The ﬁrm’s surplus is the diﬀerence between the marginal product of labor and the wage this
period, plus the expected discounted value of the ﬁrm surplus next period, if the match persists,
where ﬁrms discount the future using the representative household’s stochastic discount factor,
mt+1 = βc−γ    −γ
         t+1 /ct .

      Let St denote the representative household’s marginal surplus from employment,

                                           
                                  St = wt + 1−s−f (Θt ) Et mt+1 St+1 .                                         (32)


The household’s surplus, relative to being unemployed, is the wage plus the expected discounted
value of the surplus next period, if the match persists. (For simplicity, I assume that there is
no compensation for being unemployed; also note that the household incurs marginal disutility

 22
    Note that both ﬁrms and households are representative and have unit measure, so the number of workers
employed by each ﬁrm and the number of household members who work is given by lt .
 23
    Some authors interpret the Cobb-Douglas matching function in (29) to be ht = max{μu1−η     t  vtη , ut } so that
ht ≤ ut . However, ht ≤ ut holds around the steady state in this example, so including this max operator does not
aﬀect numerical solutions local to the model’s steady state.
                                                                                                                   17

                              Table 1: Benchmark Parameter Values

            β    .996                  δ    .0083                  ν     .5                ρ       .99
            φ     .7                   s     .02                   η     .5                σε     .005

                (a) Expected Utility Preferences               (b) Epstein-Zin Preferences
                           γ   100                                       γ      3
                           χ 100                                         χ      3
                                                                         α −130

Benchmark parameter values for numerical example with (a) expected utility and (b) Epstein-Zin pref-
erences. Parameters are calibrated to monthly data; χ0 , κ, and μ are set to achieve steady-state values
of l + u = 0.3, v/u = 0.6, and f (Θ) = 0.28, respectively. Expected utility benchmark values for γ and
χ are high in order to achieve a sizeable equity premium, but a wide range for these parameter values is
considered in Figure 1, below. See text for details.


V  (lt + ut ) whether the individual works or is unemployed.)24
       The wage wt in each period is set by Nash bargaining, so that

                                                 (1 − ν)St = νJt ,                                               (33)

where ν ∈ [0, 1] denotes the household’s Nash bargaining weight.
       In equilibrium, the marginal cost and marginal beneﬁt to the ﬁrm of hiring a worker are
equal, so
                                                    vt   κ  vt 1−η
                                           Jt = κ      =             .                                           (34)
                                                    ht   μ ut
Similarly, the marginal cost and beneﬁt to the household of searching for a job are equal, giving
the household’s unemployment Euler equation (equation (A14) in the Appendix).
       As discussed in Shimer (2010), models with frictional labor markets are more naturally
calibrated to monthly than to quarterly data, because unemployed workers in the U.S. typically
ﬁnd jobs in less than one quarter. Benchmark values for the model’s parameters are reported
in Table 1. I set the household’s discount factor β to .996, as in Shimer (2010), implying an
annual real interest rate of about 5 percent. Labor’s share of output, φ, is set to 0.7, and the
capital depreciation rate δ to .0083, about 10 percent per year. Following Shimer (2010), I set the
exogenous job separation rate s to .02, the wage bargaining parameter ν to 0.5, and the matching
 24
    Let VE       U         H
           t , Vt , and Vt denote the value to the household of an individual being employed, unemployed, and at
home, respectively. Then VE                                                E                U
                             t = wt − V (lt + ut )/U (ct ) + (1 − s)Et mt+1 Vt+1 + sEt mt+1 Vt+1 . Because there is
no compensation for unemployment, Vt = −V (lt + ut )/U (ct ) + f (Θt )Et mt+1 Vt+1 + (1 − f (Θt ))Et mt+1 VU
                                         U                                       E
                                                                                                                 t+1 .
Deﬁne St = VE   t  − V U
                       t . Note that individuals can move  freely between unemployment    and home   production,   so
VU
 t  = V H . Thus, VH does not need to be computed to derive S , although VH = H  (h ) + E m
        t            t                                            t            t        t      t  t+1 V H , using the
                                                                                                        t
notation in the Appendix. It follows that VH           U            E
                                             t > 0, Vt > 0, and Vt > Vt .
                                                                          U
                                                                                                                  18

function elasticity η to 0.5. Firms’ cost of posting a vacancy, κ, is calibrated to set v/u = 0.6
in steady state, consistent with the estimates in den Haan, Ramey, and Watson (2000) and Hall
(2005). I calibrate the matching function productivity parameter, μ, to set f (Θ) = 0.28 in steady
state, consistent with the estimate in Shimer (2012). The exogenous productivity process is
calibrated to have a monthly persistence ρ = 0.99, corresponding to a quarterly persistence of
about 0.97, and a shock standard deviation of σε = .005, as in Shimer (2010).
      For the household’s period utility function, I set the benchmark values for γ and χ to 100
each. These are high values, which are necessary to generate a sizeable equity premium in the
model, but I also consider much lower values for these parameters in Figure 1, below. In addition,
I consider an extension of the model to the case of Epstein-Zin preferences, as in Rudebusch and
Swanson (2012) and Swanson (2018), which allow for more standard values for γ and χ while still
having suﬃciently high risk aversion to produce a signiﬁcant equity premium. With Epstein-Zin
preferences, the household maximizes the generalized discounted value Vez
                                                                       t , deﬁned recursively as


                              c1−γ      (lt + ut )1+χ                                 1/(1−α)
                      Vez
                       t    = t    − χ0               + β Et (Vez
                                                               t+1 )
                                                                     1−α
                                                                                                 .               (35)
                             1−γ          1+χ

The case α = 0 in (35) corresponds to standard expected utility preferences. When γ > 1, the
period utility function in (35) and Vez
                                     t are always negative, so (35) should be interpreted as


                              c1−γ      (lt + ut )1+χ                                  1/(1−α)
                      Vez
                       t    = t    − χ0               − β Et (−Vez
                                                                t+1 )
                                                                      1−α
                                                                                                                 (36)
                             1−γ          1+χ

to avoid problems with complex numbers. In this case, the household is more risk averse the
more negative is the value of α. In general, the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion Rc for these
preferences, with labor market frictions, can be found by a straightforward combination of the
results in Swanson (2018) and the present paper.25 For these preferences, I set γ and χ each to
3, which is in line with typical parameterizations in the literature (e.g., Del Negro, Giannoni, and

  25
     Applying the methods in Swanson (2018), it’s straightforward to show that the coeﬃcient of relative risk
aversion Rc for the Epstein-Zin speciﬁcation (35)–(36) is given by
                                                               ez             ez
                                                          −cV11           cV1
                                         Rc (a, l; Θ) =     ez      + α    ez      ,
                                                           V1             V
        ez                                   ez       ez                                                    ez
where V is a function of (at , lt ; Θt ), and V1 and V11 denote the ﬁrst and second partial derivatives of V with
respect to its ﬁrst argument, evaluated at steady state, (a, l; Θ). Applying the methods of this paper, above, gives
                                                      γ                      1−γ
                         Rc (a, l; Θ) =                          + α                     .
                                                  γ l+u f (Θ)               1−γ (l+u)1+χ
                                            1 + w χ c r+s+f (Θ)      1 − χ0 1+χ c1−γ
                                                                                                                19

Schorfheide, 2015).26 I then set α = −130 to generate a sizeable equity premium in the model.27
      For both the expected utility and Epstein-Zin speciﬁcations, I calibrate the period utility
parameter χ0 to set l + u = 0.3 in steady state; that is, the household is assumed to devote about
30 percent of its time endowment to market work and labor market search.
      An equity security in the model is deﬁned to be a levered claim on the aggregate consumption
stream, where aggregate consumption Ct = ct in equilibrium. The ex-dividend price of the
consumption claim, pt , satisﬁes

                                                       λ
                                        pt = Et mt+1 (Ct+1 + pt+1 ),                                          (37)

where λ is the degree of leverage, which I calibrate to λ = 4.28 The equity premium, ψt , is deﬁned
to be the expected excess return,
                                                 λ
                                            Et (Ct+1 + pt+1 )
                                   ψt ≡                       − (1 + rtf ) ,                                  (38)
                                                   pt

where (1 + rtf ) ≡ 1/(Et mt+1 ) denotes the one-period gross risk-free interest rate.
      For any given set of parameter values, I solve the model numerically using perturbation
methods, as in Swanson (2012, 2018); in particular, I compute an nth-order Taylor series ap-
proximation to the true nonlinear solution to the model around its nonstochastic steady state.
(Results in the ﬁgures below are for a ﬁfth-order approximation, n = 5.) The numerical algorithm
is described in more detail in Swanson (2012) and Swanson, Anderson, and Levin (2006). Aruoba,
Fernández-Villaverde, and Rubio-Ramı́rez (2006) compare a variety of numerical methods applied
to a standard RBC model and ﬁnd that the ﬁfth-order perturbation solution is one of the most
accurate methods globally as well as the fastest to compute.
      Figure 1 graphs the equity premium and relative risk aversion Rc as functions of χ, γ,
and f (Θ), holding the values of the other model parameters ﬁxed at their benchmark values in
 26
    Del Negro, Giannoni, and Schorfheide (2015), following Smets and Wouters (2007), use a household preference
speciﬁcation with habits that is not additively separable in consumption and labor. However, their estimated
parameter values imply an intertemporal elasticity of subsitution and a Frisch elasticity of labor supply that are
each about 1/3.
  27
     Thus, the model matches the equity premium by assuming that households have high risk aversion. An
alternative approach is to make the model more risky, such as by adding model uncertainty (e.g., Barillas, Hansen,
and Sargent, 2009), rare disasters (Barro, 2006), long-run risks (Bansal and Yaron, 2004), or heterogeneous agents
with uninsurable idiosyncratic risks (Constantinides and Duﬃe, 1996; Schmidt, 2016). In the interest of simplicity,
I don’t consider those extensions to the model here. However, Barillas et al. (2009) show a formal equivalence
between model uncertainty and Epstein-Zin preferences with a high degree of risk aversion, and Schmidt (2016)
makes a similar observation for uninsurable idiosyncratic risk.
  28
     Note that λ stands in for two types of ﬁrm leverage in the data: explicit ﬁnancial leverage (debt vs. equity),
and operational leverage, which results from ﬁxed costs of production, wage and input price contracts, etc. See,
e.g., Garcı́a-Feijóo and Jorgensen (2010) for details and estimates.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 20

                                                        (a) Expected Utility Preferences                                                                  (b) Epstein-Zin Preferences

                                        ϭϬϬ                                                                                     ϱ                                                                                                      ϲ
                                                                                                                                         ϮϱϬ
&RHIILFLHQWRIUHODWLYHULVNDYHUVLRQ




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ϱ




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ƋƵŝƚǇƉƌĞŵŝƵŵ;ƉĞƌĐĞŶƚƉĞƌǇĞĂƌͿ
                                        ϴϬ                                                                                      ϰ
                                                                                                                                         ϮϬϬ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ϰ
                                        ϲϬ                                                                                      ϯ        ϭϱϬ

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ϯ

                                        ϰϬ                                                                                      Ϯ        ϭϬϬ
                                                                     &ŝǆĞĚͲůĂďŽƌŵĞĂƐƵƌĞŽĨƌŝƐŬĂǀĞƌƐŝŽŶ;ůĞĨƚĂǆŝƐͿ                                                                                                                  Ϯ

                                                                     ZĞůĂƚŝǀĞƌŝƐŬĂǀĞƌƐŝŽŶ ZĐ ;ůĞĨƚĂǆŝƐͿ
                                        ϮϬ                                                                                      ϭ         ϱϬ
                                                                     ƋƵŝƚǇƉƌĞŵŝƵŵ;ƌŝŐŚƚĂǆŝƐͿ                                                                                                                                       ϭ



                                          Ϭ                                                                                     Ϭ          Ϭ                                                                                           Ϭ
                                              Ϭ   ϱϬ     ϭϬϬ   ϭϱϬ    ϮϬϬ     ϮϱϬ      ϯϬϬ     ϯϱϬ      ϰϬϬ        ϰϱϬ    ϱϬϬ                  Ϭ   ϭϬ    ϮϬ    ϯϬ    ϰϬ    ϱϬ         ϲϬ         ϳϬ         ϴϬ         ϵϬ        ϭϬϬ
                                                                               Ȥ                                                                                            Ȥ


                                                                                                                                ϱ                                                                                                    ϭϬ


                                        ϭϬϬ                                                                                              ϱϬϬ

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ϴ
&RHIILFLHQWRIUHODWLYHULVNDYHUVLRQ




                                                                                                                                ϰ




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ƋƵŝƚǇƉƌĞŵŝƵŵ;ƉĞƌĐĞŶƚƉĞƌǇĞĂƌͿ
                                        ϴϬ                                                                                               ϰϬϬ


                                                                                                                                ϯ                                                                                                    ϲ

                                        ϲϬ                                                                                               ϯϬϬ


                                                                                                                                Ϯ                                                                                                    ϰ
                                        ϰϬ                                                                                               ϮϬϬ



                                                                                                                                ϭ                                                                                                    Ϯ
                                        ϮϬ                                                                                               ϭϬϬ




                                         Ϭ                                                                                      Ϭ          Ϭ                                                                                         Ϭ
                                              Ϭ   ϱϬ     ϭϬϬ   ϭϱϬ   ϮϬϬ      ϮϱϬ      ϯϬϬ     ϯϱϬ      ϰϬϬ        ϰϱϬ    ϱϬϬ                  ϭ    ϯ     ϱ      ϳ     ϵ        ϭϭ         ϭϯ         ϭϱ         ϭϳ         ϭϵ
                                                                               Ȗ                                                                                           Ȗ

                                                                                                                                    ϭϮ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ϭϰ
                                        ϭϬϬ                                                                                              ϮϲϬ
                                                                                                                                    ϭϬ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ϭϮ
&RHIILFLHQWRIUHODWLYHULVNDYHUVLRQ




                                        ϵϬ




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ƋƵŝƚǇƉƌĞŵŝƵŵ;ƉĞƌĐĞŶƚƉĞƌǇĞĂƌͿ
                                                                                                                                         ϮϰϬ
                                                                                                                                    ϴ                                                                                                ϭϬ

                                        ϴϬ
                                                                                                                                         ϮϮϬ                                                                                         ϴ
                                                                                                                                    ϲ
                                        ϳϬ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ϲ

                                                                                                                                    ϰ    ϮϬϬ
                                        ϲϬ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ϰ


                                                                                                                                    Ϯ    ϭϴϬ
                                        ϱϬ                                                                                                                                                                                           Ϯ



                                        ϰϬ                                                                                          Ϭ    ϭϲϬ                                                                                         Ϭ
                                              Ϭ   Ϭ͘Ϯ    Ϭ͘ϰ   Ϭ͘ϲ    Ϭ͘ϴ       ϭ       ϭ͘Ϯ      ϭ͘ϰ         ϭ͘ϲ    ϭ͘ϴ     Ϯ                  Ϭ   Ϭ͘Ϯ   Ϭ͘ϰ   Ϭ͘ϲ   Ϭ͘ϴ   ϭ         ϭ͘Ϯ        ϭ͘ϰ        ϭ͘ϲ        ϭ͘ϴ        Ϯ
                                                                              Iș                                                                                           Iș


                       Figure 1. Coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion Rc and the equity premium in a real business cycle model with
                       labor market frictions and (a) expected utility preferences, or (b) Epstein-Zin preferences. In each panel, one
                       model parameter is varied while the others are ﬁxed at their benchmark values, reported in Table 1. In each
                       panel, the equity premium tracks relative risk aversion Rc closely and is generally unrelated to the ﬁxed-labor
                       measure of risk aversion. See text and Table 1 for details.
                                                                                                                21

Table 1.29 The ﬁrst column reports results for the model with expected utility preferences, and
the second column the model with Epstein-Zin preferences. In each panel, the dotted red line
graphs the traditional, ﬁxed-labor measure of risk aversion (γ for expected utility, γ + α(1−γ) for
Epstein-Zin), while the dashed blue line graphs relative risk aversion Rc (given by equation (23)
for expected utility, or footnote 25 for Epstein-Zin). The solid black line in each panel plots the
model-implied average equity premium against the right axis.
        In Figure 1, the equity premium tracks relative risk aversion Rc closely and is essentially
unrelated to the traditional, ﬁxed-labor measure of risk aversion. In the top-left panel, γ is
constant at 100 while relative risk aversion Rc varies widely along with χ, consistent with the
wide variation in the equity premium. In the top-right panel, the story is essentially the same:
γ + α(1 − γ) is constant at 263 while realtive risk aversion Rc varies widely, in line with the
variation in the equity premium. In the two middle panels, the equity premium does not increase
linearly with γ, but instead follows a concave trajectory that matches relative risk aversion Rc
closely. In the bottom panels, the ﬁxed-labor measures of risk aversion are constant while Rc and
the equity premium increase sharply with labor market rigidity—that is, as the job-ﬁnding rate
f (Θ) approaches zero.30
        One might wonder why the speciﬁcation with Epstein-Zin preferences, in the right-hand
column of Figure 1, typically has higher values for risk aversion than the Expected Utility speci-
ﬁcation in the left-hand column. The reason is that the intertemporal elasticity of substitution is
much lower in the left-hand column, so that consumption and the cash ﬂows from the consump-
tion claim are much more volatile in that column. If we instead set the dividend process in the
two columns to be the same, then the equity premium is generally similar across the two columns
for similar levels of risk aversion Rc .
        There are a number of important points to take away from Figure 1. First, as in Swanson
(2012, 2018), the traditional, ﬁxed-labor measure of risk aversion has essentially no relationship
to the price of risky assets when households can vary their labor supply; instead, the household’s
relative risk aversion Rc is much more closely related to the equity premium. (Figure 1 shows
this is true for the model with labor market frictions as well as the frictionless models considered

 29
      Variation in f (Θ) is achieved by varying the matching function productivity parameter μ.
  30
     As f (Θ) → 0, relative risk aversion does not approach the ﬁxed-labor measure γ because the parameters χ0
and κ are also changing to keep l + u = 0.3 and v/u = 0.6 in steady state (see Table 1 and its discussion). As a
result, l and c in equation (23) both vanish as f (Θ) → 0, so the limit of equation (23) is not γ, and the limit of
footnote 25 is not γ + α(1−γ).
                                                                                                                  22

in Swanson (2012, 2018).) Moreover, the diﬀerence between relative risk aversion Rc and the
ﬁxed-labor measure of risk aversion can be very large, as in the top panels of Figure 1, where
relative risk aversion Rc can be arbitrarily small as χ becomes small. Finally, the bottom panels
of Figure 1 show how household risk aversion Rc depends on the job ﬁnding rate f (Θt ): if f (Θt )
is high, the household can easily vary its labor supply and better insure itself from shocks to
asset values, while if f (Θt ) is low, it’s more diﬃcult to do so and the household requires a higher
premium to bear that risk. The shape of the curves in these bottom panels is also interesting:
a relatively modest job-ﬁnding rate of f (Θ) = 0.2 provides the household with almost all of the
beneﬁts of perfect labor market ﬂexibility (large f (Θt )). This is because the household’s discount
rate in the model is not very high, and if it only takes a few months to vary labor supply, then
that delay is not very costly, compared to being unable to adjust labor supply at all. Thus, the
household can reap almost all of the beneﬁts of ﬂexible labor as long as it can adjust its labor
within a few months.31
      Finally, for robustness, I also consider two alternative deﬁnitions of the equity premium in
the model. First, I deﬁne an equity security to be a claim on one unit of the ﬁrm’s surplus from
matching with a worker. Second, I deﬁne an equity security to be a claim on one unit of the capital
stock (and add capital adjustment costs to the model to allow the price of captial to deviate from
unity).32 In a simple RBC model like the one deﬁned above, the dividends from these alternate
equity securities are highly correlated with consumption Ct : for the baseline parameterization
considered in Table 1, with Epstein-Zin preferences, the correlation between Ct and the ﬁrm’s
divident from the labor match, φyt /lt − wt , is 85%, while the correlation between Ct and the
net marginal product of capital, rt , is also 85%. As a result, the equity premium on these two
alternate securities is very similar to the equity premium on the consumption claim: the equity
premium on the (levered) labor match surplus is 3.33%, the premium on the (levered) claim on
a unit of capital is 3.80%, and the premium on the consumption claim is 3.43%. Because the
consumption claim is the simplest of these three securities, and the most widely comparable in

 31
     One can also decompose the equity premium in Figure 1 into a “quantity of risk” and a “price of risk” term,
as in Cochrane (2005). That decomposition shows that the variation in the equity premium in Figure 1 is driven
by variation in the price of risk rather than the quantity, and that the variation in the price of risk moves in line
with the relative risk aversion coeﬃcient Rc . See the online appendix for additional details.
 32
     I assume that capital adjustment costs are quadratic and follow Jermann (1998) in calibrating the elasticity
of investment/capital with respect to Tobin’s q to 0.25. I keep the other parameters of the model the same as
in Table 1(b), except for the Epstein-Zin parameter α, which I reduce in magnitude from −130 to −55. This is
because, with capital adjustment costs, consumption Ct is more volatile, so the model doesn’t need as much risk
aversion to match the equity premium.
                                                                                                                   23

the literature, I’ve left the baseline results above in terms of the consumption claim.



4. Implications of Labor Market Frictions for Risk Aversion

Intuitively, labor market frictions make it more diﬃcult for households to insure themselves from
asset ﬂuctuations by varying hours of work. Thus, a greater degree of labor market frictions
should imply higher risk aversion, all else equal. That eﬀect is evident in the bottom panel
of Figure 1; in the present section, I analyze the implications of labor market frictions for risk
aversion more generally.
       The transition equation (2) for labor, evaluated at steady state, implies

                                                    sl = f (Θ)u.                                                 (39)

Equation (39) can be used to substitute out f (Θ)u/l in (23) to obtain

                                                             γ
                                   Rc (a, l; Θ) =                         .                                      (40)
                                                        γ wl s + f (Θ)
                                                     1+
                                                        χ c r + s + f (Θ)

If labor is perfectly ﬁxed, corresponding to the case s = f (Θ) = 0, equation (40) reduces to the
                                                           
usual Arrow-Pratt deﬁnition, γ. As the ratio (s + f (Θ))/ r + s + f (Θ) approaches 1, equation
(40) converges to the formula for risk aversion for the case where labor is perfectly ﬂexible,
                                                
reported in Swanson (2012).33 Thus, (s + f (Θ))/ r + s + f (Θ) lies between 0 and 1 and can be
thought of as an index of labor market ﬂexibility, with 0 corresponding to perfect rigidity and 1
to perfect ﬂexibility. The interest rate r appears in this index because labor frictions only delay
the household’s labor adjustment, rather than prevent it, and r is related to the cost of this delay.
Households that are very patient (have a low r) view labor market frictions as less costly, because
they can adjust their labor supply as desired given enough time to do so. This labor market
ﬂexilibity index features prominently in the quantitative analysis of the next section.
       Equation (39) can also be used to substitute out f (Θ) in (23), giving

                                                             γ
                                 Rc (a, l; Θ) =                           .                                      (41)
                                                       γ wl s(1+(l/u))
                                                    1+
                                                       χ c r + s(1+(l/u))
  33
     Technically, |1 − s − f (Θ)| < 1 is required to solve equation (A17) forward, so s + f (Θ) ∈ (0, 2) and the ratio
(s + f (Θ))/(r + s + f (Θ)) has a maximum of 2/(r + 2). However, for small enough r this ratio can be arbitrarily
close to 1.
                                                                                                                24
                               
Rc (a, l; Θ) is decreasing in s 1 + (l/u) , holding ﬁxed the other quantities in equation (41). This
suggests that greater labor market frictions (lower s) or a recession (lower l/u) should correspond
to higher levels of risk aversion. The remainder of this section makes these two points more
rigorously and investigates their quantitative importance.
      The following assumption is not strictly necessary, but helps to simplify the discussion and
intuition in the analysis below:

Assumption 8. The elasticity −ct U  (ct )/U  (ct ) = γ for all ct ∈ Ωc , the elasticity (lt +ut )V  (lt +
ut )/V  (lt + ut ) = χ for all lt + ut ∈ Ωlu , and wl = c.

Assumption 8 implies that U and V each have an isoelastic functional form, as in the numerical
example above. The assumption wl = c is equivalent to ra + d = 0, from the household’s ﬂow
budget constraint (3); this will be the case, for example, if there are no assets in steady state and
no transfers in the model, or alternatively if lump-sum taxes oﬀset the household’s asset income.
The crucial feature of Assumption 8 is that γ, χ, and wl/c in (40)–(41) can be regarded as stable
               
compared to s 1 + (l/u) . The intuition and basic results in the analysis below continue to hold
if Assumption 8 holds only approximately rather than exactly. However, if any of γ, χ, or wl/c
vary substantially, then the analytical results below may not hold and one would have to resort
to numerical solutions of a given model to determine the variation in (40)–(41).34


4.1 Risk Aversion Is Higher in More Frictional Labor Markets

Labor markets are more frictional when f (Θ) is lower—when it is harder for an unemployed
worker to ﬁnd a job. The following proposition characterizes the relationship between f (Θ) and
risk aversion:

Proposition 3. Let f1 , f2 : ΩΘ → [0, 1], and let the other parameters of the household’s opti-
mization problem be held ﬁxed. Given Assumptions 1–8, let (a1 , l1 ; Θ1 ) and (a2 , l2 ; Θ2 ) denote the
steady-state values of (at , lt ; Θt ) corresponding to f1 and f2 , respectively, and let R1c (a1 , l1 ; Θ1 )
and R2c (a2 , l2 ; Θ2 ) denote the corresponding values of risk aversion from (40). If f1 (Θ1 ) < f2 (Θ2 ),
then R1c (a1 , l1 ; Θ1 ) > R2c (a2 , l2 ; Θ2 ).

 34
    For example, suppose that ra + d > 0 (i.e., c > wl). For the numerical example considered earlier, a higher
degree of labor market frictions (lower f (Θ)) causes l to be lower and u to be higher in steady state. Lower l
causes the MPK to be lower, ceteris paribus, and thus k must be lower to bring the return rk back in line with
the household’s discount factor. Thus, steady-state y and c are lower. On net, it turns out that the ratio wl/c is
lower. Thus, as f (Θ) decreases, the ratio wl/c also falls. This reinforces the eﬀect in equation (40). Thus, the
conclusions of Proposition 3, below, are strengthened if we recognize that the ratio wl/c can vary in the numerical
example considered earlier.
                                                                                                        25

Proof: Since 1 + r = 1/β, r is independent of f (Θ). Assumption 8 then implies Rc (a, l; Θ) in
equation (40) is decreasing in f (Θ).

      Consistent with the intuition presented earlier, Proposition 3 shows that a more rigid labor
market implies greater risk aversion. The case f (Θ) = s = 0 corresponds to complete labor
market rigidity and leads to the maximal level of household risk aversion, γ.
      Proposition 3 is interesting because it suggests that economies with more frictional labor
markets should also have higher risk premia. For example, if labor markets in Europe are char-
acterized by lower job-ﬁnding probabilities f (Θ) than in the U.S., then Propostion 3 implies
risk aversion in those countries should be higher than in the U.S. I investigate the quantitative
importance of this eﬀect below.
      Proposition 3 is also interesting because it holds regardless of how the production side of the
economy is speciﬁed, so long as Assumptions 1–8 for the household’s problem are satisﬁed. The
details of the production function and matching technology will generally aﬀect the stochastic
process for Θt and the functional form of f , but do not aﬀect the conclusions of the proposition.
      Finally, it may be tempting to conclude from (40) that Rc is decreasing in s as well as f (Θ),
but that is not necessarily the case. Changes in s may aﬀect the steady-state level of Θ and
thus f (Θ)—for example, a lower value of s tends to increase l/u, which increases f (Θ) in standard
labor market search models. Thus, the eﬀect of s on Rc in (40) is ambiguous. The following
corollary correctly characterizes the relationship between s and risk aversion:

Corollary 2. Let s1 , s2 ∈ [0, 1], f1 , f2 : ΩΘ → [0, 1], and let the other parameters of the house-
hold’s optimization problem be held ﬁxed. Given Assumptions 1–8, let (a1 , l1 ; Θ1 ) and (a2 , l2 ; Θ2 )
denote the steady-state values of (at , lt ; Θt ) corresponding to (s1 , f1 ) and (s2 , f2 ), respectively,
and R1c (a1 , l1 ; Θ1 ) and R2c (a2 , l2 ; Θ2 ) the corresponding values of risk aversion (40). If s1 < s2
and f1 (Θ1 ) ≤ f2 (Θ2 ), then R1c (a1 , l1 ; Θ1 ) > R2c (a2 , l2 ; Θ2 ). More generally, if s1 + f1 (Θ1 ) <
s2 + f2 (Θ2 ), then R1c (a1 , l1 ; Θ1 ) > R2c (a2 , l2 ; Θ2 ).

Proof: Since 1 + r = 1/β, r is independent of s and f . Assumption 8 then implies Rc (a, l; Θ) in
equation (40) is increasing in s + f (Θ).



4.2 Risk Aversion Is Higher in Recessions

Intuitively, a recession is a period in which employment is low and unemployment is high, or l/u
is low. The following proposition characterizes the relationship between l/u and risk aversion:
                                                                                                 26

Proposition 4. Given Assumptions 1–8 and ﬁxed values for the parameters s, β, γ, and χ,
Rc (a, l; Θ) is decreasing in l/u.

Proof: Since 1 + r = 1/β, r is independent of l/u. Assumption 8 then implies Rc (a, l; Θ) in
equation (41) is decreasing in l/u.

     Proposition 4 shows that risk aversion is higher in recessions. A lower ratio of employment to
unemployment implies that it is harder for unemployed workers to ﬁnd a job, because f (Θ) = sl/u.
As a result, it is more diﬃcult for households to use the labor market to insure themselves from
asset ﬂuctuations.
     Note that the source of the change in l/u in Proposition 4 is irrelevant. The ratio l/u
could be lower because of a decrease in the eﬃciency of the matching function, a fall in ﬁrm
productivity, a fall in government purchases, or a change in some other element of the economic
state Θ. Proposition 4 also holds regardless of how the production side of the economy is speciﬁed,
so long as Assumptions 1–8 are satisﬁed. As was the case for Proposition 3, the details of the
production function and matching technology will generally aﬀect the stochastic process for Θt
and the functional form of f , but do not aﬀect the conclusions of the proposition.
     Although l/u is the ratio of steady-state employment to unemployment, low l/u is the
standard way to model a recession in labor search models. Gross ﬂows in and out of employment
and unemployment are large in the U.S., so calibrated labor search models imply that employment
and unemployment converge very rapidly to their steady state values, in a matter of weeks rather
than quarters (e.g., Shimer, 2012; Elsby, Hobijn, and Şahin, 2013). Thus, the interpretation of
low l/u in Proposition 4 as a recession is typical.
     Finally, the model’s prediction that risk aversion is countercyclical is interesting because
there is a great deal of empirical evidence that risk premia in ﬁnancial markets are countercyclical
(e.g., Fama and French, 1989; Campbell and Cochrane, 1999; Cochrane, 1999; Piazzesi and
Swanson, 2008; Cooper and Priestley, 2009; Lettau and Ludvigson, 2010). Indeed, an important
contribution of Campbell and Cochrane (1999) was to generate countercyclical risk aversion in
an asset pricing model to better match the observed countercyclicality of risk premia in the data.
Proposition 4 shows that labor market frictions provide an additional source of countercyclicality.
In Campbell and Cochrane (1999), risk aversion is high in recessions because consumption is
lower than its long-run history; here, risk aversion is higher in recessions because it’s harder for
households to oﬀset shocks to their portfolios. I investigate the quantitative importance of this
eﬀect below.
                                                                                                              27

4.3 Risk Aversion Is Higher for Households that Are Less Employable

Propositions 3–4 and Corollary 2 all assumed a representative household. I now relax that as-
sumption in order to consider the case where the economy is populated by a unit continuum of
households divided into two types: a set of measure one of households of type 1, and a set of
measure zero of households of type 2. Because the type 2 households are a set of measure zero, all
of the aggregate variables in the economy are completely determined by the type 1 households,
and so is the general equilbrium of the economy. Type 2 households are assumed to be the same
as those of type 1 except that it is harder for them to ﬁnd a job—that is, f2 (Θ) < f1 (Θ) at the
steady-state Θ. (The aggregate state Θ is the same for both household types.)
      Given that the aggregate equilibrium is determined by the type 1 households, it is straight-
forward to check that Propositions 1–4 continue to hold in this economy for both type 1 and type 2
households. In particular, Propositions 1 and 2 give the expressions for risk aversion for both
type 1 and type 2 households, and the risk aversion of the two types of households can be compared
using Proposition 3. Since f2 (Θ) < f1 (Θ), Proposition 3 implies that R2c (a2 , l2 ; Θ) > R1c (a1 , l1 ; Θ).
      In other words, risk aversion is higher for less employable (type 2) households. These
households face greater labor market frictions than those of type 1, so it is more diﬃcult for them
to insure themselves from asset ﬂuctuations in the labor market, and they are correspondingly
more risk averse. I explore the quantitative importance of this eﬀect below.
      Some examples of households that might ﬁt the type 2, “less employable” classiﬁcation are
households with less education, households nearing retirement age, and households that suﬀer
from discrimination in the labor market. According to the theory above, these households should
be more risk averse than regular, type 1 households, and hold a smaller fraction of their wealth
in risky assets such as stocks.
      This result provides a formal justiﬁcation for why households nearing retirement should hold
a greater fraction of their wealth in bonds rather than stocks: they are more risk averse.35 Of
course, households near retirement also have a greater fraction of their wealth in ﬁnancial assets
and less in human capital, so retirees have a greater need to diversify their ﬁnancial holdings in
order to diversify their total wealth. Bodie, Merton, and Samuelson (1992) solve a calibrated life-
cycle portfolio allocation model numerically and ﬁnd that labor market ﬂexibility is an important

  35
     Gollier (2002) notes that younger households should have lower absolute risk aversion because they can dis-
tribute a given fall in wealth over more periods of consumption. That eﬀect is not present in the inﬁnite-horizon
model of the present paper, although it is present in the numerical analysis of Bodie et al. (1992).
                                                                                                                   28

factor in the household’s willingness to hold risky assets. For tractability, their analysis considers
only the extreme cases of perfectly ﬂexible and perfectly rigid labor markets, essentially the
same two cases considered in Swanson (2012). The possibility that older households face greater
labor market frictions than younger households is acknowledged by Bodie et al. (1992) as being
potentially important, but is beyond the scope of their analysis.36 The present paper shows
how their analysis can be extended to the case of frictional labor markets, and provides some
immediate insights into the nature and magnitude of these eﬀects.



5. Empirical Evidence and Quantitative Implications

The theoretical predictions of the model above are consistent with a large and growing body of
empirical evidence. First, there is substantial evidence that households vary their labor supply in
response to ﬁnancial shocks. Imbens, Rubin, and Sacerdote (2001) estimate that individuals who
win a prize in the Massachusetts state lottery reduce their earnings by about 11 cents for every
dollar won.37 Cesarini, Lindqvist, Notowidigdo, and Östling (2017) corroborate and signiﬁcantly
extend this ﬁnding using administrative data on a large sample of Swedish lottery prize winners.
They also ﬁnd that individuals who win a lottery prize reduce their earnings by about 11 percent
of unearned income won, and this eﬀect rises to about 14 percent when spousal earnings are also
included. Cesarini et al. (2017) also ﬁnd that more than half this adjustment is along the intensive
rather than extensive margin. Coronado and Perozek (2003) ﬁnd that individuals who held more
stocks in the late 1990s retired on average about 7 months earlier than nonstockholders. And
Coile and Levine (2009) ﬁnd that older individuals are about 7 percent less likely to retire in a
given year after the stock market falls 30 percent. More generally, the labor supply literature
consistently estimates a signiﬁcant negative eﬀect of unearned income on hours worked (e.g.,
Pencavel, 1986; Killingsworth and Heckman, 1986).
       There is also substantial evidence that risk premia in ﬁnancial markets are higher in re-

  36
     For example, “The ability to vary labor supply ex post induces the individual to assume greater risks in
his portfolio ex ante.” (Bodie et al. 1992, p. 427); “Obviously, the opportunity to vary continuously one’s labor
supply without cost is a far cry from the workings of actual labor markets. A more realistic model would allow
limited ﬂexibility in varying labor and leisure.” (ibid., p. 448); and “It is reasonable to hypothesize that, for most
individuals, the degree of labor ﬂexiliby diminishes over the life cycle. For this reason, the eﬀective human capital
on which the individual can draw also declines.” (ibid., p. 446).
  37
     That is, if the prize is $10,000 per year for 20 years, the typical prize winner reduces his or her earnings by
$1100 per year indeﬁnitely, according to the Imbens et al. (2001) estimates. The prizes they study are each paid
annually for 20 years.
                                                                                                                 29

cessions (e.g., Fama and French, 1989; Cooper and Priestley, 2009).38 A natural explanation for
this ﬁnding is that investors’ risk aversion itself is higher in recessions—indeed, one of the contri-
butions of Campbell and Cochrane (1999) was to provide a model that generates countercyclical
risk aversion. Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2017) provide direct evidence for countercyclical
risk aversion using survey data from a large panel of Italian households before and during the
2008–09 recession. They show that these households’ risk aversion is substantially higher during
the recession and, importantly, that the increase in risk aversion is independent of the house-
hold’s portfolio performance during the 2008 ﬁnancial crisis. In other words, the increase in risk
aversion appears to be unrelated to whether the household incurred portfolio losses or whether
consumption fell below its previous (“habit”) level, presenting a challenge for habit-based models
of countercyclical risk aversion.
      The simple, stylized model of the present paper is consistent with all of these basic empir-
ical facts. The remainder of the section considers the international evidence and more detailed
quantitative predictions of the model.


5.1 International Comparison of Labor Flows and Household Portfolios

Table 2 reports international evidence on labor market ﬂows and household portfolio allocations
across risky and safe assets. Hobijn and Şahin (2007) estimate average values of s and f (Θ) over
time for a variety of OECD countries, and values for the six largest countries in their sample are
reported in the ﬁrst two columns of Table 2.39 In the present paper, individuals may be out of
the labor force, employed, or unemployed, so s in Table 2 is deﬁned to be the sum of the monthly
ﬂow rates from employment into unemployment and into nonemployment. The job-ﬁnding rate
f (Θ) is the monthly ﬂow rate from unemployment into employment. A striking feature of these
estimates is that the job-ﬁnding rate in Continental Europe is an order of magnitude lower than
in the U.S., ranging from 1.3 to 3.5 percent vs. more than 28 percent. By contrast, job separation
rates are more similar across all the countries in the table.
      The last three columns of Table 2 provide some statistics on portfolio allocations between
risky and safe assets in each country. Data on the percentage of households owning equities is

 38
    See also Campbell and Cochrane (1999), Campbell (1999), Lettau and Ludvigson (2010), Piazzesi and Swanson
(2008), and Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005).
  39
     Hobijn and Şahin (2007) estimate a job separation rate for the U.S. of .006. For consistency with Shimer’s
(2012) results for the U.S. reported later, I use Shimer’s estimates for the U.S. in Table 2 (for which s = .019 and
f (Θ) is the same as in Hobijn and Şahin (2007)).
                                                                                                                 30

 Table 2: International Comparison of Labor Flows and Household Portfolios
                                                     percentage of       percentage of        share of house-
                                                      households          households          hold portfolios
                                                        owning           owning risky           in currency
                              s         f (Θ)           equities        ﬁnancial assets        and deposits
 United States              .019         .282             48.9                 49.2                  12.4
 United Kingdom             .009         .056             31.5                 32.4                  26.0
 Germany                    .006         .035             18.9                 25.1                  33.9
 France                     .007         .033              –                    –                    29.1
 Spain                      .012         .020              –                    –                    38.1
 Italy                      .004         .013             18.9                 22.1                  27.9
Labor market ﬂows s and f (Θ) are from Hobijn and Şahin (2007, Table 4) and Shimer (2012); s is sum
of monthly ﬂow rates from employment (E) to unemployment (U) and to nonemployment (N); f (Θ) is
monthly ﬂow from U to E. Percentages of households owning equities (directly and indirectly) and risky
ﬁnancial assets are from Guiso et al. (2002, Table I.5) and are upper bounds for the U.K., Germany, and
Italy (ibid., p. 7). Share of household portfolios in currency and deposits is from Ynesta (2008, Table 1).
See text for details.

from Guiso, Haliassos, and Japelli (2002) for the year 1998 and includes indirect holdings through
mutual funds and retirement accounts as well as direct equity holdings.40 Data on the percentage
of households holding risky ﬁnancial assets (including corporate bonds as well as equities) is from
the same source. The share of household portfolios in each country held in currency and deposits
is from Ynesta (2008) for the year 2006.
      The theme in the last three columns of Table 2 is that households in the U.S. are more likely
to hold stocks and allocate a greater fraction of their portfolios to risky assets than households
in the U.K. and Continental Europe. In fact, the diﬀerence between portfolio allocations in
the U.S. and other countries in Table 2 are understatements because the U.K., German, and
Italian data overestimate the degree of indirect stockholding in those countries, as discussed in
the previous footnote. As shown by Guiso et al. (2002), these diﬀerences in portfolio holdings
are robust to controlling for demographic characteristics such as household wealth or age; that is,
U.S. households of a given wealth level and age are more likely to hold equities and risky ﬁnancial
assets than are European households of a similar wealth level and age.
      The international evidence in Table 2 is thus consistent with the theoretical points raised
earlier: Labor markets in Europe are more frictional than those in the U.S., and households in
Europe are more risk averse in their portfolio allocations. There are, of course, other reasons
 40
    Data for France and Spain are not available in the survey. Data on indirect equity holdings for the U.K.,
Germany, and Italy are upper bounds because the portfolio surveys for those countries do not provide information
on the type of mutual funds held, so that indirect stockholding in these countries cannot be separated from indirect
holdings of other assets (Guiso et al., 2002, p. 7).
                                                                                                               31

why European households might be more reluctant than U.S. households to invest in stocks; for
example, stock markets in Europe are generally less liquid and more volatile than in the U.S.,
intermediation fees for indirect stock holding are typically higher, and the costs of acquiring ﬁ-
nancial information may be higher (Guiso and Jappelli, 2002, p. 260). But the lower liquidity
and higher intermediation costs in European equity and mutual fund markets are also partly an
equilibrium outcome of the lower level of household participation and activity in those markets.
Thus, it is not clear that these other factors are fundamental causes of low equity market partic-
ipation, as opposed to an endogenous response to European households’ apparently higher risk
aversion and preference for holding safer assets. Thus, it is certainly possible that this apparently
higher level of risk aversion is due in part to the greater labor market rigidity faced by European
households.


5.2 Quantitative Implications of Labor Market Frictions for Risk Aversion

In Table 3, I consider the quantitative importance of these labor market diﬀerences for risk
aversion across countries. The ﬁrst two rows report results for the benchmark cases of perfect
labor market rigidity and perfect ﬂexibility, essentially corresponding to the two extreme cases
considered in Swanson (2012). The ﬁrst two columns report the corresponding values of s and
                                                           
f (Θ), while the third colum reports the ratio (s + f (Θ))/ r + s + f (Θ) , which lies between 0
and 1 and can be thought of as an index of labor market ﬂexibility, as discussed earlier.41 For
the monthly discount rate r, I use Hall’s (2017), estimate of 0.7 percent per month, based on the
similarity between ﬁrms’ investment in “match capital” in the labor market and other types of
capital like physical plant and equipment. This similarity implies that discount rates in the labor
market should be relatively high and volatile, just as they are in the capital markets.
      The last four columns of Table 3 report the value of relative risk aversion Rc from equa-
tion (40) for diﬀerent values of the utility curvature parameters γ and χ. When labor markets
are perfectly rigid, Rc = γ, while when labor markets are perfectly ﬂexible, Rc is smaller by a
factor of three to ten for the parameterizations in the table, a dramatic diﬀerence.
      The rest of Table 3 focuses on frictional labor markets, calibrated to the international
values from Hobijn and Şahin (2007) in Table 2. For the U.S., the labor market ﬂexibility index
is .977, virtually as high as the frictionless benchmark. The values for the European country
 41
    The benchmark s = f (Θ) = 1 yields a labor market ﬂexibility index of .997, which is slightly less than 1. One
cannot generate an index value higher than this without assuming a lower value for r.
                                                                                                       32

Table 3: Quantitative Importance of Labor Market Frictions for Risk Aversion
                                                                  Relative Risk Aversion Rc
                                                               γ=2     γ = 5 γ = 10 γ = 20
                                                  s+f (Θ)
                                 s       f (Θ)   r+s+f (Θ)    χ = 1.5 χ = 0.5 χ = 2.5 χ = 10

 Theoretical labor market benchmarks:
   perfect rigidity          0      0                0           2          5        10         20
   perfect ﬂexibility        1      1              .997        0.86       0.46      2.01       6.68
 International comparison:
    United States               .019     .282      .977         0.87      0.46      2.04       6.77
    United Kingdom              .009     .056      .903         0.91      0.50      2.17       7.13
    Germany                     .006     .035      .854         0.94      0.52      2.26       7.38
    France                      .007     .033      .851         0.94      0.53      2.27       7.40
    Spain                       .012     .020      .821         0.96      0.54      2.34       7.57
    Italy                       .004     .013      .708         1.03      0.62      2.61       8.28

Relative risk aversion Rc from equation (40) for diﬀerent values of γ, χ, and r, using estimated values of
s and f (Θ) from Hobijn and Şahin (2007) and Shimer (2012) and r = .007 from Hall (2017). See notes
to Table 2 and text for details.


calibrations are lower, but even Italy’s labor market ﬂexibility index is about 71 percent by this
metric. Intuitively, households in the model are suﬃciently patient that the extra time it takes to
vary employment is not extremely costly; thus, even households in the most rigid calibrations in
Table 3 are able to insure themselves from asset ﬂuctuations to some extent in the labor market.

      These observations are reﬂected in the implied relative risk aversion coeﬃcients Rc in the last
four columns of Table 3. Each of these four columns considers a diﬀerent conﬁguration of utility
curvature parameters γ and χ. For all of these parameter conﬁgurations, relative risk aversion
in the U.S. is very close to the frictionless benchmark and never near the traditional, ﬁxed-labor
measure. For the other countries, frictional labor markets cause risk aversion to be higher, ranging
from a few percent higher in the U.K. to up to 35% higher for Italy. Thus, diﬀerences in labor
market frictions can account for a quantitatively signiﬁcant part of the apparent diﬀerences in
risk aversion in Table 2. Note, though, that even for the most rigid countries in Table 3, the
implied coeﬃcients of relative risk aversion are still much lower than the traditional, ﬁxed-labor
benchmark.

      In fact, the risk aversion estimates in Table 3 are likely to represent underestimates of the
true quantitative eﬀect of labor market frictions on risk aversion. In the stylized model of the
present paper, the only cost of labor market frictions is the delay in labor market adjustment,
and this cost is completely characterized by the parameter r. To the extent that this delay is
                                                                                                               33

made more costly by borrowing constraints, depreciation of human capital, or stigma associated
with longer unemployment, the cost parameter r should be taken to be higher than 0.7 percent
for the purposes of the calculations in Table 3. If we take r = .014 instead of .007, then the risk
aversion coeﬃcients for the U.S. are still very cose to those in Table 3, but the coeﬃcients for the
more frictional countries increase by another roughly 20% (not reported in the table).


5.3 Quantitative Implications for Cyclical Variation in Risk Aversion

Finally, I consider whether labor market frictions can make a quantitatively signiﬁcant contri-
bution to business cycle variation in risk aversion. Recall that risk aversion may be higher in
recessions simply because household consumption is lower and marginal utility is higher, as in
Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and Swanson (2012, 2018). In this section, I investigate whether
labor market frictions play an additional role contributing to this variation. The job separation
rate is higher and the job ﬁnding rate lower in recessions, implying that the labor market is cor-
respondingly less ﬂexible. A less ﬂexible labor market implies that risk aversion should be higher,
all else equal, in addition to any eﬀects coming from the decline in consumption.
      The ﬁrst two rows of Table 4 report parameters calibrated to the U.S. economy in expansions
and recessions. Values of s and f (Θ) are taken from Shimer (2012), while estimates of r are from
Hall (2017).42 In recessions, the job separation rate increases by almost a third, the job ﬁnding
rate falls by 40%, and the discount rate roughly triples. Nevertheless, labor markets are so ﬂexible
in the U.S. that even in the recession calibration, the index of labor market ﬂexibility remains
very high, .953. The resulting diﬀerences in risk aversion Rc between recessions and expansions
in the last four columns are thus quite small.43 Intuitively, labor market ﬂows in the U.S. are
simply too large to make delay very costly for households, even in recessions.
      Of course, this cyclical variation tends to be larger in countries with more rigid labor
markets. In the bottom panel of Table 4, I consider a calibration based on the estimates for Italy
in Table 3. In particular, I take the job separation rate for the U.S. in expansions from Table 4
and scale those values down by the ratio of average job separations in Italy to that in the U.S.

 42
     Hall (2017) estimates a one-month discount rate of −0.1 percent in expansions and 13.5 percent in recessions,
and an annualized 29-month discount rate of 4.4 percent in expansions and 12.2 percent in recessions (where 29
months corresponds to the lifetime of a job in the model). In my application, the relevant period is the lifetime
of the unemployment spell rather than the job, and the former is shorter than the latter. Thus, in Table 4 I use
discount rates that are intermediate between Hall’s one-month and 29-month values.
 43
    Note that these computations set consumption to its steady-state value, so the diﬀerences between expansion
and recession in Table 4 are completely due to diﬀerences in labor market rigidity.
                                                                                                          34

   Table 4: Quantitative Implications for Cyclical Variation in Risk Aversion
                                                                         Relative Risk Aversion Rc
                                                                     γ=2      γ = 5 γ = 10 γ = 20
                                                         s+f (Θ)
                                 s      f (Θ)     r     r+s+f (Θ)   χ = 1.5 χ = 0.5 χ = 2.5 χ = 10

U.S., expansion                .017      .35    .003      .995       0.86     0.46       2.01      6.70
U.S., recession                .022      .20    .011      .953       0.88     0.47       2.08      6.88
rigid labor mkt, expans.      .0036     .016    .003      .868       0.93     0.52       2.24      7.31
rigid labor mkt, recess.      .0046     .009    .011      .557       1.15     0.76       3.10      9.45

Relative risk aversion Rc from equation (40) for diﬀerent values of γ, χ, and r. U.S. values of s and f (Θ)
are from Shimer (2012), r from Hall (2017). See notes to Table 3 and text for details.


from Table 3. This produces a separation rate of 0.36 percent in expansions and 0.46 percent in
recessions. I do the same thing for the job ﬁnding rate. Finally, I assume that the discount rate
is the same as in the U.S. calibration. (I refer to this as a “rigid labor market” rather than an
“Italy” calibration because I don’t have actual data on how job separation and ﬁnding rates vary
over the business cycle in Italy.) In these bottom rows, the variation in risk aversion over the
business cycle is much more signiﬁcant, rising about 25–50% in recessions.
      I conclude from this exercise that cyclical variation in labor market frictions is probably
not a signiﬁcant contributor to time-varying risk aversion in the U.S., but it may be a signiﬁcant
contributor to the cyclicality of risk aversion in countries with more frictional labor markets, such
as in Continental Europe.


5.4 Other International Evidence

Campbell (1999) reports cross-country comparisons of consumption volatility and the equity
premium for a variety of countries from 1970–1996, which was the longest sample available to
him for the non-U.S. countries at the time (using quarterly MSCI data). Over this sample,
consumption growth in the U.S. has an annualized standard deviation of about 0.9 percent, vs.
2.6 percent in the U.K., 2.1 percent in France, 2.5 percent in Germany, 1.7 percent in Italy, 2.8
percent in the Netherlands, 1.9 percent in Sweden, and 2.2 percent in Switzerland (Table 3 of
Campbell). Thus, consumption is about twice as volitile in Europe as in the U.S. over this period,
consistent with the model in the present paper. Intuitively, a more frictional labor market implies
that economic shocks must pass through more to consumption.
      Over the same period, 1970–96, the equity premium in the U.S. was 4.5%, while the equity
premium in the U.K. was 6.2%, France 4.5%, Germany 4.8%, the Netherlands 9.0%, Sweden 6.4%,
                                                                                               35

Switzerland 10.1%, and Italy −1.5% (Table 2 of Campbell). Other than Italy, which is a large
outlier presumably due to poor economic performance during this period, the equity premium is
higher in all of these countries than in the U.S. (although it’s about the same in France). Again,
these results are consistent with the predictions of the model in the present paper. A more
frictional labor market implies that households should be more risk averse, leading to a higher
equity premium. Of course, the equity premium in a country also depends on many other factors
than labor market frictions (as evidenced by Italy), but the fact that Campbell’s ﬁndings go in
the direction predicted by the simple model here is noteworthy.



6. Conclusions

Traditional studies of risk aversion, such as Arrow (1964), Pratt (1965), Epstein and Zin (1989),
and Weil (1989), assume that household labor supply is ﬁxed. However, this assumption ignores
households’ ability to partially oﬀset portfolio shocks by varying hours of work. As a result,
ﬁxed-labor measures of risk aversion are not representative of the household’s aversion to holding
risky assets when labor supply can vary. For reasonable parameterizations, traditional, ﬁxed-
labor measures of risk aversion can overstate the household’s aversion to holding a risky asset by
a factor of as much as ten, as in Table 3.
     The closed-form expressions for risk aversion I derive above lie between the traditional,
ﬁxed-labor measures and the ﬂexible-labor expressions in Swanson (2012). Traditional, ﬁxed-
labor measures of risk aversion are essentially unrelated to the equity premium in a standard
real business cycle model with labor market search, while the expressions derived here match the
equity premium closely. Thus, taking into account the household’s labor margin is necessary for
risk aversion to correspond to risk premia in the model.
     According to my analysis, household risk aversion is higher: 1) in countries with more
frictional labor markets, such as Continental Europe, 2) in recessions, and 3) for households
that are less employable, such as less-educated households, retirees, and households facing labor
market discrimination. In all of these cases, it’s more diﬃcult for the household to vary hours
of work in response to portfolio shocks, and so these shocks pass through to consumption to a
greater extent.
     These predictions are consistent with a wide variety of empirical evidence in the literature.
Numerous authors ﬁnd that Continental European households are more conservative in their
                                                                                                 36

portfolio allocations (e.g., Guiso et al., 2002), that risk premia are higher in recessions (e.g.,
Fama and French, 1989), and that older households invest more conservatively (e.g., Guiso et al.,
2002). Many other authors ﬁnd that households vary their labor supply signiﬁcantly in response
to asset ﬂuctuations (e.g., Imbens et al., 2001; Cesarini et al., 2017).
      Quantitatively, U.S. labor market ﬂows are suﬃciently high that household risk aversion is
very close to the frictoinless benchmark considered in Swanson (2012). More rigid labor markets,
such as Spain and Italy, imply a higher coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion, which I conservatively
estimate to be 15–35% larger than the frictionless benchmark. Note that even these higher values
are still substantially less than traditional, ﬁxed-labor measure of risk aversion. Thus, taking the
household’s labor margin into account is important for understanding the household’s attitudes
toward holding a risky asset.
                                                                                                                                     37

Appendix: Proofs of Propositions and Technical Details
Microfoundation for Household Preferences
The household consists of a unit continuum of individuals, indexed by i ∈ [0, 1]. At each time t, each
individual either works, searches for a job, or engages in home production of nonmarket goods and
services, including “leisure”. Let lt denote the measure of household members who work in period t, ut
the measure of household members who search, and ht = 1− lt − ut the measure of household members
who engage in home production. The household’s output of nonmarket goods and services, cn   t , is given
by
                                                cn
                                                 t = H(ht ),                                       (A1)

where H is an increasing, concave, twice-diﬀerentiable function of the measure of household members
engaged in home production.
    Each individual household member has a period utility function given by

                                                          u(cm         n
                                                             it ) + v(cit ),                                                      (A2)

where cm         n
         it and cit denotes individual i’s consumption at time t of market and nonmarket goods, respec-
tively, and u and v are increasing, strictly concave, and twice-diﬀerentiable functions. For simplicity, I
assume that the disutility of working, searching, and home production are equal and enter additively
into (A2). Since the disutility of work then equals a constant for each individual in each period t, that
constant can be normalized to zero.
      Household members pool their income and consumption of home-produced goods, so that each
member consumes the same amount of market and nonmarket goods in each period t. Let ct and cn                t
denote this common level of market and nonmarket good consumption, respectively.
      The household’s utility ﬂow in each period t is given by the integral of its individual members’ utility
ﬂows, which equals
                                           u(ct ) + v(H(1− lt − ut ))                                   (A3)

since each individual’s consumption of market and nonmarket goods is the same. Let U (ct ) ≡ u(ct ) and
V (lt + ut ) ≡ −v(H(1− lt − ut )). Then the household’s period utility function is given by

                                                        U (ct ) − V (lt + ut ),                                                   (A4)

where U is increasing, strictly concave, and twice-diﬀerentiable, and V is increasing, strictly convex, and
twice-diﬀerentiable, as stated in preference speciﬁcation (1).

Proof of Proposition 1
                                                                 σε
Since (at , lt ; Θt ) is an interior point of X, V(at + 1+r         t
                                                                      , lt ; Θt ) and V(at + 1+r
                                                                                              σε
                                                                                                 t
                                                                                                   , lt ; Θt ) exist for suﬃciently
small σ, and V(at +          σε                (at , lt ; Θt ; σ) ≤ V(at + σε , lt ; Θt ), hence V
                                , lt ; Θt ) ≤ V                                                               (at , lt ; Θt ; σ) exists.
                            1+rt                                                   1+rt
Moreover, since V(·, ·; ·) is continuous and increasing in its ﬁrst argument, the intermediate value theorem
                                                                                 μ
implies there exists a unique −μ(at , lt ; Θt ; σ) ∈ [σε, σε] satisfying V(at − 1+r                  (at , lt ; Θt ; σ).
                                                                                      , lt ; Θt ) = V
                                                                                    t
     For a suﬃciently small fee μ in (8), the change in household welfare (6) is given to ﬁrst order by

                                                        −V1 (at , lt ; Θt )
                                                                            dμ .                                                  (A5)
                                                           1 + rt
Using the envelope theroem, we can rewrite (A5) as

                                                 −βEt V1 (a∗t+1 , lt+1
                                                                   ∗
                                                                       ; Θt+1 ) dμ ,                                              (A6)

where a∗t+1 ≡ (1 + rt )at + wt lt + dt − c∗t and lt+1
                                                  ∗
                                                      = (1 − s)lt + f (Θt )u∗t .
     Turning now to the gamble in (7), note that the household’s optimal choices for consumption and
unemployment in period t, c∗t and u∗t , will generally depend on the size of the gamble σ—for example,
the household may undertake precautionary saving when faced with this gamble. Thus, in this section we
                                                                                                                        38

write c∗t ≡ c∗ (at , lt ; Θt ; σ) and u∗t ≡ u∗ (at , lt ; Θt ; σ) to emphasize this dependence on σ. The household’s
value function, inclusive of the one-shot gamble in (7), satisﬁes

                         (at , lt ; Θt ; σ) = U (c∗ ) − V (lt + u∗ ) + βEt V(a∗ , l∗ ; Θt+1 ).
                        V                                                                                            (A7)
                                                   t              t            t+1 t+1


Because (7) describes a one-shot gamble in period t, it aﬀects assets a∗t+1 and lt+1  ∗
                                                                                          in period t + 1 but
otherwise does not aﬀect the household’s optimization problem from period t + 1 onward; as a result,
the household’s value-to-go at time t + 1 is just V(a∗t+1 , lt+1
                                                             ∗
                                                                 ; Θt+1 ), which does not depend on σ except
         ∗         ∗
through at+1 and lt+1 .
     Diﬀerentiating (A7) with respect to σ, the ﬁrst-order eﬀect of the gamble on household welfare is
                           ∗        ∗                                                    
                         ∂ct     ∂ut                ∂c∗t                           ∂u∗t
                      U       −V       + βEt V1 · ( −      + εt+1 ) + βEt V2 f (Θt )        dσ,                      (A8)
                          ∂σ       ∂σ                 ∂σ                             ∂σ

where the arguments of U  , V  , V1 , and V2 are suppressed to reduce notation. Optimality of c∗t
and u∗t implies that the terms involving ∂c∗t /∂σ and ∂u∗t /∂σ in (A8) cancel, as in the usual enve-
lope theorem (these derivatives vanish at σ = 0 anyway, for the reasons discussed below). Moreover,
Et V1 (a∗t+1 , lt+1
                ∗
                    ; Θt+1 )εt+1 = 0 because εt+1 is independent of Θt+1 , lt+1   ∗
                                                                                     , and a∗t+1 , evaluating the latter
two at σ = 0. Thus, the ﬁrst-order cost of the gamble is zero, as in Arrow (1964) and Pratt (1965).
     To second order, the eﬀect of the gamble on household welfare is
       ∗ 2             ∗ 2
          ∂ct               ∂ut           ∂ 2 c∗t     ∂ 2 u∗t
  U             − V              + U      2
                                                  −V                                                                  (A9)
          ∂σ                 ∂σ           ∂σ          ∂σ 2
                                          2                                                                      
                               ∂c∗t                                ∂c∗t                ∂u∗t                   ∂ 2 c∗t
          + βEt V11 · −             + εt+1 + βEt V12 · −                + εt+1 f (Θt )      + βEt V1 · −
                               ∂σ                                  ∂σ                  ∂σ                     ∂σ 2
                                ∗ 2                                                                       
                                                                 ∗                  ∗                     2 ∗
                                 ∂u                           ∂c                 ∂u                     ∂  u      dσ 2
          + βEt V22 f (Θt )2         t
                                          + βEt V12 · − t + εt+1 f (Θt ) t + βEt V2 f (Θt )                 t
                                                                                                                        .
                                   ∂σ                         ∂σ                  ∂σ                    ∂σ 2        2

The terms involving ∂ 2 c∗t /∂σ 2 and ∂ 2 u∗t /∂σ 2 cancel due to the optimality of c∗t and u∗t . The derivatives
∂c∗t /∂σ and ∂u∗t /∂σ also vanish at σ = 0 (there are two ways to see this: ﬁrst, the linearized version of the
model is certainty equivalent; alternatively, if ε is symmetric, the gamble in (7) is isomorphic for positive
and negative σ, hence c∗ and u∗ must be symmetric about σ = 0, implying the derivatives vanish). Thus,
for inﬁnitesimal gambles, (A9) simpliﬁes to

                                                                                dσ 2
                                         βEt V11 (a∗t+1 , lt+1
                                                           ∗
                                                               ; Θt+1 ) ε2t+1        .                              (A10)
                                                                                 2
                                        ∗
Finally, εt+1 is independent of Θt+1 , lt+1 , and a∗t+1 , evaluating the latter two at σ = 0. Since εt+1 has
unit variance, (A10) reduces to
                                                                     dσ 2
                                      βEt V11 (a∗t+1 , lt+1
                                                        ∗
                                                            ; Θt+1 )      .                            (A11)
                                                                      2
Equating (A6) to (A11) allows us to solve for dμ as a function of dσ 2 . Thus, limσ→0 2μ(at , lt ; Θt ; σ)/σ 2
exists and is given by
                                      − Et V11 (a∗t+1 , lt+1
                                                         ∗
                                                             ; Θt+1 )
                                                                      .                                 (A12)
                                       Et V1 (at+1 , lt+1 ; Θt+1 )
                                                ∗     ∗


     To evaluate (A12) at the nonstochastic steady state, set at+1 = a, lt+1 = l, and Θt+1 = Θ to get

                                                     − V11 (a, l; Θ)
                                                                     .                                              (A13)
                                                      V1 (a, l; Θ)
                                                                                                                39

Proof of Lemma 1
The computation in the lemma is performed in two steps, using the household’s Euler equation for
unemployment,
                                                                                                         
       V  (lτ∗ + u∗τ )                                                             V  (lτ∗ +1 +u∗τ +1 )
                        = βEτ wτ +1 U  (c∗τ +1 ) − V  (lτ∗ +1 +u∗τ +1 ) + (1 − s)                         , (A14)
           f (Θτ )                                                                       f (Θτ +1 )

and the transition equation (2) for labor. Equation (A14) is derived in the same way as the consumption
Euler equation and is standard in the labor search literature. The left-hand side of (A14) represents the
household’s marginal cost of ﬁnding a job, while the right-hand side is the discounted marginal beneﬁt of
having one more employed worker, given by the wage times the marginal utility of consumption less the
marginal disutility of work, plus the job retention rate (1 − s) times the marginal beneﬁt of not having
to search for a job next period.
     Equation (A14) holds at each date τ ≥ t for any initial asset stock at . Diﬀerentiating (A14) with
respect to at and taking time-t expectations yields
                                         
      V  (lτ∗ + u∗τ ) ∂lτ∗   ∂u∗τ                             ∂c∗
   Et                        +        = βEt wτ +1 U  (c∗τ +1 ) τ +1                                       (A15)
          f (Θτ )        ∂at   ∂at                                ∂at
                                                                                                          
                                                   ∗           ∗    1 − s − f (Θτ +1 ) ∂lτ∗ +1   ∂u∗τ +1
                                             + V (lτ +1 +uτ +1 )                                 +            .
                                                                          f (Θτ +1 )      ∂at       ∂at

Evaluating (A15) at steady state gives
         ∗                                                                  ∗               
          ∂lτ   ∂u∗τ          U  (c)f (Θ)    ∂c∗τ +1                        ∂lτ +1   ∂u∗τ +1
     Et       +        = βw               Et         + β (1 − s − f (Θ))Et         +           .          (A16)
         ∂at    ∂at           V (l + u)         ∂at                            ∂at      ∂at

Substituting for ∂c∗τ +1 /∂at from (15), and for w from (A14) evaluated at steady state, this becomes
     ∗                                                                           ∗               
     ∂lτ    ∂u∗τ          γ l+u                          ∂c∗                       ∂lτ +1   ∂u∗τ +1
 Et       +         = −           [1 − β (1 − s − f (Θ))] t + β (1 − s − f (Θ))Et         +           , (A17)
     ∂at    ∂at           χ c                            ∂at                        ∂at      ∂at

where γ ≡ −cU  (c)/U  (c) and χ ≡ (l + u)V  (l + u)/V  (l + u). Since |1 − s − f (Θ)| < 1, equation (A17)
can be solved forward to yield
                                        ∗            
                                         ∂lτ     ∂u∗τ           γ l + u ∂c∗t
                                    Et       +          = −                  .                            (A18)
                                         ∂at     ∂at           χ c ∂at

In response to a change in assets, household leisure (1 − lt − ut ) and consumption move in the same
direction. (Intuitively, it is natural to think of both consumption and leisure as normal goods, so that
∂c∗t /∂at > 0 and ∂(lt∗ + u∗t )/∂at < 0, although this sign restriction is not required below.)
      The transition equation (2) for labor implies
                                 ∗
                               ∂lt+k             ∂l∗                    ∂u∗
                          Et         = (1 − s) Et t+k−1 + f (Θt+k−1 ) Et t+k−1 .                            (A19)
                                ∂at                ∂at                    ∂at

Evaluating (A19) at steady state and applying (A18) gives
                               ∗
                             ∂lt+k                     ∂l∗      γ l+u      ∂c∗
                        Et         = (1 − s − f (Θ)) Et t+k−1 −       f (Θ) t .                             (A20)
                              ∂at                        ∂at    χ c        ∂at

Solving (A20) backward to the initial condition ∂lt /∂at = 0 gives
                               ∗                                              ∗
                             ∂lt+k     γ l + u f (Θ)                     k ∂c
                        Et         = −               [1 − (1 − s − f (Θ)) ] t .                             (A21)
                              ∂at      χ c s + f (Θ)                       ∂at
                                                                                                           40

Relationship between the Stochastic Discount Factor, Risk Premia, and Risk Aversion
The household’s aversion to gambles over asset values depends on its ability to oﬀset the outcome of those
gambles with changes in hours worked. Here, the analysis is extended to show the relationship between
risk aversion and risk premia in the Lucas-Breeden stochastic discounting framework. Risk premia in this
framework are closely related to the deﬁnition of risk aversion in the present paper, and are generally
unrelated to traditional, ﬁxed-labor measures of risk aversion.
      Let pit denote the ex-dividend time-t price of an asset i that pays stochastic dividend dit each period.
In equilibrium, pit satisﬁes
                                        pit = Et mt+1 (dit+1 + pit+1 ),                                 (A22)

where mt+1 ≡ βU  (ct+1 )/U  (ct ) denotes the household’s stochastic discount factor.
             i
    Let 1 + rt+1 denote the realized gross return on the asset,

                                               i           dit+1 + pit+1
                                          1 + rt+1 ≡                     ,                             (A23)
                                                                 pit

and deﬁne the risk premium on the asset, ψti , to be its expected excess return,

                                             ψti ≡ Et rt+1
                                                       i      f
                                                           − rt+1 ,                                    (A24)
           f
where 1 + rt+1 ≡ 1/Et mt+1 denotes the risk-free rate. Then

                                  Et mt+1 Et (dit+1 + pit+1 ) − Et mt+1 (dit+1 + pit+1 )
                          ψti =
                                                      pit Et mt+1
                                                 i
                                  −Covt (mt+1 , rt+1 )
                              =                        ,                                               (A25)
                                      Et mt+1

where Covt denotes the covariance conditional on information at time t.
     Conditional on information at time t, the household’s stochastic discount factor can be written to
ﬁrst order as
                                                     βγ ∗
                                        dmt+1 = −       dct+1 ,                                  (A26)
                                                      c
where γ ≡ cU  /U  . The ﬁrst-order change in consumption, dc∗t+1 , in turn can be computed from the
household’s Euler equation and budget constraint, where it is now recognized that wt , rt , dt , and Θt may
vary in response to economic shocks. This computation is summarized in the following lemma:

                           s + f (Θ)                     γ l
Lemma A1. Let ϕ ≡                      , and let λ ≡         , the long-run sensitivity of labor relative to
                         r + s + f (Θ)                   χc
consumption in response to a change in assets. To ﬁrst order, evaluated at steady state,
                      
       ∗         r                    w
     dct+1 =            dat+1 +              dlt+1
             1 + wλϕ             r+s+f (Θ)
                                    ∞                                                             
                                          1                                          w
                           + Et+1                 l dwt+k + ddt+k + adrt+k +                udft+k
                                       (1 + r)k                                 r+s+f (Θ)
                                   k=1
                           ∞                                          
                   c              1                     rwλϕ
                − Et+1                   βdrt+k+1 −              dωt+k ,                              (A27)
                   γ      k=1
                              (1 + r)k                1 + wλϕ

where dft+k denotes the ﬁrst-order change in the job-ﬁnding rate f (Θt+k ) and dωt+k denotes the ﬁrst-order
change in the return to searching for a job at time t + k, deﬁned in the Appendix.

Proof: See below.
                                                                                                          41

Note that if w, r, d, and f (Θ) do not change, as in the Arrow-Pratt gamble for a single household in
Section 3, then equation (A27) reduces to (25), where dlt = 0 in that example because labor at time t
is given. More generally, (A27) includes the eﬀects of changes in w, r, d, and f (Θ) on consumption.
The term in square brackets in (A27) describes the change in household wealth—including nonﬁnancial
wealth—and thus the ﬁrst line of (A27) describes the wealth eﬀect on consumption. The last line of
(A27) describes the substitution eﬀect: changes in consumption due to changes in current and future
                                          w
wages and interest rates. The ratio r+s+f    (Θ)
                                                 corresponds to the present discounted value of wages from
an increase in labor at time t, over the lifetime of the job. The term udft+k , which represents the change
in the number of jobs found each period, is multiplied by the same present value.
      Let dÂt+1 denote the quantity inside the square brackets in (A27), representing the change in
household wealth, and let dΦt+1 ≡ Et+1 ∞       k=1 (1 + r)
                                                           −k               rλϕ
                                                              (βdrt+k+1 − 1+wλϕ  dωt+k ), the intertemporal
substitution term from (A27). Then the stochastic discount factor and risk premium can be written as
follows:

Proposition A1. To ﬁrst order, evaluated at steady state,

                                dmt+1 = −Ra (a, l; Θ) β dÂt+1 + β dΦt+1 .                            (A28)

To second order, evaluated at steady state,

                       ψti = Ra (a, l; Θ) Covt (drt+1
                                                  i                        i
                                                      , dÂt+1 ) − Covt (drt+1 , dΦt+1 ) .            (A29)

                                     γ     r
Proof: Note ﬁrst that Ra (a, l; Θ) =             . Substituting (A27) into (A26) yields (A28). Substi-
                                      c 1 + wλϕ
tuting (A28) into (A25) yields (A29). Finally, Cov(dx, dy) is accurate to second order when dx and dy
are accurate to ﬁrst order.

      Equation (A29) characterizes the relationship between risk aversion and the risk premium on the
asset. The ﬁrst term in (A29) shows that ψti increases locally linearly with Ra , by an amount that
depends on the covariance between the asset return and the household’s wealth, including nonﬁnancial
wealth. This link between risk premia and risk aversion should not be too surprising: Propositions 1–2
described the risk premium for extremely simple, idiosyncratic gambles over household wealth, while
Proposition A1 shows that the same coeﬃcient also appears in the household’s aversion to more general
ﬁnancial market gambles that may be correlated with aggregate variables such as interest rates, wages,
and transfers.
      The second term in (A29) corresponds to Merton’s (1973) “changes in investment opportunities” in
the ICAPM framework. Even if Ra = 0—that is, even if households are risk-neutral in a cross-sectional
or CAPM sense—ψti can be nonzero. This is because even a risk-neutral household can beneﬁt from an
asset that pays oﬀ well when the price of the household’s total consumption bundle is low. An asset that
pays oﬀ well when current and future wages are low (and hence leisure is cheap) or current and future
interest rates are high (and hence future consumption is cheap) is preferable to an asset that pays oﬀ
poorly in those situations. Even a risk-neutral household would be willing to pay a premium for such an
asset—implying a lower ψti —and this eﬀect is captured by the second term in (A29).
      The fact that households in the present paper face a consumption-leisure tradeoﬀ as well as a current-
vs.-future consumption tradeoﬀ implies that the second term in (A29) is more general than just changes
in the household’s investment opportunities. Indeed, the second term in (A29) is better described as
being due to “changes in purchasing opportunities.” The decomposition in (A29) also suggests that ψti
is more accurately described as an “expected excess return” rather than a “risk premium” because only
the ﬁrst term in (A29) represents compensation to the household for bearing risk; the second term is not
compensation for risk but rather reﬂects changes in the household’s purchasing opportunities over time.
      Finally, the decomposition (A29) can be written in terms of relative rather than absolute risk aversion
using Deﬁnition 2:
                                                                                                                             42

Corollary A1. In terms of relative risk aversion, the risk premium in (A29) can be written as:
                                                         
                                                   dÂt+1
                   ψti = Rc (a, l; Θ) Covt drt+1
                                              i
                                                 ,                    i
                                                            − Covt (drt+1 , dΦt+1 )                                       (A30)
                                                     A
where A is as in Deﬁnition 2.


Proof of Lemma A1
Diﬀerentiating the household’s Euler equation (13) and evaluating at steady state yields

                                         U  (c)(dc∗t − Et dc∗t+1 ) = βU  (c)Et drt+1 .                                 (A31)

It follows that, for each k = 1, 2, . . .,
                                                                               k
                                                                      βc
                                             Et dc∗t+k = dc∗t +          Et         drt+i .                               (A32)
                                                                      γ       i=1

Combining (3)–(4), diﬀerentiating, and evaluating at steady state yields
                      ∞
                               1
                 Et                  (dc∗t+k − wdlt+k
                                                  ∗
                                                      − ldwt+k − ddt+k − adrt+k ) = (1 + r) dat .                         (A33)
                            (1 + r)k
                      k=0

Diﬀerentiating the household’s unemployment Euler equation (17) and evaluating at steady state yields
                                               
  V  (l+u) ∗       ∗     V  (l+u)
            (dlτ + duτ ) −           dfτ = βEτ wU  (c)dc∗τ +1 + U  (c)dwτ +1                       (A34)
    f (Θ)                   f (Θ)2
                                                                                                       
                                           1 − s − f (Θ)     ∗         ∗               1−s
                                  + V (l+u)                (dlτ +1 + duτ +1 ) − V (l + u)        dfτ +1 .
                                                 f (Θ)                                    f (Θ)2

Rearranging (A34) gives
                                                         γ l+u
  dlτ∗ + du∗τ = β(1−s−f (Θ)) Eτ (dlτ∗ +1 + du∗τ +1 ) −           (1 − β(1−s−f (Θ))) Eτ dc∗τ +1       (A35)
                                                         χ c
                                   l+u                                  l+u           l+u1−s
                                 +     (1 − β(1−s−f (Θ))) Eτ dwτ∗+1 +         dfτ − β          Eτ dfτ +1 ,
                                    χw                                 χf (Θ)          χ f (Θ)
which, assuming |s + f (Θ)| < 1, can be solved forward to yield
                                                                 ∞
                                 γ l+u ∗      l+u
          dlτ∗ + du∗τ = −             dcτ − β     Eτ                  β k−1 (1−s−f (Θ))k−1 drτ +k
                                 χ c           χ
                                                                k=1
                                                                                     ∞
                                             l+u
                                         +       (1 − β(1−s−f (Θ))) Eτ                    β k−1 (1−s−f (Θ))k−1 dwτ +k
                                              χ
                                                                                    k=1
                                                                              ∞
                                              l+u           l+u
                                         +          dfτ − β     Eτ                 β k−1 (1−s−f (Θ))k−1 dfτ +k .          (A36)
                                             χf (Θ)          χ
                                                                           k=1

Note that, when current and future r, w, and f (Θ) do not change, (A36) reduces to (21). Deﬁne
                 ∞                                                                             ∞
                          k−1                 k−1
dωτ ≡ − βEτ           β         (1−s−f (Θ))         drτ +k + (1 − β(1−s−f (Θ))) Eτ                   β k−1 (1−s−f (Θ))k−1 dwτ +k
                k=1                                                                            k=1
                                                       ∞
                                       1
                                +         dfτ − βEτ          β k−1 (1−s−f (Θ))k−1 dfτ +k .                                (A37)
                                    f (Θ)              k=1
                                                                                                                     43

Then
                                                       γ l+u ∗    l+u
                                     dlτ∗ + du∗τ = −        dcτ −     dωτ ,                                     (A38)
                                                       χ c         χ
so that (A38) corresponds to a standard intratemporal optimality condition between l + u and c, and dωτ
represents the change in the present discounted value of the gains from searching for a job, analogous to
dwτ in a frictionless model.
     Diﬀerentiating the transition equation (2) for labor and evaluating at steady state yields
               ∗                   ∗                      ∗
             dlt+k = (1−s−f (Θ)) dlt+k−1 + f (Θt+k−1 ) (dlt+k−1 + du∗t+k−1 ) + udft+k−1 .                       (A39)

Solving backward to time t gives
                                           ∞
          ∗
        dlt+k = (1−s−f (Θ))k dlt +              (1−s−f (Θ))k−1−i [f (Θ)(dlt+i
                                                                          ∗
                                                                              + du∗t+i ) + udft+i ].            (A40)
                                          i=1

Substituting (A38) into (A40) and taking expectations gives

         ∗                                γ l+u       1 − (1−s−f (Θ))k ∗
    Et dlt+k = (1−s−f (Θ))k dlt −               f (Θ)                 dct
                                          χ c              s + f (Θ)
                                           k−1                                        k−1
                           l+u                                  k−1−i
                         +     f (Θ)Et           (1−s−f (Θ))            dωt+i + uEt         (1−s−f (Θ))k−1−i dft+i
                            χ              i=0                                        i=0
                                                    k−1
                                l + u f (Θ)
                         −β                   Et          [1 − (1−s−f (Θ))k−i ] drt+i .                         (A41)
                                  χ s + f (Θ)       i=1

Inserting (A41) into the budget constraint (A33) gives
                                                                     ∞
1+r      γ wl s + f (Θ)             1+r                     1                1
      1+                 dc∗t −               wdlt −               Et              wudft+k
 r       χ c r+s+f (Θ)           r+s+f (Θ)            r+s+f (Θ)           (1 + r)k
                                                                      k=0
                            ∞                                                          ∞
           1 s + f (Θ)            1                1 + r βc       γ wl s + f (Θ)               1
        −               Et             k
                                         ldωt+k +             1 +                    Et              drt+k
           χ r+s+f (Θ)     k=0
                               (1 + r)               r γ          χ c r+s+f (Θ)         k=1
                                                                                            (1 + r)k
                ∞
                         1
         − Et                  [ldwt+k + ddt+k + adrt+k ] = (1 + r)dat .                                        (A42)
                      (1 + r)k
                k=0

Solving for dc∗t , using the deﬁnitions of λ and ϕ, yields
                             
      ∗      r         1                                w
    dct =                      (1 + r)dat + (1 + r)            dlt
           1 + r 1 + wλϕ                            r+s+f (Θ)
                                          ∞                                                       
                                                 1                                    wu
                                     + Et               l dwt+k + ddt+k + adrt+k +           dft+k
                                              (1 + r)k                             r+s+f (Θ)
                                           k=0
                            ∞                                                ∞
                    βc               1               r c wλϕ                         1
                −      Et                  drt+k +                 Et                      dωt+k .              (A43)
                    γ             (1 + r)k         1 + r γ 1 + wλϕ                (1 + r)k
                            k=1                                             k=0



Expressions for Risk Aversion with Balanced Growth
The results in the main text carry through essentially unchanged to the case of balanced growth. The
corresponding expressions are collected here in Lemma A2, Proposition A2, and Corollary A2.
     Along a balanced growth path, x ∈ {l, r, u} satisﬁes xt+k = xt for k = 1, 2, . . ., and I drop the time
subscript to denote the constant value. For x ∈ {a, c, w, d}, we have xt+k = Gk xt for k = 1, 2, . . ., for
                                                                                                                             44

some G ∈ (0, 1+r), and we let xbg  t denote the balanced growth path value. I denote the balanced growth
path value of Θt by Θbg t , although  the elements of Θ may grow at diﬀerent constant rates over time (or
remain constant). The job-ﬁnding rate f (Θbg   t ) must be constant along the balanced growth path because
f (Θbg
    t  ) = sl/u, and I write this value as f (Θ).  Additional details regarding balanced growth are provided
in King, Plosser, and Rebelo (1988, 2002).

Lemma A2. Given Assumptions 1–6 and 7 , along the balanced growth path, ∂c∗t+k /∂at = Gk ∂c∗t /∂at ,
k = 1, 2, . . ., and
                                     ∂c∗t                              1+r−G
                                          =                                                           .                    (A44)
                                     ∂at              γ       wtbg l            s + f (Θ)
                                                   1+
                                                      χ       cbg
                                                                t
                                                                       ( 1+r
                                                                          G
                                                                               − 1) + s + f (Θ)

Proof: The household’s Euler equation (13), evaluated along the (nonstochastic) balanced growth path,
implies
                                U  (cbg              bg                 bg
                                       t ) = β(1 + r)U (ct+1 ) = β(1 + r)U (Gct ).                                         (A45)

      As in King, Plosser, and Rebelo (2002), assume that preferences U are consistent with balanced
growth for all initial asset stocks and wages in a neighborhood of abg     bg
                                                                    t and wt , and hence for all initial
values of (ct , lt ) in a neighborhood of (cbg
                                            t , l). Thus, (A45) can be diﬀerentiated to yield


                                                U  (cbg                 bg
                                                       t ) = β(1 + r)G U (Gct ).                                           (A46)

Diﬀerentiating (A45) with respect to at yields

                                                    ∂c∗t                         ∂c∗t+1
                                      U  (cbg
                                             t )         = β(1 + r) U  (cbg
                                                                           t+1 )        .                                  (A47)
                                                    ∂at                           ∂at
Solving for ∂c∗t+1 /∂at and using (A46) yields ∂c∗t+1 /∂at = G ∂c∗t /∂at .
      Next, use the household’s budget constraint (1)–(2) and the above to solve for ∂c∗t /∂at , following
along the lines of (16)–(25).

The larger is G, the smaller is ∂c∗t /∂at , since the household chooses to absorb a greater fraction of asset
shocks in future periods.

Proposition A2. Given Assumptions 1–6 and 7 , absolute risk aversion satisﬁes

                                          a                        −V11 (abg     bg     bg
                                                                          t+1 , lt+1 ; Θt+1 )
                                      R       (abg      bg
                                                t , l; Θt )    =                                                           (A48)
                                                                       V1 (abg     bg     bg
                                                                            t+1 , lt+1 ; Θt+1 )

and                                                                                      1+r
                                                   −U  (cbg
                                                           t )                                  −1
                          Ra (abg      bg
                               t , l; Θt ) =              bg
                                                                                          G
                                                                                                                   .       (A49)
                                                     
                                                    U (ct )           γ        wtbg l            s + f (Θ)
                                                                   1+
                                                                      χ        cbg
                                                                                 t
                                                                                        ( 1+r
                                                                                           G
                                                                                                − 1) + s + f (Θ)

Proof: Proposition 1 implies (A48). Assumptions 1–6 imply (11)–(12). Substituting (11)–(12) and
Lemma A2 into (A48) gives

                                               −U  (cbg
                                                       t+1 )                            1+r−G
                       Ra (abg      bg
                            t , l; Θt ) =                                                                              .   (A50)
                                                U  (cbg
                                                      t+1 )        γ      wtbg l          G(s + f (Θ))
                                                                1+
                                                                   χ      cbg
                                                                            t
                                                                                   (1 + r − G) + G(s + f (Θ))
                                                                                                       45

Applying the Euler equation (13) and (A45) completes the proof.

Note that (A50) agrees with Proposition 2 when G = 1. The larger is G, the smaller is Ra , since larger
G implies greater household wealth and ability to absorb asset shocks.

Corollary A2. Given Assumptions 1–6 and 7 , relative risk aversion satisﬁes
                                                                   γ
                          Rc (abg      bg
                               t , l; Θt ) =                                              .         (A51)
                                                  γ   wtbg l            s + f (Θ)
                                               1+
                                                  χ   cbg
                                                        t      ( 1+r
                                                                  G
                                                                       − 1) + s + f (Θ)


Proof: As in Deﬁnition 2, deﬁne wealth Abg
                                        t in beginning- rather than end-of-period-t units; this requires
multiplying by ((1+r)/G)−1 rather than just (1+r)−1 . Then the present discounted value of consumption
along the balanced growth path is given by Abg   bg  1+r
                                            t = ct /( G − 1). Substituting these into Proposition A2
completes the proof.

Thus, the expressions for relative risk aversion are largely unchanged by balanced growth. The labor
                                               s + f (Θ)                      s + f (Θ)
market ﬂexibility index takes the form 1+r                     rather than                , which has the
                                         ( G − 1) + s + f (Θ)               r + s + f (Θ)
eﬀect of decreasing the importance of r and amplifying the importance of s + f (Θ) in the index, but other
than that the expression is unchanged.
                                                                                               46

References

Ai, Hengjie, Mariano Max Croce, and Kai Li (2013). “Toward a Quantitative General Equilibrium
    Asset Pricing Model with Intangible Capital,” Review of Financial Studies 26, 491–530.
Ai, Hengjie, Mariano Max Croce, Anthony Diercks, and Kai Li (2018). “News Shocks and
    Production-Based Term Structure of Equity Returns,” Review of Financial Studies 31, 2423–2467.
Alvarez, Fernando and Nancy Stokey (1998). “Dynamic Programming with Homogeneous Func-
   tions,” Journal of Economic Theory 82, 167–189.
Andolfatto (1996). “Business Cycles and Labor-Market Search,” American Economic Review 86, 112–
   132.
Andreasen, Martin (2012a). “On the Eﬀects of Rare Disasters and Uncertainty Shocks for Risk Premia
   in Nonlinear DSGE Models,” Review of Economic Dynamics 15, 295–316.
Andreasen, Martin (2012b). “An Estimated DSGE Model: Explaining Variation in Nominal Term
   Premia, Real Term Premia, and Inﬂation Risk Premia,” European Economic Review 56, 1656–1674.
Arrow, Kenneth (1965). “Aspects of the Theory of Risk-Bearing,” Yrjö Jahnsson Lectures, in Essays
   in the Theory of Risk Bearing, ed. Arrow, Kenneth (Chicago: Markum, 1971).
Aruoba, S. Boragan, Jesús Fernández-Villaverde, and Juan Rubio-Ramı́rez (2006). “Compar-
   ing Solution Methods for Dynamic Equilibrium Economies,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and
   Control 30, 2477–2508.
Backus, David, Bryan Routledge, and Stanley Zin (2008). “Asset Prices in Business Cycle Anal-
   ysis,” unpublished manuscript Tepper School of Business, Carnegie Mellon University.
Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron (2004). “Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of Asset-
   Pricing Puzzles,” Journal of Finance 59, 1481–1509.
Barillas, Francisco, Lars Hansen, and Thomas Sargent (2009). “Doubts or Variability?” Journal
   of Economic Theory 144, 2388–2418.
Barro, Robert (2006). “Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century,” Quarterly Jour-
   nal of Economics 121, 823–866.
Bodie, Zvi, Robert Merton, and William Samuelson (1992). “Labor Supply Flexibility and Port-
   folio Choice in a Life Cycle Model,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 16, 427–449.
Boldrin, Michele, Lawrence Christiano, and Jonas Fisher (1997). “Habit Persistence and Asset
   Returns in an Exchange Economy,” Macroeconomic Dynamics 1, 312–332.
Boldrin, Michele, Lawrence Christiano, and Jonas Fisher (2001). “Habit Persistence, Asset
   Returns, and the Business Cycle,” American Economic Review 91, 149–166.
Campbell, John (1999). “Asset Prices, Consumption, and the Business Cycle,” in Handbook of Macroe-
   conomics 1, ed. John Taylor and Michael Woodford (New York: Elsevier), 1231–1303.
Campbell, John, and John Cochrane (1999). “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based Explanation
   of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy 107, 205–251.
Cesarini, David, Erik Lindqvist, Matthew Notowidigdo, and Robert Ostling (2017). “The
   Eﬀect of Wealth on Individual and Household Labor Supply: Evidence from Swedish Lotteries,”
   American Economic Review 107, 3917–3946.
Cochrane, John. Asset Pricing (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2005).
Cochrane, John, and Monika Piazzesi (2005). “Bond Risk Premia,” American Economic Review 95,
   138–160.
                                                                                                  47

Coile, Courtney, and Paul Levine (2009). “The Market Crash and Mass Layoﬀs: How the Current
    Economic Crisis May Aﬀect Retirement,” NBER Working Paper 15395.
Constantinides, George (1990). “Habit Formation: A Resolution of the Equity Premium Puzzle,”
   Journal of Political Economy 98, 519–543.
Constantinides, George, and Darrell Duffie (1996). “Asset Pricing with Heterogeneous Con-
   sumers,” Journal of Political Economy 104, 219–240.
Cooper, Ilan, and Richard Priestley (2009). “Time-Varying Risk Premiums and the Output Gap”
   Review of Financial Studies 22, 2801–2833.
Coronado, Julia, and Maria Perozek (2003). “Wealth Eﬀects and the Consumption of Leisure:
   Retirement Decisions During the Stock Market Boom of the 1990s,” Federal Reserve Board Finance
   and Economics Discussion Series 2003–20.
Croce, Mariano Massimiliano (2014). “Long-Run Productivity Risk: A New Hope for Production-
   Based Asset Pricing?” Journal of Monetary Economics 66, 13–31.
Del Negro, Marco, Marc Giannoni, and Frank Schorfheide (2015). “Inﬂation in the Great
   Recession and New Keynesian Models,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7, 168–196.
Den Haan, Wouter, Garey Ramey, and Joel Watson (2000). “Job Destruction and Propagation
   of Shocks,” American Economic Review 90, 482–498.
Dew-Becker, Ian (2014). “Bond Pricing with a Time-Varying Price of Risk in an Estimated Medium-
   Scale Bayesian DSGE Model,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 46, 837–888.
Elsby, Michael, Bart Hobijn, and Ayşegül Şahin (2013). “Unemployment Dynamics in the OECD,”
    Review of Economics and Statistics 95, 530–548.
Epstein, Larry, Emmanuel Farhi, and Tomasz Strzalecki (2014). “How Much Would You Pay to
    Resolve Long-Run Risk?” American Economic Review 104, 2680–2697.
Epstein, Larry, and Stanley Zin (1989). “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior
    of Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework,” Econometrica 57, 937–969.
Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French (1989). “Business Conditions and Expected Returns on Stocks
   and Bonds,” Journal of Financial Economics 25, 23–49.
Farmer, Roger (1990). “RINCE Preferences,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 105, 43–60.
Flavin, Marjorie, and Shinobu Nakagawa (2008). “A Model of Housing in the Presence of Ad-
    justment Costs: A Structural Interpretation of Habit Persistence,” American Economic Review 98,
    474–495.
García-Feijóo, Luis, and Randy Jorgensen (2010). “Can Operating Leverage Be the Cause of the
   Value Premium?” Financial Management Autumn, 1127–1153.
Gollier, Christian (2002). “What Does Theory Have to Say About Household Portfolios?” in House-
   hold Portfolios (MIT Press: Cambridge, MA), Guiso, Luigi, Michael Haliassos, and Tullio Jappelli
   (eds.), 27–54.
Gourio, François (2012). “Disaster Risk and Business Cycles,” American Economic Review 102, 2734–
   2766.
Gourio, François (2013). “Credit Risk and Disaster Risk,” American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
   nomics 5, 1–34.
Guiso, Luigi, Michael Haliassos, and Tullio Jappelli (2002). Household Portfolios (MIT Press:
    Cambridge, MA).
Guiso, Luigi, and Tullio Jappelli (2002). “Household Portfolios in Italy,” in Household Portfolios
    (MIT Press: Cambridge, MA), Guiso, Luigi, Michael Haliassos, and Tullio Jappelli (eds.), 251–289.
                                                                                                48

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales (2017). “Time Varying Risk Aversion,” Journal
    of Financial Economics forthcoming.
Hall, Robert (2005). “Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness,” American Eco-
   nomic Review 95, 50–65.
Hall, Robert (2017). “High Discounts and High Unemployment,” American Economic Review 107,
   305–330.
Hobijn, Bart, and Ayşegül Şahin (2007). “Job-Finding and Separation Rates in the OECD,” Federal
   Reserve Bank of New York Staﬀ Report 298.
Imbens, Guido, Donald Rubin, and Bruce Sacerdote (2001). “Estimating the Eﬀect of Unearned
    Income on Labor Earnings, Savings, and Consumption: Evidence from a Survey of Lottery Players,”
    American Economic Review 91, 778–794.
Jermann, Urban (1998). “Asset Pricing in Production Economies,” Journal of Monetary Economics 41,
   257–275.
Kihlstrom, Richard, and Leonard Mirman (1974). “Risk Aversion with Many Commodities,” Jour-
    nal of Economic Theory 8, 361–388.
Kihlstrom, Richard, and Leonard Mirman (1981). “Constant, Increasing, and Decreasing Risk
    Aversion with Many Commodities,” Review of Economic Studies 48, 271–280.
Killingsworth, Mark, and James Heckman (1986). “Female Labor Supply: A Survey,” Handbook of
    Labor Economics 1, 103–204.
King, Robert, Charles Plosser, and Sergio Rebelo (1988). “Production, Growth, and Business
   Cycles: I. The Basic Neoclassical Model,” Journal of Monetary Economics 21, 195–232.
King, Robert, Charles Plosser, and Sergio Rebelo (2002). “Production, Growth, and Business
   Cycles: Technical Appendix,” Computational Economics 20, 87–116.
Kung, Howard (2015). “Macroeconomic Linkages between Monetary Policy and the Term Structure of
   Interest Rates,” Journal of Financial Economics 115, 42–57.
Lettau, Martin, and Sydney Ludvigson (2010). “Measuring and Modeling Variation in the Risk-
   Return Trade-oﬀ,” Handbook of Financial Econometrics 1, 617–690.
Merton, Robert (1973). “An Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model,” Econometrica 41, 867–887.
Merz, Monika (1995). “Search in the Labor Market and the Real Business Cycle,” Journal of Monetary
   Economics 36, 269–300.
Michaillat, Pascal (2012). “Do Matching Frictions Explain Unemployment? Not in Bad Times,”
   American Economic Review 102, 1721–1750.
Mortensen, Dale, and Christopher Pissarides (1994). “Job Creation and Job Destruction in the
   Theory of Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies 61, 397–415.
Palomino, Francisco (2012). “Bond Risk Premiums and Optimal Monetary Policy,” Review of Eco-
   nomic Dynamics 15, 19–40.
Pencavel, John (1986). “Labor Supply of Men: A Survey,” Handbook of Labor Economics 1, 3–102.
Piazzesi, Monika, and Eric Swanson (2008). “Futures Prices as Risk-Adjusted Forecasts of Monetary
    Policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics 55, 677–691.
Pratt, John (1964). “Risk Aversion in the Small and in the Large,” Econometrica 32, 122–136.
Rincón-Zapatero, Juan, and Carlos Rodríguez-Palmero (2003). “Existence and Uniqueness of
    Solutions to the Bellman Equation in the Unbounded Case,” Econometrica 71, 1519–1555.
                                                                                                    49

Rouwenhorst, K. Geert (1995). “Asset Pricing Implications of Equilibrium Business Cycle Models,”
   in Frontiers of Business Cycle Research, ed. Cooley, Thomas (Princeton: Princeton University Press).
Rudebusch, Glenn, and Eric Swanson (2008). “Examining the Bond Premium Puzzle with a DSGE
   Model,” Journal of Monetary Economics 55, 111–126.
Rudebusch, Glenn, and Eric Swanson (2012). “The Bond Premium in a DSGE Model with Long-Run
   Real and Nominal Risks,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4, 105–143.
Santos, Manuel (1991). “Smoothness of the Policy Function in Discrete Time Economic Models,”
   Econometrica 59, 1365–1382.
Schmidt, Lawrence (2016). “Climbing and Falling Oﬀ the Ladder: Asset Pricing Implications of Labor
   Market Event Risk,” unpublished manuscript Sloan School of Management.
Shimer, Robert (2010). Labor Markets and Business Cycles (Princeton: Princeton University Press).
Shimer, Robert (2012). “Reassessing the Ins and Outs of Unemployment,” Review of Economic Dy-
    namics 15, 127–148.
Stiglitz, Joseph (1969). “Behavior Towards Risk with Many Commodities,” Econometrica 37, 660–667.
Smets, Frank, and Rafael Wouters (2007). “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A Bayesian
   DSGE Approach,” American Economic Review 97, 586–606.
Stokey, Nancy, and Robert Lucas, with Edward Prescott (1989). Recursive Methods in Eco-
   nomic Dynamics (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Swanson, Eric (2009). “Risk Aversion, the Labor Margin, and Asset Pricing in DSGE Models,” Federal
   Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2009–26.
Swanson, Eric (2012). “Risk Aversion and the Labor Margin in Dynamic Equilibrium Models,” Amer-
   ican Economic Review 102, 1663–1691.
Swanson, Eric (2018). “Risk Aversion, Risk Premia, and the Labor Margin with Generalized Recursive
   Preferences,” Review of Economic Dynamics 28, 290–321.
Swanson, Eric (2019). “A Macroeconomic Model of Equities and Real, Nominal, and Defaultable Debt,”
   unpublished manuscript University of California, Irvine.
Swanson, Eric, Gary Anderson, and Andrew Levin (2006). “Higher-Order Perturbation Solutions
   to Dynamic, Discrete-Time Rational Expectations Models,” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
   Working Paper 2006–01.
Tallarini, Thomas (2000). “Risk-Sensitive Business Cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics 45, 507–
   532.
Trigari, Antonella (2009). “Equilibrium Unemployment, Job Flows, and Inﬂation Dynamics,” Jour-
    nal of Money, Credit, and Banking 41, 1–33.
Uhlig, Harald (2007). “Leisure, Growth, and Long-Run Risk,” unpublished manuscript University of
   Chicago.
Van Binsbergen, Jules, Jesús Fernández-Villaverde, Ralph Koijen, and Juan Rubio-Ramírez
   (2012). “The Term Structure of Interest Rates in a DSGE Model with Recursive Preferences,”
   Journal of Monetary Economics 59, 634–648.
Weil, Phillipe (1989). “The Equity Premium Puzzle and the Risk-Free Rate Puzzle,” Journal of
   Monetary Economics 24, 401–421.
Ynesta, Isabelle (2008). “Households’ Wealth Composition Across OECD Countries and Financial
   Risks Borne by Households,” OECD Financial Market Trends .
