                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   A DYNAMIC MODEL OF CHARACTERISTIC-BASED RETURN PREDICTABILITY

                                         Aydoğan Alti
                                        Sheridan Titman

                                      Working Paper 25777
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25777


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2019




Both authors are with the University of Texas at Austin. An earlier draft of the paper was
circulated under the title “Creative Destruction, Investor Beliefs and the Evolution of Stock
Returns.” We benefited from comments and suggestions by Wei Xiong (the Editor), the Associate
Editor, two anonymous referees, Zhanhui Chen (discussant), Nicolae Gârleanu (discussant),
David Hirshleifer, Travis Johnson, Mao Lei (discussant), Kristian Rydqvist (discussant), David
Solomon (discussant), and participants in presentations of the paper at the 2016 Rising Stars
Conference at Fordham University, Workshop in Memory of Rick Green at Carnegie Mellon
University, 2016 Asian Bureau of Finance and Economic Research Conference in Singapore,
Asset Pricing Conference in Honor of John Wei at HKUST, 2016 UBC Summer Finance
Conference, 2017 China International Conference in Finance, 2018 American Finance
Association Meeting, Emory University, HEC Lausanne, Office of Financial Research, SAIF,
Universidad de Chile, University of Colorado Boulder and Denver, University of Georgia,
University of Southern California, University of Texas at Austin, and Vienna University of
Economics and Business. We thank Will Shuo Liu for excellent research assistance. Disclosure
statement: Alt has no conflicts of interest to disclose. Titman works as an advisor in the asset
management business. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Aydoğan Alti and Sheridan Titman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
A Dynamic Model of Characteristic-Based Return Predictability
Aydoğan Alti and Sheridan Titman
NBER Working Paper No. 25777
April 2019
JEL No. G02,G12

                                           ABSTRACT

We present a dynamic model that links characteristic-based return predictability to systematic
factors that determine the evolution of firm fundamentals. In the model, an economy-wide
disruption process reallocates profits from existing businesses to new projects and thus generates
a source of systematic risk for portfolios of firms sorted on value, profitability, and asset growth.
If investors are overconfident about their ability to evaluate the disruption climate, these
characteristic-sorted portfolios exhibit persistent mispricing. The model generates predictions
about the conditional predictability of characteristic-sorted portfolio returns and illustrates how
return persistence increases the likelihood of observing characteristic-based anomalies.


Aydoğan Alti
Department of Finance
McCombs School of Business
University of Texas
Austin, TX 78712
aydogan.alti@mccombs.utexas.edu

Sheridan Titman
Finance Department
McCombs School of Business
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712-1179
and NBER
titman@mail.utexas.edu
Since the late 1970s, financial economists have identified a number of firm characteristics like

valuation ratios, profitability and asset growth rates that explain the cross-section of stock

returns. Historically, market-neutral portfolios that are sorted on these characteristics have

exhibited very high Sharpe ratios – at least as high as the Sharpe ratio of the market. While the

literature has mostly focused on these historical return patterns, there is relatively little research

on the conditional relationships between characteristics and returns. This is somewhat surprising

because the cross-section of firm characteristics in the economy, as well as the relation between

characteristics and firm values, exhibits substantial time variation (e.g., the increased prevalence

and valuations of growth firms in the late 1990s).

        This paper explores the evolution of firm characteristics and their links to return

predictability within the context of a dynamic behavioral model. The model assumes that the

profitability and growth rates of firms are affected by what we refer to as the disruption climate,

which is an economy-wide factor that creates losers as well as winners. The behavioral elements

of the model arise because investors are overconfident about their ability to assess the disruption

climate, and because of this, firms with different exposures to disruption – e.g., value versus

growth firms – exhibit predictable return differences. The model’s testable implications relate

these return differences to observable measures of the conditional bias in investor beliefs. For

instance, cross-sectional dispersions of characteristics, which reflect the hard and soft indicators

of disruption that investors observe, predict subsequent returns of characteristic-sorted portfolios.

The model also illustrates how the persistence of characteristic-sorted returns, which obtains due

to slow-changing investor beliefs, can substantially increase the likelihood of observing

characteristic-based anomalies such as the value premium in samples that are of comparable

length to those in empirical studies.


                                                   1
       Firms in the model are characterized by differences in their current access to new growth

opportunities, as well as their different histories. Growth firms are endowed with new projects

every period while value firms simply harvest the profits from their existing projects. The

emergence of the new projects, as well as the demise of the existing ones, is determined by a

systematic factor that we label the disruption climate. A favorable disruption climate increases

the arrival rate of new projects, which benefits young growth firms, but because these new

projects compete with existing businesses, a favorable disruption climate harms the profits of

assets in place, and is thus detrimental to mature value firms. The model thus captures the

Schumpeterian notion of creative destruction, where innovation creates losers as well as winners.

       To abstract from differences in risk premia, investors in our model are assumed to be

risk-neutral. These investors learn about the disruption climate from two sources, the realized

rate of disruptive innovations, and a soft information signal that represents, for example, news

reports and expert opinions. Since both sources are noisy indicators of the disruption climate,

investor expectations contain estimation errors, implying that even fully rational investors are

sometimes too optimistic and sometimes too pessimistic about the rate of future disruptive

innovations. However, these estimation errors do not generate predictable returns when investors

are rational – some degree of irrationality is needed to generate asset pricing anomalies.

       We introduce the possibility of biased inferences by assuming that investors are

overconfident about the precision of their soft information, which implies that their estimates of

the disruption climate puts too much weight on the soft information signal. This behavioral bias

does not cause investors to systematically over- or under-estimate the disruption climate, i.e., the

unconditional, or the long-run expected return associated with disruption rate surprises is zero.

However, because overconfident investors learn slowly, conditional expected returns differ from



                                                 2
zero and change slowly over time. Put differently, the mistakes investors make in estimating the

disruption climate take time to correct.

       We explore the model’s empirical and quantitative implications for characteristic-sorted

portfolio returns through simulations. We first analyze the differences in the portfolio exposures

to disruption and the return predictability that these differences generate. Portfolios that bet in

favor of newcomers (growth firms, unprofitable firms, and high asset growth firms) are

positively exposed to disruption, whereas portfolios that bet in favor of incumbents (value firms,

profitable firms, and low asset growth firms) are negatively exposed. Thus, when investors over-

estimate the disruption climate, investment strategies that bet in favor of newcomers and against

incumbents exhibit low subsequent return performance. The opposite predictability pattern

obtains when investors under-estimate the disruption climate. Our analysis also highlights how

return predictability is affected by the interactions between different characteristics. For instance,

while growth firms are positively exposed to disruption on average, profitable growth firms

exhibit negligible exposures, since an increased flow of investment opportunities is offset by the

demise of some of the existing profitable projects. Thus, the predictability of growth firms’

returns is mainly driven by unprofitable growth firms, not the profitable ones.

       Our analysis suggests three avenues for testing the model’s predictions on conditional

return predictability. The first is to employ measures of investors’ expectations that one might

obtain from surveys, the media, or analyst reports. In our model, the overconfident investors’

expectations of the disruption climate are too dispersed relative to the rational benchmark, e.g.,

high expectations tend to be too high. Thus, measures of investor expectations predict

subsequent returns of characteristic-sorted portfolios, similar to the “investor sentiment” effects

documented in the empirical literature. Second, our analysis links return predictability to the

observed distribution of firm characteristics. As we show, the cross-sectional dispersion of firms’

                                                  3
valuation ratios, profitability, and asset growth rates capture past realizations of both hard and

soft information signals. Since investors’ processing of these signals is biased, measures of

cross-sectional dispersion of firm characteristics predict subsequent returns. Third, characteristic-

sorted portfolio returns exhibit positive autocorrelation, thus momentum strategies that buy

recent winner portfolios and sell recent losers are profitable in our model.

        In the final part of the paper, we consider the historical return patterns discussed at the

outset, and examine the extent to which they can be replicated within the context of our model.

As our simulations illustrate, the persistence of characteristic-sorted portfolio returns described

above greatly increases the likelihood that these portfolios generate high Sharpe ratios. For

instance, realizing a Sharpe ratio of 0.40 in a 50-year sample, an extremely unusual event under

full investor rationality, occurs in up to 20% of the simulated histories. Moreover, such abnormal

historical return patterns do not predict significant future returns. While these results obtain in a

stylized model that assumes zero unconditional return predictability, the broader takeaway of this

analysis – that investor overconfidence can substantially increase the likelihood of extreme

return realizations – holds more generally, regardless of the magnitude of unconditional expected

returns.

        Our analysis is related to the behavioral finance literature, and in particular to Daniel,

Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam (DHS) (1998, 2001), which describe a link between the value

effect and the tendency of investors to be overconfident about the precision of their private

information.1 We also focus on overconfidence, but our channel generating mispricing is

different. In the DHS papers, firms are essentially identical, and the value effect is generated




1
 Other important papers in this literature include Barberis, Shleifer and Vishny (1998), which considers behavioral
biases that influence how investors estimate the persistence of earnings shocks, and Hong and Stein (1999), which
considers the effects of positive-feedback traders and traders who ignore the information embedded in market prices.

                                                         4
from the fact that overpriced stocks tend to have high prices relative to fundamentals. In contrast,

the firms in our model differ in fundamental ways, i.e., the growth firms have ongoing new

investment opportunities and the value firms do not, and it is these fundamental differences that

lead to cross-sectional differences in their exposures to sources of systematic risk.

         There is also a behavioral literature that explores how fluctuations in investor sentiment

can induce covariation amongst stocks with common characteristics.2 In our model,

overconfident investors tend to over-react to soft information about disruption shocks, and in

doing so they induce excess (relative to the fully rational case) covariation amongst stocks with

similar characteristics. In this sense, our model endogenously generates what looks like a

sentiment factor.

         The analysis in this paper is also related to studies that focus on asset pricing with

parameter uncertainty. For instance, Lewellen and Shanken (2002) show, within a setting where

rational Bayesian investors learn about expected cash flows, that returns may appear to the

econometrician to be predictable along historical sample paths. As our analysis illustrates, if we

properly integrate over all possible sample paths, the null hypothesis of no predictability is

rejected too often only when investors are irrational. Pastor and Stambaugh (2012) analyze the

long-term variance of market returns in a model with parameter uncertainty and changing

expected rates of return. Similar to our paper, they make the point that changes in expected

returns can increase the volatility of long-term return realizations.3


2
  Barberis and Shleifer (2003) present one of the first theoretical analyses of how style or characteristic-based
investor sentiment can generate excess return covariation. See Baker and Wurgler (2006) for an empirical analysis
of the impact of time-varying investor sentiment on characteristic-sorted portfolio returns.
3
  Other related papers include Timmermann (1993, 1996) and Pastor and Veronesi (2003, 2006). Timmermann
(1993, 1996) analyzes models where investors use Bayes’ rule to estimate unknown parameters but value assets
without taking into account estimation error, resulting in predictable returns and excess volatility. Pastor and
Veronesi (2003, 2006) also analyze learning effects on asset prices, though their focus is not on return predictability.
The Pastor-Veronesi models illustrate how uncertainty about future growth rates may rationalize high and volatile
valuations, especially for young businesses such as the technology firms of the late 1990s.

                                                           5
         This research also complements recent work by Gârleanu, Kogan, and Panageas (2012)

and Kogan, Papanikolaou, and Stoffman (2015), which examine how the innovation process can

generate sources of systematic risk that affect the prospects of different firms differently. In these

models growth firms earn low expected returns as they constitute a hedge against the

displacement risk brought about by technological progress. These models, which assume full

rationality, require fairly strong risk preferences to rationalize the historically observed return

patterns.4 Although we solve our model with risk neutral preferences, we can envision a hybrid

model that accounts for risk preferences as well as slow learning that better explains the

historical return patterns.

         The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section I presents the model. Section

II describes the model calibration and simulations. Sections III and IV present the analyses of the

calibrated model. Section V concludes the paper.



I. THE MODEL

A. Model setup

         Time is continuous and denoted by t. Because our focus is on abnormal returns, we

abstract from the possibility of risk premia and assume that investors are risk neutral and

discount cash flows at a constant rate r. The investors also have the same beliefs about model

parameters and observe the same information, which implies that asset prices are effectively set

by a representative agent. The economy is populated by a continuum of firms and we use the

superscript i to denote a generic individual firm. Financing is frictionless and the Modigliani-


4
 See also Bena, Garlappi, and Grüning (2016) and Loualiche (2016), which analyze asset pricing implications of
new firm creation in general equilibrium models. A number of earlier papers in the literature also provide risk-based
explanations for the value premium. Examples are Berk, Green, and Naik (1999), Carlson, Fisher, and Giammarino
(2004), and Zhang (2005). These papers, by specifying exogenous pricing kernels that are calibrated with a high
price of risk, also effectively assume extreme risk aversion.

                                                          6
Miller Theorem holds so we can assume all firms are equity financed without loss of generality.

         Firms derive their values from their projects, which are infinitesimal investment

opportunities that arrive exogenously. A project generates cash flows until it becomes obsolete

and is terminated. Specifically, a newly arrived project requires a capital investment kz and

generates deterministic cash flows at rate azkz until it is terminated, where az represents the

project’s return on investment.5 The subscript z denotes the firm’s idiosyncratic growth state; as

we explain below, firms in different growth states receive different projects. When an active

project is terminated, a fraction  of the initial investment kz is recovered.6 The net cash flows

of the firm, which include the cash flow from the active projects, the cost of investing in new

projects, and the value of the recovered capital of terminated projects, are immediately paid out

to shareholders.7

         Firms in this model differ for two reasons. The first is that they have different histories,

i.e., they received different projects in the past. The second is that they inhabit different growth

states, which determine the new projects they receive. Specifically, a firm is in one of three

growth states z at any given time: the early growth state EG, the mature growth state MG, and

the no growth state NG. Let zti  { EG,MG,NG } describe the state of firm i at time t. New firms

are born with identical initial conditions into the early growth state and they transition into the




5
  Our assumption of projects with deterministic cash flows allows us to focus on the arrival and the termination rates
of projects as the primary sources of risk. A more general version of the model could feature project cash flows that
are subject to additional risk factors.
6
  For simplicity we assume that capital does not depreciate. An alternative interpretation is that capital depreciates
but has to be replenished for the project to be operational; in this interpretation, the cost of depreciation is implicit in
the project return az.
7
  By assuming an exogenous process governing project arrivals and terminations, we abstract from the possibility
that firms’ real investment choices are influenced by investor beliefs. This assumption allows us to focus on the
pricing of a given set of assets. Yet the feedback from asset prices to investment choices may be relevant for some
return anomalies, especially those that relate to firms’ investment rates. See Altı and Tetlock (2014) for a
quantitative analysis of how firms’ investment decisions may amplify the impact of biased investor beliefs on return
predictability.

                                                             7
mature growth state and the no growth state over time.

         In our calibrated model, the firm has access to new projects in the early and the mature

growth states, but not in the no growth state. Specifically, we set kEG = kMG = k and aEG > aMG.

Thus, the projects that arrive in the mature growth state require the same initial capital

investment k as in the early growth state, but are less profitable. The assumption that firms in the

no growth state receive no projects can be stated as kNG = aNG = 0.

         Let f t i denote the firm’s profitability, defined as the rate at which the cash flow from the

firm’s active projects are generated, and K ti denote the firm’s capital stock, which is the total

capital investment incurred for the active projects. A new firm i, which is born at time t into the

early growth state, has an initial capital stock that is normalized to K ti  1 and initial profitability

that is normalized to f t i  0 .8

         After being born into the early growth state, the firm’s state zti evolves as a continuous-

time Markov process with sequential jumps. Specifically, the firm transitions from the early

growth state to the mature growth state with Poisson intensity qEG , and from the mature growth

state to the no growth state with Poisson intensity qMG . A firm in the no growth state dies and

leaves the firm population with Poisson intensity qNG . Each firm that dies is replaced by a new

firm that is born into the early growth state, as described above. When a firm dies, its owners

receive the market value of its active projects as a liquidating dividend.9 The transition rates

described above imply that firms spend 1/ qEG years on average in the early growth state, 1/ qMG



8
  The assumption that firms are born with an unproductive unit of capital is motivated by the presence of firms with
valuable growth opportunities but little or no profits in the data. The specific value chosen here, zero initial
profitability, does not affect our results in any material way; what is important is that the model includes growth
firms with low profits.
9
  Thus, a firm’s death in our model resembles an asset sale to an entity outside the publicly traded corporate sector.

                                                          8
years on average in the mature growth state, and 1/ qNG years on average in the no growth state.

Thus, the average life expectancy of a firm is 1/ qEG  1/ qMG  1/ qNG years.

       The firm’s capital stock K ti and profitability f t i evolve according to the following laws

of motion:

                               dKti  kz  dt  dM t    Kti  dt  dM t  ,                       (1)

                              df t i  az kz  dt  dM t    f t i  dt  dM t  .                 (2)




In Equations (1) and (2), the z subscript refers to the firm-specific growth state. The term dM t

represents a disruption rate that is systematic across firms. We describe the evolution of the

disruption rate and investors’ information about it in detail below. For now, it is sufficient to

point out that the disruption rate dM t is a persistent process with a long-term mean of zero.


       The first terms in Equations (1) and (2) capture the arrival of new projects. Recall that

firms in the early and the mature growth states receive projects that each require a capital

investment of kz = k and add azkz to the firm’s profitability. The rate at which new projects arrive

is stochastic and is represented by the term dt  dM t . Thus, over an instantaneous time period dt

the firm receives dt projects on average (i.e., one project per unit of time), with more or less new

projects arriving depending on the realization of the disruption rate dM t .

       The second terms in Equations (1) and (2) reflect the termination of active projects. Over

a given period of time, a fraction of the firm’s active projects become obsolete and are

liquidated. When a project is terminated the capital of the firm declines and the profitability of

the firm declines by a proportional amount. Projects are terminated at an average rate   0 ,



                                                        9
which we assume is the same for all firms. As with the arrival of new projects, the realized

termination rate depends on the disruption rate and is given by   dt  dM t  .

       Equations (1) and (2) illustrate how the exogenous growth state of the firm, i.e., early

growth, mature growth or no growth, generates the endogenous state variables, capital stock K ti

and profitability f t i . Transitions from one state to another, along with the termination rate of

active projects, generate cross-sectional and time-series variations in firm size, profitability, and

valuation ratios. Firms that have profitable active projects but are in the no growth state expect

their size and profits to decline over time. Firms that have low current profitability but are in

growth states expect the opposite. Thus, the model captures in a reduced-form way the

Schumpeterian notion of creative destruction: profits are redistributed from established firms to

newcomers and from old to new technologies.

       The economy-wide disruption rate dM t , which determines the speed of this

Schumpeterian reallocation process, is the main focus of the model. When dM t is high, new

projects are created faster and existing projects are destroyed faster. As a result, early-growth

firms benefit when dM t is high and no-growth firms are hurt. Depending on parameters, mature-

growth firms can either be helped or hurt by more disruption, since it hurts their existing

businesses while at the same time facilitating new projects.

       The disruption rate, which is observable, is an exogenously-specified process that has

both persistent and transitory components. Specifically,



                                        dM t  t dt   M dtM ,                                     (3)




                                                   10
where  t , what we have referred to as the disruption climate, is the persistent component of the

disruption rate, and the Brownian process dtM is the transitory component. We envision the

disruption climate  t as a slow-moving variable with a long-term mean that is normalized to be

zero. Specifically,  t evolves according to




                                            d t     t dt    dt .                                        (4)




         Although investors observe the realized disruption rate dM t , they cannot separately

observe the persistent and the transitory components.10 They do, however, observe a soft

information signal dst that reflects the state of technological progress, changes in the regulatory

environment, and other information that may help them predict the future evolution of the

disruption climate. Specifically, investors observe




                                           dst  dt  1   2 dts ,                                            (5)




where the parameter   [0,1] is the signal’s precision and the Brownian term dts is the signal’s

noise. Higher values of  describe a more informative signal and thus less residual uncertainty

about  t . In model calibrations, we consider the possibility that investors have biased

perceptions about the precision of the soft information signal. Specifically, we analyze the case



10
  Investors observe the realized disruption rate dMt because each firm’s changes in capital stock and profitability are
observable and can be used to back out dMt (see Equations 1 and 2). In a more general version of the model where
change in profitability contains additional noise terms, a single firm’s change in profitability would not perfectly
reveal dMt , but with a large cross section of firms investors would still be able to estimate it highly precisely.

                                                          11
where overconfident investors believe the signal precision parameter to be B   .

       Investors in this model use the historical realizations of the disruption rate along with

their soft information to learn about expected future disruption rates. We model the disruption

rate dM t in a way that reflects the learning features that we would like to analyze. For learning

to be relevant, the disruption rate needs to have a persistent component that is not directly

observable along with a transitory component. In other words, as expressed in Equation (3), the

observed disruption rate equals the persistent component plus a transitory component that

obscures the investor’s inference problem. In principle, the persistent component  t could be an

unknown constant  ; however, when this is the case, learning effects vanish in the long run

since investors eventually learn  arbitrarily precisely. In our model, the persistent component

 t changes over time. Investors learn about the current value of  t , but unobservable shocks to

 t create an additional source of uncertainty. In the steady state, these two effects cancel out,

and the estimation error investors face about  t remains constant over time.

       The soft signal dst plays an important role in the model. The signal summarizes all the

non-financial data that investors use to evaluate the current disruption climate. Investors’

possibly biased perception of the signal’s precision is the driver of the return predictability

patterns that the model generates. The signal is assumed to be informative about the shocks to  t

rather than the level of  t . This specification, which we take from Scheinkman and Xiong


                                                                                      
                                                                                           2
(2003), has two advantages. First, the signal has constant variance  2        12            1 regardless

of the value of  . Thus, the specification permits biased investor beliefs about signal precision

(i.e., B   ) that cannot be detected directly from the time-series variance of signal realizations.


                                                  12
Second, the specification clearly delineates the two sources of information investors use to

update their estimates. The signal is informative about shocks to  t whereas the realized

disruption rate dM t is informative about the level of  t . Being orthogonal, these two sources of

information generate an economically meaningful two-factor structure for asset returns.



B. Information Processing

        As discussed above, investors update their beliefs about the disruption climate  t based

on two pieces of information, the realized disruption rate dM t and the signal dst . In this section

we characterize the steady state of the model in which the precision of the conditional estimate of

 t is constant over time.

        Let ˆ t denote investors’ expected disruption rate, defined as the conditional estimate of

 t given all available information at time t. Let  denote the steady-state variance of the

estimation error ˆ t  t . The law of motion of ˆ t is given by



                                                                        
                                 d ˆ t     ˆ t dt    dst       dt ,                   (6)
                                                                       M



where



                                                     dM t  ˆ t dt
                                            dt                       .                          (7)
                                                         M



The disruption surprise dt is a standard Brownian motion that reflects the unexpected

                                                      13
component of the realized disruption rate. Recall that the signal dst is also a standard Brownian

motion by construction. Therefore, the disruption surprise dt and the signal dst constitute the

two sources of systematic risk that are orthogonal to each other.

       The steady-state variance of the estimation error  solves



                                     2   1  2 2 2         
                                                 2      .                                  (8)
                                    2  2         M      



The solution is given by




                                                                        
                                M    M   2 M2  1   2  2 .                         (9)




       When investors have biased signal precision, the parameter  in Equations (6), (8), and

(9) is replaced by its biased counterpart B   , which results in  B   . When this is the case,

investors overestimate the precision of their soft information, which implies that they believe that

their disruption rate estimate ˆ t is more precise than it actually is. Inspecting Equation (6), we

see that this bias leads investors to place too much weight on their soft signal dst in updating ˆ t ,

and too little weight on the hard information as reflected by the disruption surprise dt .



C. Valuation and Returns

       We now turn to firms’ valuations and their stock returns. To keep our discussion focused

on the economic intuition we will present the relevant equations and provide their derivations in


                                                  14
the Internet Appendix.

         The values of the firms can be expressed as the discounted value of their expected cash

flows conditional on all available information:




                          Vti  Et      

                                          u t
                                              e r ( u t )  f ui du   Kui  k z   du  dM u   .        (10)




The cash flows in Equation (10) consist of three components, which include f ui , the profits

accruing to firm i from its active projects,  Kui , the capital recovered from terminated projects,

and kz, the outflows arising from capital investments for new projects given the firm-specific

state z  zui . Note that the profits from active projects accrue at an instantaneously deterministic

rate, whereas capital flows for new and terminated projects are stochastic and determined by the

economy-wide disruption rate dM u .

         The firm value in Equation (10) can be decomposed as follows:



                           V  zti , Kti , f t i , ˆ t   f t iV f  ˆ t   KtiVK  ˆ t   Vg ,z  ˆ t  ,   (11)



where the functions V f  ˆ t  , VK  ˆ t  , and Vg , z  ˆ t  are solutions to a set of differential equations

that we derive in the Internet Appendix. The first two terms in Equation (11) respectively

represent the present value of the cash flows from the firm’s active projects and the value derived

from the expected partial recovery of capital tied to those projects. Note that these two terms are

linear in the firm’s profitability f t i and its capital stock K ti . The third term, which is a function




                                                                    15
of the firm’s idiosyncratic growth state z, reflects the NPV of future projects.11 When investors

expect a relatively high degree of disruption (i.e., ˆ t is high), firms in the early and the mature

growth states enjoy higher valuations of their growth opportunities (i.e., Vg , EG  ˆ t  and

Vg , MG  ˆ t  are relatively high). In these same high ˆ t states, active projects are expected to be

terminated sooner, which implies that the present values of firm cash flows V f  ˆ t  are low and

the values derived from the partial recovery of capital VK  ˆ t  are high.

            The firm’s excess return (i.e., its realized rate of return in excess of the discount rate r)

consists of three components, as expressed below:



                          f iV   ˆ   K tiVK  ˆ t   Vg, z  ˆ t                      
            drti  rdt   t f t                                                  dst     d t 
                                              Vt i
                                                                                           M      
                                                                                                                             (12)
                            K  k z    k z   K VK  ˆ t    az k z   f t V f  ˆ t  
                                     i
                                     t
                                                             i
                                                             t
                                                                                           i

                                                           i                                          M dt  d  ti .
                                                        Vt                                          




The first two terms in Equation (12) characterize the exposure of the firm’s return to the two

systematic risk factors in the model, the disruption surprise dt and the signal dst . The last term

d  ti is the firm’s idiosyncratic return that is driven by growth state transitions.


            A comparison of the first two terms in Equation (12) provide some intuition for the factor

structure of asset returns in the model. The first term in Equation (12) reflects the Bayesian



11
     The functions Vg , z account for future transitions of the growth state and future projects’ initial capital investments,
profits, and eventual capital recoveries. Also, note that growth opportunities are worth zero in the no growth state,
i.e., Vg , NG  0 .

                                                                  16
updating of the expected disruption climate ˆ t , which is relevant for predicting subsequent

disruption rates and thus valuing future cash flows. The second term in Equation (12) captures

the immediate impact of the disruption process on the arrival and termination of projects. Note

that both the disruption surprise dt and the signal dst contribute to the updating of ˆ t , but

only the disruption surprise dt has an immediate effect on the firm’s projects. This asymmetry

is what generates a two-factor structure in asset returns. Having experienced different histories

and being in different growth states, firms differ in their relative sensitivities to the expected

disruption climate versus the realized disruption rate. Thus, firms’ relative exposures to the two

systematic risk factors differ in the cross section.




D. Return Dynamics with Biased Investor Beliefs

        Up to this point we have characterized firm values and returns conditional on the beliefs

of investors, which may or may not be biased. In the rest of this section we consider the case

where investors have biased beliefs, but characterize expected returns from the perspective of a

fully rational observer. In particular, we will be examining the link between the two systematic

risk factors in the model, the signal dst and the disruption surprise dt , and return

predictability.


        First, consider the signal dst . From Equation (12) we see that the impact of the signal dst

on returns is proportional to  . This implies that if investors have biased beliefs about the

signal’s precision, i.e., B   , the sensitivity of returns to the signal is amplified. This

amplification effect, however, does not influence the conditional expected rates of return that

prevail at the time the signal is realized. This is because the signal dst has an expected value of

                                                   17
zero regardless of either the perceived or the actual precision. Even with biased perceptions of

the precision of the signal, investors are observing something that is a random walk so their

expectation of what the signal will be in the next instance is unbiased.


        In contrast to the signal, the disruption surprise dt can generate conditional return

predictability when investors have biased beliefs. To illustrate this predictability formally, let ˆ tB

denote investors’ estimate of  t in the case where they have a biased perception of the signal

precision B   . Let ˆ tR denote the unbiased estimate a fully rational observer (i.e., someone

who knows the true signal precision) would have given the same history. Similarly, let dtB and

dtR denote the disruption surprise from the perspectives of biased investors and the rational

observer, respectively. Substituting the new notation into Equation (7) yields



                         dM t  ˆ tB dt       ˆ tR  ˆ tB      dM t  ˆ tR dt ˆ tR  ˆ tB
                dtB                                       dt                               dt  dtR .   (13)
                              M                   M                 M              M



Investors with biased signal precision perceive dtB to be a standard Brownian motion, since

under their beliefs ˆ tB is an unbiased estimate of  t . However, because the rational observer’s

estimate ˆ tR will typically differ from biased investors’ estimate ˆ tB , the conditional Sharpe

ratio of dtB in Equation (13), i.e., the term  ˆ tR  ˆ tB  /  M , is (almost always) non-zero. For

example, after a string of positive realizations of the signal, the biased estimate ˆ tB is likely to

exceed the rational estimate ˆ tR , resulting in a negative conditional Sharpe ratio. In such cases,

biased investors will be disappointed on average by subsequent realizations of the disruption


                                                             18
rate. The opposite predictability pattern will obtain after a string of negative signal realizations.

        Since the disruption climate is a persistent state variable, the biases in investors’

estimates do not get corrected immediately. As a result, the conditional Sharpe ratio exhibits

persistence as well. Formally, the law of motion of the conditional Sharpe ratio is given by



             ˆ R  ˆ tB            B   ˆ tR  ˆ tB                          
           d t                 
                                      2                  dt       B  dst   2 B  dtR .   (14)
             M                      M   M                  M                  M 



As Equation (14) shows, the conditional Sharpe ratio evolves stochastically in response to the

soft information signal dst and the disruption surprise dtR , but tends to revert to its long-term

mean of zero over time. Specifically, since overconfident investors over-react to soft information

relative to the fully rational case (i.e.,   B is negative), positive realizations of the soft

information signal reduce the conditional Sharpe ratio. In contrast, since overconfident investors

under-react to hard information relative to the fully rational case (i.e.,    B is positive),

positive realizations of the disruption surprise increase the conditional Sharpe ratio. The rate of

mean reversion of the conditional Sharpe ratio reflects both the changes in the disruption climate

over time (   ), and biased investors’ learning from disruption surprises (  B /  M2 ).

        The firm’s expected excess return from the perspective of the rational observer can be

computed by substituting dtB from Equation (13) into Equation (12) and taking expectations.

We skip the formula for brevity. Intuitively, cross-sectional differences in factor exposures, as

characterized by Equation (12), generate cross-sectional return predictability. For instance, early

growth firms, which accumulate new projects at a high rate relative to their capital base, are

highly sensitive to disruption surprises and exhibit stronger conditional return predictability

                                                      19
relative to other firms. We numerically analyze these predictability patterns in Section III.



II. MODEL CALIBRATION AND SIMULATION


A. Calibration

         The model has 13 parameters. Most of these parameters are difficult to calibrate based

directly on data observations, and in any case, the model structure is too simplistic to provide a

fully realistic description of the true data generating process. We thus pick parameters that

broadly replicate the salient features of the data and highlight the mechanisms that our model is

intended to capture. The empirical sample we use as reference for our calibrations includes firms

traded in U.S. stock exchanges over the 50-year period from July 1964 to June 2014.12 The

calibrated parameters for our simulations are described in Table I.

         The discount rate r is set at 0.050. Because we think of the disruption climate as a slow

moving variable, we pick a relatively small mean-reversion rate for  ,    0.070 , which

implies a half-life of shocks to  that is approximately 10 years. We set the volatility of  to

   0.100 . The parameter choices for   and   imply a standard deviation of 0.267 for  in

a long time series. We pick the volatility of the transitory component of the disruption rate to be

 M  0.250 . Thus, the long-term variation in the persistent component of the disruption rate and

the short-term variation in its transitory component are similar in magnitude.

         We calibrate a moderately informative signal by choosing its precision to be   0.500 .

Overconfident investors perceive the signal precision to be B  0.934 , which we calibrate based

on survey evidence that we discuss in the next paragraph. Given these parameter choices and


12
  See the Internet Appendix for details of the empirical sample construction and a discussion of the historical
stylized facts.

                                                         20
using Equation (14), the conditional Sharpe ratio of the disruption surprise has a mean reversion

rate of       B /  M2   0.1589 , which implies a half-life of about 4.36 years. The time-

invariant distribution of the conditional Sharpe ratio is normal with a mean of zero and a

standard deviation of 0.462. Using the corresponding percentile values, the conditional Sharpe

ratio is within the interval [−0.6, 0.6] about 80% of the time, and within [−1, 1] about 97% of the

time.13

          One can compare the degree of overconfidence assumed in our calibrated model to

results from surveys that ask participants to make predictions and to report their perceived

confidence intervals. In particular, Ben-David, Graham, and Harvey (2013) ask financial

executives to predict one-year S&P 500 returns and provide an 80% confidence interval. The

authors find that the executives’ reported confidence intervals include the realized outcome only

36.3% of the time, suggesting that they tend to be quite overconfident about the precision of their

estimates.14 We calibrate the biased signal precision in our base case simulations to match this

level of overconfidence. Specifically, given the true signal precision   0.500 , investors with

biased precision B  0.934 compute 80% confidence intervals that include the realized outcome

(i.e., shocks to  t ) 36.3% of the time on average.15

          The remaining parameters of the model describe firms and their investment opportunities.

We set the life expectancy of firms at 10 years, with an average of 1/ qEG  3 years spent in the




13
   Note that, due to its persistence, the conditional Sharpe ratio varies less in finite samples compared to its time-
invariant distribution.
14
   The standard error associated with this point estimate is 7.8%.
15
   In earlier studies, Alpert and Raiffa (1969) ask Harvard Business School students to answer general knowledge
questions, and Russo and Schoemaker (1992) ask money managers to answer questions about their industry. These
studies respectively find the participants’ 98% and 90% confidence intervals to include the correct answer 54% and
50% of the time. Our base-case overconfidence calibration implies 98% and 90% confidence intervals to include the
realized outcome 60.8% and 45.5% of the time, respectively.

                                                         21
early growth state, 1/ qMG  4 years spent in the mature growth state, and 1/ qNG  3 years spent

in the no growth state.16 The average project termination rate is   0.150 , which implies that

the average half-life of firms’ active projects is 4.621 years (   ln(0.5) /  ).

           Firms receive their projects in the early and the mature growth states. The initial

investment required for a project is the same in both states, kEG = kMG = k. A higher value of k

generates more cross-sectional dispersion in firms’ growth rates by allowing young firms to

grow faster. Accordingly, we calibrate k to match the dispersion in asset growth rates in our

empirical sample. Specifically, setting k = 0.950 approximately replicates the difference between

the average asset growth rates of the median firms in the top and the bottom asset growth

portfolios, which is 0.519 in our empirical sample.

           We assume that the projects that firms receive in the mature growth state are half as

profitable as those that they receive in the early growth state: aMG = aEG / 2. We calibrate aEG =

0.250 (and thus aMG = 0.125) to approximately match the median operating profitability of firms

in our empirical sample, which is 0.145. Finally, we calibrate the capital recovery rate of

terminated projects,   0.650 , to approximately match the median Tobin’s q of firms in our

empirical sample, which is 1.376.



B. Simulation Procedure and Formation of Characteristic-Sorted Portfolios

           Using the parameters described in the previous subsection we simulate sample paths for a

set of hypothetical firms. Specifically, we first solve for the firm value in Equation (11)

numerically, as described in the Internet Appendix. We then start each simulation with 10,000

firms in the early growth state. As the economy evolves, these firms are endowed with new



16
     The average number of years an individual firm appears in our empirical sample is 10.56.

                                                          22
projects, some of their existing projects are terminated, they can transition to new states, and they

may die. As described in Section I.A, firms that die are replaced with new firms born into the

early growth state.

         The initial values of the disruption climate,  0 , and investors’ estimate of it, ̂ 0 , are

drawn randomly from their time-invariant distributions. We simulate 200 years of data by

approximating the continuous passage of time with 48 discrete time periods per year (i.e., four

periods per month). We drop the first 150 years so as to allow firm characteristics to reach their

steady-state distributions, and use the remaining 50 years of data (the length of our empirical

sample) for analysis. We repeat this procedure to generate 10,000 simulated samples.

         In forming portfolios, we focus on three firm characteristics that received substantial

attention in the empirical literature. To capture the value anomaly, we examine the market-to-

book portfolios, which are formed by sorting firms with respect to their ratios of market value to

capital stock. The asset growth portfolios are formed by sorting firms with respect to the growth

rate of their capital stock over the prior year. The profitability portfolios are formed by sorting

firms with respect to their ratios of profitability to capital stock.17 The cutoffs for portfolio

assignments are chosen based on the quintile breakpoints of the underlying characteristics. For

instance, the low market-to-book (i.e., value) portfolio consists of the firms that are in the bottom

quintile of the cross-sectional distribution of the market-to-book ratio, while the high market-to-

book (i.e., growth) portfolio consists of the firms that are in the top quintile.



17
   See Fama and French (1992) for the value anomaly, Cooper, Gulen, and Schill (2008) for the asset growth
anomaly, and Fama and French (2015) and Novy-Marx (2013) for the profitability anomaly. Our measurement of
firm characteristics differs from these and other studies in two respects. First, our value and profitability measures
are scaled by book assets instead of book equity, since capital structure is irrelevant and firms are all-equity financed
in our model. Second, unlike in the empirical literature where profitability can be measured in multiple ways (e.g.,
net versus gross), there is only one profitability measure in our model, which can be interpreted as net of all
expenses. In the Internet Appendix, we show that applying our characteristic measures to empirical data results in
findings that are qualitatively similar to those in the above-cited studies.

                                                           23
C. Summary Statistics of Simulated Samples

       Table II presents summary statistics of the simulated data samples. As shown in Panel A,

the value-weighted portfolio of all simulated firms earns an average annual return of 5.00%,

matching the discount rate r. Since our model does not include an aggregate market factor, our

simulated returns are not as volatile as actual stock returns. Nevertheless, the average volatility

of 2.61% is not negligible relative to the model’s discount rate. The other statistics reported in

Panel A show that the median firm’s capital stock, profitability, and Tobin’s q do not exhibit

substantial variation across or within samples.

       Panel B reports the time-series averages of the median values of firm characteristics in

each of the three growth states. The mature growth firms are the largest and the early growth

firms are the smallest on average. Profitability is the highest for firms in the early growth state.

Since firms do not receive any projects following their transitions from mature growth to no

growth, and since these transitions occur with equal likelihood for any firm in the mature growth

state, by construction the mature growth and the no growth states exhibit the same average

profitability. Asset growth rates decline as firms transition from early growth to mature growth,

and become negative in the no growth state. Similarly, Tobin’s q values are the highest in the

early growth state, followed by the mature growth state and then the no growth state.

       Panel C reports statistics on characteristic-sorted portfolios. The first three columns

report the percentages of firms in a given characteristic-sorted portfolio that belong to each of the

three growth states. The next four columns are the median values of the firm characteristics for

each portfolio. The high market-to-book (i.e., growth) portfolio consists solely of firms in the

early growth state, whereas the low market-to-book (i.e., value) portfolio consists mainly of

firms in the no growth state. Growth firms also tend to be smaller, more profitable, and exhibit

higher growth rates relative to value firms. High asset growth firms, which are primarily in the

                                                  24
early growth state, are larger and have higher Tobin’s q values. However, there is no difference

between the profitability rates of high versus low asset growth firms. Profitability portfolios are

somewhat more evenly distributed across the three growth states. Relative to low profitability

firms, high profitability firms are larger and exhibit higher Tobin’s q values and slightly lower

growth rates. In comparison to our empirical sample, the simulated characteristic-sorted

portfolios exhibit less cross-sectional dispersion in market-to-book and profitability ratios, and

somewhat lower levels of asset growth rates.18

         Panel D reports the return volatilities and correlations of characteristic-sorted long-short

portfolios.19 The simulated returns of the characteristic-sorted portfolios are less volatile than

their empirical counterparts (not reported in the table), and exhibit strong positive correlations

with each other. These discrepancies between the simulated and empirical data are not

surprising. For parsimony, our model focuses on a single disruption factor. In reality, there are

likely to be several such factors, imperfectly correlated with each other and affecting different

portfolios differently. In addition, our model abstracts from other risk factors that are unrelated to

disruptive innovations (e.g., short-term shocks to profitability). Such risk factors are likely to

increase the return volatilities of the characteristic-sorted portfolios and dampen the correlations

between their returns.20




18
   For a more complete comparison of portfolio characteristics in simulated and the empirical data samples, see
Table IA.I in the Internet Appendix.
19
   The reported volatilities and correlations are average values of in-sample estimates based on monthly data.
20
   A second reason why the model generates relatively low volatilities is that it abstracts from financial leverage
effects. In unreported analyses we find that adjusting for financial leverage in historical data reduces volatilities of
characteristic-sorted portfolio returns by up to 30%.

                                                           25
III. CONDITIONAL RETURNS OF CHARACTERISTIC-SORTED PORTFOLIOS


A. The Exposures of Characteristic-Sorted Portfolios to Disruption

         As discussed in Section I.C, characteristic-based return predictability in our model arises

from the firms’ exposure to the disruption surprise factor dtB . We start our analysis by

examining these factor exposures. In Table III, we report the betas of various characteristic-

sorted portfolios with respect to the disruption surprise factor. Since the portfolios’ factor

exposures can vary across different states of the world, we report conditional betas as well as the

unconditional betas that measure average exposures.21

         As the signs of the reported unconditional betas indicate, high disruption rates are good

news for high market-to-book, high asset growth, and low profitability firms, and are bad news

for low market-to-book, low asset growth, and high profitability firms. The table also reports the

unconditional betas for portfolios that are formed based on the interaction of two characteristics.

As these betas show, a single characteristic is often not sufficient to characterize firms’ factor

exposures.

         For instance, while high market-to-book firms are positively exposed to disruption on

average, firms can have high market-to-book ratios for different reasons, and depending on the

reason, their exposure to the disruption factor will differ. Some are unprofitable firms whose

stock prices largely reflect future expected growth. These firms’ exposures to the disruption

factor is strongly positive. Other firms with high market-to-book ratios are relatively more

mature and derive high market values from highly profitable existing projects as well as access



21
  Factor betas are estimated via monthly return regressions. Note that the disruption surprise factor has a volatility
of one by construction (see Equation 13), which is much larger than portfolio return volatilities. Thus, the factor
betas are small in absolute value. For ease of interpretation, we report the estimated betas multiplied by 100 (or
equivalently, betas with respect to the factor renormalized to have a volatility of 1%).

                                                          26
to future opportunities. These firms’ exposure to disruption can be close to zero, since the

increased flow of new projects is offset by the demise of some of the existing projects. Thus, the

extent to which high market-to-book firms are exposed to disruption depends on their

profitability. Similarly, among highly profitable firms, those with low asset growth rates are

strongly negatively exposed to disruption, whereas those with high asset growth rates exhibit

near-zero exposure.

         The next four columns in Table III report conditional betas that measure firms’ exposure

to disruption in different states of the model economy. Specifically, we consider states in which

the conditional Sharpe ratio of the disruption surprise factor  ˆ tR  ˆ tB  /  M is low or high, and

similarly, whether investors’ expected disruption rate ˆ tB is low or high.22 Firms that benefit

from disruption, i.e., those with high asset growth rates, low profitability, and high market-to-

book ratios, exhibit higher disruption betas when investors’ expected disruption rates are low

rather than high. The intuition is that these firms are proportionally more affected by disruption

shocks when their valuations are relatively low, which is the case when investors expect low

disruption rates. A similar rationale explains why the disruption betas of these firms are higher

when the conditional Sharpe ratio is low. The realized disruption rates disappoint investors in

such states of the world on average, lowering the valuations of growth-oriented firms and thus

increasing their exposure to subsequent disruption shocks.23

         In summary, the disruption betas are particularly high for young unprofitable firms with



22
   In Tables III and IV, low and high values of the conditioning variable are defined as those that are less than one
standard deviation below and more than one standard deviation above its mean, respectively.
23
   The conditional beta patterns discussed in the text imply that growth firms are better hedges against future
disruption shocks in relatively more tranquil times when incumbents are expected to be in a strong position. While
there are no hedging demands in our risk-neutral model, similar insights can be explored within the context of asset
pricing models with priced disruption risk, such as Gârleanu, Kogan, and Panageas (2012) and Kogan,
Papanikolaou, and Stoffman (2015).

                                                         27
high growth rates, and particularly low for mature profitable firms with low growth rates. Firms’

exposures to disruption change over time as the model economy transitions from states of low to

high expected disruption rates or low to high conditional mispricing.



B. Conditional Predictability of Characteristic-Sorted Portfolio Returns

        In this section we analyze the predictability of the characteristic-sorted portfolio returns

that are generated by our model and compare these implications to existing empirical evidence.

For brevity, we focus from hereafter on the long-short portfolios that are formed based on firms’

market-to-book ratios, asset growth rates, and profitability. Since the unconditional return

premium associated with disruption is zero, our analysis focuses on conditional predictability.

Specifically, we examine the predictability of portfolio returns by computing their Sharpe ratios

in different subsamples of simulated months that reflect different states of the model economy.

The results are reported in Table IV.24

        As the first two rows of Table IV show, the predictability of characteristic-sorted

portfolio returns strongly depends on the conditional Sharpe ratio of the disruption surprise

factor. All three long-short portfolios exhibit highly positive (negative) return performance as

measured by their Sharpe ratios when the conditional Sharpe ratio associated with disruption is

low (high). Recall that low conditional Sharpe ratio states are those in which biased investors’

estimate of the disruption climate is too high relative to the rational estimate. Accordingly,

market-to-book, asset growth, and profitability strategies that bet in favor of incumbents and

against newcomers in such states of the world exhibit positive abnormal performance.

        The conditional Sharpe ratios discussed above are not directly observable to the


24
  Sharpe ratios are computed as the ratio of the subsample mean to the subsample standard deviation of the monthly
returns of long-short portfolios, and are reported in annualized terms.

                                                       28
econometrician. Thus, to test the model’s implications, we need a set of observable or at least

indirectly observable conditioning variables. Consider first investors’ beliefs about the expected

disruption rate, which might be indirectly inferred from surveys, textual analysis of media or

analyst report, and observed investor or management choices. The third and fourth rows in Table

IV show that the characteristic-sorted portfolios exhibit positive performance when investors’

disruption expectations are high and negative performance when those expectations are low.

These patterns are a reflection of investor overconfidence. While overconfidence does not

generate an unconditional bias in investor expectations, it does cause the distribution of those

expectations to be more dispersed. As a result, expectations in the right (left) tail are too high

(low) relative to the fully rational case. In other words, when investors are very optimistic about

the disruption rate they tend to be too optimistic and when they are very pessimistic they tend to

be too pessimistic. Hence, our model predicts that measures of investor beliefs about growth

opportunities, such as the “sentiment” proxies used in the empirical literature, predict subsequent

returns.25

        Next, we examine the predictability of returns based on the cross-sectional distributions

of firm fundamentals. The disruption process in our model generates persistent differences in the

cross-sectional dispersion of firms’ valuation ratios, asset growth rates, and profitability. To

evaluate the information content of cross-sectional dispersion, we analyze returns in subsamples

in which the market-to-book spread, the asset growth spread, and the profitability spread are low

or high.26 The results are reported in the last six rows of Table IV.

        Consider first the dispersion in asset growth and profitability rates. Being non-price


25
   See, for instance, Baker and Wurgler (2006), who find that investor sentiment proxies such as the number of IPOs
or the equity share in new issues predict the subsequent performance of characteristic-sorted portfolios.
26
   The market-to-book spread is defined as the difference between the market-to-book ratios of the median firms in
the high market-to-book (i.e., growth) and the low market-to-book (i.e., value) portfolios. The asset growth and the
profitability spreads are defined similarly based on the high/low asset growth and profitability portfolios.

                                                         29
measures of firm fundamentals, asset growth and profitability rates in the model reflect the hard

information revealed by realized disruption rates. Specifically, asset growth rates are more

dispersed when realized disruption rates are high, and profitability is more dispersed when

realized disruption rates are low. Since overconfident investors underreact to these hard

information signals, the dispersions of asset growth and profitability rates are proxies for investor

under-reaction in our model. Confirming this intuition, Table IV shows that the three

characteristic-sorted portfolios in our model perform well following periods of low asset growth

spreads and high profitability spreads, and poorly in the opposite circumstances.

       Unlike asset growth and profitability, market-to-book ratios reflect market prices and thus

are affected by both hard and soft information. This makes the relation between the cross-

sectional dispersion of market-to-book ratios and the future returns of characteristic-sorted

portfolios more subtle. First, high realized disruption rates increase the assets of growth firms,

increasing their book values, thereby narrowing the spread between the market-to-book ratios of

growth and value firms. Since investors underreact to this hard information, narrowing the

dispersion of market-to-book ratios through this channel is associated with low future returns to

characteristic-sorted portfolios that bet on incumbent firms. Second, negative realizations of the

soft information signal decrease growth firms’ valuations, and thus decrease the cross-sectional

dispersion of market-to-book ratios. Since investors overreact to such signals, narrowing the

dispersion of market-to-book ratios through this channel is also associated with low future

returns of characteristic-sorted portfolios that bet on the incumbents. Thus, both channels

contribute to a negative relationship between the market-to-book spread and the future returns of

the three characteristic-sorted portfolios analyzed in Table IV. The results in the table confirm

this negative relationship and show that the effect is asymmetric: the abnormal performance of

the characteristic-sorted portfolios is especially large following periods of high market-to-book

                                                 30
spread.

          To summarize, the cross-sectional dispersion of firm characteristics reflects past

realizations of both hard and soft information, and can thus predict future returns. In particular,

dispersion in non-price characteristics such as asset growth and profitability rates relate to

investors’ under-reaction to hard information, whereas dispersion in price-related characteristics

such as market-to-book ratios reflect both under-reaction to hard information and over-reaction

to soft information. As far as we know, there has been little empirical inquiry into these

predictions. One exception is Cohen, Polk, and Voulteenaho (2003), who show that the value

spread, which measures the cross-sectional dispersion of book-to-market ratios, positively

predicts the subsequent returns of value-minus-growth strategies. Our model’s predictions

discussed above are consistent with their findings.27



C. Autocorrelations of Characteristic-Sorted Portfolio Returns

          As we have discussed in Section I.C, expected returns are persistent in our model.

Specifically, the conditional Sharpe ratio of the disruption surprise factor is a persistent process,

as Equation (14) shows. In this subsection, we examine the implications of persistence for the

autocorrelations of characteristic-sorted portfolio returns.

          Table V reports return autocorrelations for the three characteristic-sorted long-short

portfolios. Autocorrelations are calculated for returns measured at one-year and five-year

intervals.28 In addition to population autocorrelations that are estimated by combining all


27
   It should be noted that expected returns in our model vary because investors have biased estimates of future cash
flows. Given this, one might also be able to test the implications of our model by directly exploring the link between
characteristics and observed biases in earnings forecasts, as in La Porta (1996). Alternatively, one can indirectly
infer biases by looking at the link between characteristics and abnormal stock returns on earnings announcement
dates, as in Chopra, Lakonishok, and Ritter (1992) and La Porta, Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1997).
28
   In unreported results, we find that monthly return autocorrelations are close to zero. This is not surprising, as
short-term return variation in our model is primarily determined by Brownian diffusion terms.

                                                         31
simulated 50-year data samples, the table also reports some statistics on in-sample

autocorrelations that are estimated within each 50-year simulated sample.

       Population autocorrelations are positive at one year intervals and become even larger at

five year intervals. Thus, characteristic-sorted portfolio returns are highly persistent. However,

strong persistence is revealed only by the population estimates. The in-sample autocorrelation

estimates are small on average and become weaker at longer return intervals. Furthermore, the

in-sample estimates are negative in 20% or more of the simulated samples. Thus, the strong

autocorrelation patterns in the population may not be easy to detect even with 50 years of data.

       The persistence of characteristic-sorted portfolio returns implies that momentum

strategies that buy recent winner portfolios and sell recent losers tend to be profitable. In

unreported analysis, we find that this is indeed the case in our simulated data samples. The

predictions of the model in this regard are consistent with the findings in Lewellen (2002), who

documents that book-to-market (as well as size) portfolios exhibit momentum, and the analysis

of Chen and Hong (2002), who highlight the role of positive autocorrelation for Lewellen’s

momentum findings.



IV. AVERAGE RETURNS OF CHARACTERISTIC-SORTED PORTFOLIOS


       Our focus up to this point has been on the conditional predictability of characteristic-

sorted portfolio returns. In this section, we turn our attention to the extent to which our model

can explain the historical evidence linking characteristics and average returns, e.g., the fact that

value has significantly beaten growth. Recall that our model is designed so that characteristics do

not predict returns over sufficiently long sample periods. The question we ask in this section is

whether we are likely to observe a significant relationship between characteristics and average


                                                 32
returns in samples that approximately match the length of historical data samples.

         We start our analysis by computing annualized Sharpe ratios for the three characteristic-

sorted long-short portfolios using 600 months (50 years) of return data in each simulated sample.

We then characterize the probability distributions of these Sharpe ratios using the 10,000

simulated samples. The results are reported in Table VI. Panel A of the table provides the

benchmark for these Sharpe ratio distributions under the null of no return predictability.

Specifically, the panel shows the t-statistic values for conventional statistical significance levels,

and the annualized Sharpe ratios that these t-statistic values correspond to in a 50-year sample

period.29

         Panel B of Table VI reports the Sharpe ratios distributions for the three characteristic-

sorted long-short portfolios that are generated in simulations with rational investors. Relative to

the benchmark distribution in Panel A, the simulated distributions of the characteristic portfolios

have slightly negative means and are also left-skewed. These deviations from the benchmark,

which are quite small in magnitude, are likely to result in part from the fact that the returns of

characteristic-sorted portfolios are not distributed i.i.d. normal.30 The basic takeaway from these

simulations is that extreme Sharpe ratio realizations (e.g., magnitudes that are comparable to

historically observed ones) are extremely unlikely in our model when investors are rational.

         The main results of our analysis are described in Panel C of Table VI and Figure 1. Panel

C reports the distributions of characteristic-sorted portfolios’ Sharpe ratios in simulations with



29
   A long-short portfolio’s Sharpe ratio is the t-statistic on its mean return divided by the square root of T, which is
the number of return observations. Our sample period is 50 years, or 600 months; therefore the relevant t distribution
has 599 degrees of freedom. The reported Sharpe ratios are annualized by multiplying by square root of 12.
30
   Indeed, in unreported analyses we find that the realized mean returns of the characteristic-sorted portfolios are
positively correlated with the realized time-series return standard deviations of those portfolios. Thus, in simulated
samples where the portfolios earn positive returns on average, those returns are more volatile, dampening the
realized Sharpe ratio. Such deviations from constant return volatility are not surprising in a model like ours, where
the systematic factors affect firms’ valuations in non-linear ways.

                                                          33
overconfident investors. Figure 1 plots the Sharpe ratio distributions for the low-minus-high

market-to-book portfolio with rational and overconfident investors.31 As the table and the figure

show, introducing the overconfidence bias results in substantially more dispersed Sharpe ratio

distributions relative to the rational case. The economic magnitudes of the tail Sharpe ratios are

quite large. For instance, the 90th percentile of the Sharpe ratio of the low-minus-high market-to-

book portfolio is more than doubled, from 0.155 with rational investors to 0.367 with

overconfident investors.

         To put things into a more concrete perspective, consider a Sharpe ratio of 0.40, which is

within the range of the historical Sharpe ratios documented in empirical studies (a Sharpe ratio of

0.40 over a 50-year period corresponds to a t-statistic of 0.40  50  2.83 ). Based on the

distributions reported in Table VI, what is the likelihood of observing a 50-year sample in which

characteristic-sorted portfolios achieve a Sharpe ratio of 0.40 or above in absolute value (i.e., in

either tail of the distribution)? When investors are rational, this likelihood is extremely low. For

instance, market-to-book sorts generate a Sharpe ratio of 0.40 or above in only 0.63% of the

sample paths. With overconfident investors, however, market-to-book sorts generate a Sharpe

ratio of 0.40 or above in 18.23% of the sample paths, which is a 29-fold increase relative to the

case with rational investors. Similarly, at least one portfolio sorted based on the three

characteristics we consider generates a Sharpe ratio of 0.40 or above in 20.64% of the sample

paths. Thus, although the likelihood of generating the magnitude of historically observed

characteristic-based anomalies is negligible when investors have unbiased beliefs, these

magnitudes arise quite frequently when investors are overconfident.



31
  For visual ease Figure 1 plots smoothed probability distribution function estimates that are obtained by applying a
normal kernel function to simulated Sharpe ratios. Figures for the asset growth and the profitability portfolios are
omitted for brevity.

                                                         34
         The increased dispersion of the Sharpe ratio distributions of characteristic-sorted

portfolios is a consequence of return persistence. As discussed earlier, the conditional expected

returns of characteristic-sorted portfolios are persistent in our model because overconfident

investors’ beliefs about the disruption climate adjust too slowly. An implication of this

persistence is the increased variance of long-term return realizations relative to short-term return

volatility. As a result, Sharpe ratios, which scale averages of long-term return realizations by

short-term volatility, exhibit greater dispersion.

         Historical returns are of interest to academics and practitioners in part because they may

reveal patterns that will repeat in the future. For instance, one might try to predict the future

performance of a value strategy based on its past performance. We now briefly turn to the power

of such predictions within the context of our model simulations. Specifically, we ask: conditional

on a characteristic-sorted portfolio achieving a Sharpe ratio of 0.40 or above in a 50-year sample,

what is its likely Sharpe ratio over the next 10 years?32

         The results, which we report without tabulating, indicate that in our model historical

returns do not significantly predict future returns. For instance, conditional on achieving a

historical Sharpe ratio that exceeds 0.40, the low-minus-high market-to-book portfolio generates

an expected future Sharpe ratio of only 0.14 (which translates into a t-statistic of 0.43 in 10-year

sample period). Furthermore, the realized Sharpe ratio over the 10-year period is negative with a

probability of 0.41. Similarly, the low-minus-high asset growth portfolio’s future Sharpe ratio is

0.11 in expectation (t-statistic of 0.34) and negative with probability 0.41, and the high-minus-

low profitability portfolio’s future Sharpe ratio is 0.07 in expectation (t-statistic of 0.21) and

negative with probability 0.46. In short, strong historical return patterns do not repeat in the


32
  Our choice of a 10-year evaluation period reflects the typical length of track records investors take into account in
practice. We get similar results when we consider shorter evaluation periods.

                                                          35
future in our model simulations.

        The results that we describe in this section obtain in a stylized model with zero

unconditional return premia. In reality, it is likely that characteristic-sorted portfolios have

unconditional return premia that partly explain their historical returns. Our analysis is not

intended to argue that such premia do not exist. Rather, we make a general point – that extreme

return realizations are more likely when overconfident investors adjust their beliefs slowly –

which holds regardless of the magnitudes of unconditional premia. We believe that this insight

may help us understand why many of the anomalies examined in the empirical literature

exhibited such extreme average returns.



V. CONCLUSION

        Over the past 50 years, portfolios formed on firm characteristics like value, profitability

and asset growth have generated very high Sharpe ratios. Motivated by these observations,

financial economists have developed a number of rational and behavioral asset pricing models.

We contribute to this literature by offering a dynamic behavioral model that explicitly links

characteristic-sorted portfolio returns to systematic risk factors that determine the evolution of

firm fundamentals. Our model provides testable implications about conditional predictability of

characteristic-sorted portfolio returns, and illustrates how persistence of these returns increases

the likelihood of observing abnormally high Sharpe ratios.

        For the sake of parsimony we have made a number of assumptions. In particular, we

assume risk neutrality and design a model where one economic concept generates multiple

anomalies. Given our simplifications, it is not surprising that our model does not capture all

salient features of the data, e.g., the correlations of characteristic-sorted portfolio returns are too


                                                   36
high in our model. Moreover, the most extreme Sharpe ratios documented in the empirical

literature cannot be generated as a likely sample path in our model. These discrepancies can

potentially be addressed by incorporating insights from our model into existing models that

generate a richer structure of expected returns.

        Our framework can also be extended to consider additional behavioral biases. In

unreported work, we have explored two potential biases. The first, suggested by Shiller (2000), is

that investors may be overly optimistic about the commercial potential of new technologies. This

bias can be incorporated into our model by assuming that investors’ initial expectations are too

optimistic, i.e., investors initially believe that the disruption climate is stronger than it actually is.

We find that this form of optimism generates a substantial effect on characteristic-sorted

portfolio returns only when investors are also overconfident and thus shed their optimism slowly.

The second bias, suggested by Barberis, Shleifer and Vishny (1998), is that the Tversky and

Kahneman (1974) representativeness heuristic can lead investors to overreact to hard

information, such as earnings. Similarly, our model can incorporate the possibility that investors

overreact to realized disruption rates. Our preliminary investigation of such a model reveals that

overreaction and overconfidence generate very distinct predictions. For instance, the

overconfidence model implies that the cross-sectional dispersion of market-to-book ratios

positively predicts the subsequent returns of value firms – in contrast, the overreaction model

predicts the opposite. Future work that explores the different implications of alternative biases is

clearly warranted.




                                                   37
REFERENCES

Alpert, Marc, and Howard Raiffa, 1969, A progress report on the training of probability
        assessors, unpublished manuscript, Harvard University.

Altı, Aydoğan, and Paul C. Tetlock, 2014, Biased beliefs, asset prices, and investment: A
       structural approach, Journal of Finance 69, 325-361.

Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2006, Investor sentiment and the cross-section of stock
       returns, Journal of Finance 61, 1645-1680.

Barberis, Nicholas, and Andrei Shleifer, 2003, Style investing, Journal of Financial Economics
       68, 161-199.

Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1998, A model of investor sentiment,
       Journal of Financial Economics 49, 307−343.

Ben-David, Itzhak, John R. Graham, and Campbell R. Harvey, 2013, Managerial miscalibration,
      Quarterly Journal of Economics 128, 1547-1584.

Bena, Jan, Lorenzo Garlappi, and Patrick Grüning, 2016, Heterogeneous innovation, firm
       creation and destruction, and asset prices, Review of Asset Pricing Studies 6, 46-87.

Berk, Jonathan B., Richard C. Green, and Vasant Naik, 1999, Optimal investment, growth
       options, and security returns, Journal of Finance 54, 1553-1607.

Carlson, Murray, Adlai Fisher, and Ron Giammarino, 2004, Corporate investment and asset
       price dynamics: Implications for the cross-section of returns, Journal of Finance 59,
       2577-2603.

Chen, Joseph, and Harrison Hong, 2002, Discussion of “momentum and autocorrelation in stock
       returns,” Review of Financial Studies 15, 565-573.

Chopra, Navin, Josef Lakonishok, and Jay R. Ritter, 1992, Measuring abnormal performance: Do
      stocks overreact? Journal of Financial Economics 31, 235-268.

Cohen, Randoph B., Christopher Polk, and Tuomo Voulteenaho, 2003, The Value Spread,
       Journal of Finance 58, 609-641.

Cooper, Michael J., Huseyin Gulen, and Michael J. Schill, 2008, Asset growth and the cross
      section of stock returns, Journal of Finance 63, 1609-1651.

Daniel, Kent, and David Hirshleifer, 2015, Overconfident investors, predictable returns, and
       excessive trading, Journal of Economic Perspectives 29, 61-88.

Daniel, Kent, David Hirshleifer, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 1998, Investor psychology and
       security market under- and overreactions, Journal of Finance 53, 1839−1886.

                                                38
Daniel, Kent, David Hirshleifer, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2001, Overconfidence,
       arbitrage, and equilibrium asset pricing, Journal of Finance 56, 921-965.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1992, The cross-section of expected stock returns,
      Journal of Finance 47, 427-465.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2015, A five-factor asset pricing model, Journal of
      Financial Economics 116, 1-22.

Gârleanu, Nicolae, Leonid Kogan, and Stavros Panageas, 2012, Displacement risk and asset
       returns, Journal of Financial Economics 105, 491-510.

Hong, Harrison, and Jeremy C. Stein, 1999, A unified theory of underreaction, momentum
      trading, and overreaction in asset markets, Journal of Finance 54, 2143-2184.

Kogan, Leonid, Dimitris Papanikolaou, and Noah Stoffman, 2015, Winners and losers: Creative
      destruction and the stock market, working paper.

La Porta, Rafael, 1996, Expectations and the cross-section of stock returns, Journal of Finance
       51, 1715-1742.

La Porta, Rafael, Josef Lakonishok, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1997, Good news for
       value stocks: Further evidence on market efficiency, Journal of Finance 52, 859-874.

Lewellen, Jonathan, 2002, Momentum and autocorrelation in stock returns, Review of Financial
       Studies 15, 533-563.

Lewellen, Jonathan, and Jay Shanken, 2002, Learning, asset-pricing tests, and market efficiency,
       Journal of Finance 57, 1113-1145.

Loualiche, Erik, 2016, Asset pricing with entry and imperfect competition, unpublished
       manuscript.

MacKinlay, A. Craig, 1995, Multifactor models do not explain deviations from the CAPM,
     Journal of Financial Economics 38, 3-28.

Novy-Marx, Robert, 2013, The other side of value: The gross profitability premium, Journal of
      Financial Economics 108, 1-28.

Pastor, Lubos, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2012, Are stocks really less volatile in the long run?
        Journal of Finance 67, 431-477.

Pastor, Lubos, and Pietro Veronesi, 2003, Stock valuation and learning about profitability,
        Journal of Finance 58, 1749-1789.



                                               39
Pastor, Lubos, and Pietro Veronesi, 2006, Was there a Nasdaq bubble in the late 1990s? Journal
        of Financial Economics 81, 61-100.

Russo, J. Edward, and Paul J. H. Schoemaker, 1992, Managing overconfidence, Sloan
       Management Review 33, 7−17.

Scheinkman, Jose A., and Wei Xiong, 2003, Overconfidence and speculative bubbles, Journal of
       Political Economy 111, 1183−1219.

Shiller, Robert J., 2000, Irrational Exuberance (Princeton University Press, Princeton).

Timmermann, Allan, 1993, How learning in financial markets generates excess volatility and
     predictability in stock prices, Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 1135-1145.

Timmermann, Allan, 1996, Excess volatility and predictability of stock prices in autoregressive
     dividend models with learning, Review of Economic Studies 63, 523−557.

Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman, 1974, Judgement under uncertainty: heuristics and
biases, Science 185, 1124-1131.

Zhang, Lu, 2005, The value premium, Journal of Finance 60, 67−103.




                                               40
                                                     Table I
                                                 Model Parameters

The table reports the parameter values in the calibrated model. More detailed descriptions of the parameters
and their calibration are provided in Section II.A.




                  Parameter                                                  Value

                  Discount rate r                                             0.050

                  Mean reversion rate of disruption climate ρµ                0.070

                  Volatility of disruption climate σµ                         0.100

                  Volatility of transitory disruption shocks σM               0.250

                  True signal precision η                                     0.500

                  Biased signal precision ηB                                  0.934

                  Expected time in the early growth state 1 / qEG            3 years

                  Expected time in the mature growth state 1 / qMG           4 years

                  Expected time in the no growth state 1 / qNG               3 years

                  Project capital investment k                                0.950

                  Project profitability in the early growth state aEG         0.250

                  Project profitability in the mature growth state aMG        0.125

                  Average project termination rate λ                          0.150

                  Capital recovery rate α                                     0.650




                                                         41
                                                   Table II
                                      Summary Statistics of Simulated Data

The table reports summary statistics of the simulated data samples. The statistics reported in the table are
described in Section II.C.




                                                       Panel A: All firms

                                          Value-weighted              Median capital       Median profitability      Median Tobin’s q
                                        portfolio (annual %)            stock K                   f/K                     V/K

 Mean across all simulated samples              5.00                       3.150                  0.144                      1.371

 Standard deviation of sample means             0.75                       0.232                  0.005                      0.055

 Mean of sample standard deviations             2.61                       0.267                  0.004                      0.077

                                           Panel B: Median firm characteristics


                                           Capital stock K           Profitability f / K    Asset growth (%)             Tobin’s q V / K

 Early Growth                                  2.418                       0.171                  22.35                      2.242

 Mature Growth                                 4.057                       0.138                    9.21                     1.285

 No Growth                                     2.670                       0.138                  -13.91                     1.192

                                          Panel C: Characteristic-sorted portfolios

                            % Early       % Mature         % No               Capital      Profitability      Asset            Tobin’s q
                            Growth         Growth         Growth              stock K         f/K          growth (%)            V/K

 Low Market-to-Book            0.0          33.5             66.5              2.515          0.113            -12.22            1.106

 High Market-to-Book         100.0           0.0               0.0             1.911          0.138            37.54             2.312

 Low Asset Growth              0.1           0.1             99.8              1.673          0.122            -13.94            1.299

 High Asset Growth            57.5          39.8               2.7             2.007          0.122            37.60             2.249

 Low Profitability            38.5          34.8             26.7              1.579          0.092            12.15             1.296

 High Profitability           58.1          24.0             17.9              3.884          0.212               8.53           2.049




                                                          42
                                         Table II – continued




                                Panel D: Characteristic-sorted portfolio returns

                                                                               Correlations
                                    Volatility
                                 (annualized %)         Low minus High      Low minus High    High minus Low
                                                        Market-to-Book       Asset Growth       Profitability

Low minus High Market-to-Book         3.85                     1                   0.952          0.909

Low minus High Asset Growth           3.49                     -                    1             0.892

High minus Low Profitability          3.36                     -                     -              1




                                                   43
                                                    Table III
                       The Exposure of Characteristic-Sorted Portfolio Returns to Disruption

     The table reports betas of characteristic-sorted portfolios with respect to the disruption surprise factor. The betas
     are estimated via monthly return regressions. The unconditional betas are estimated using all simulated sample
     months. The conditional betas are estimated using subsamples of simulated months in which the conditioning
     variables are less than one standard deviation below or more than one standard deviation above their respective
     means. For ease of interpretation, the table reports the estimated betas multiplied by 100.




                                      Unconditional    Low Conditional     High Conditional    Low Expected     High Expected
                                                        Sharpe Ratio         Sharpe Ratio       Disruption       Disruption


Low Market-to-Book                        −1.57             −1.45               −1.67              −1.19            −1.72


High Market-to-Book                        1.90              2.23                1.57               3.35              0.65


Low Asset Growth                          −2.34             −2.17               −2.47              −2.48            −2.10


High Asset Growth                          0.60              0.81                0.40               2.18            −0.43


High Profitability                        −1.17             −1.26               −1.12              −1.06            −1.29


Low Profitability                          1.34              1.77                0.97               3.79            −0.18


Unprofitable / High Market-to-Book         3.62              3.61                3.64               5.88              2.07


Profitable / High Market-to-Book           0.19              0.15                0.15               0.84            −0.35


Profitable / High Asset Growth            −0.04             −0.40                0.09              −0.03            −0.38


Profitable / Low Asset Growth             −2.89             −2.79               −3.01              −3.17            −2.63




                                                              44
                                                 Table IV
                   Conditional Predictability of Characteristic-Sorted Portfolio Returns

The table reports Sharpe ratios of long-short characteristic-sorted portfolio returns. The Sharpe ratios are
computed using monthly returns in subsamples of simulated months in which the conditioning variables are
less than one standard deviation below or more than one standard deviation above their respective means. The
reported Sharpe ratios are annualized.



                                              Low minus High        Low minus High     High minus Low
                                              Market-to-Book         Asset Growth        Profitability


    Low Conditional Sharpe Ratio                    0.601                0.542               0.553


    High Conditional Sharpe Ratio                  −0.622               −0.621              −0.488


    Low Expected Disruption                        −0.128               −0.143              −0.074


    High Expected Disruption                        0.183                0.152               0.261


    Low Asset Growth Spread                         0.213                0.147               0.181


    High Asset Growth Spread                       −0.164               −0.179              −0.091


    Low Profitability Spread                       −0.129               −0.140              −0.095


    High Profitability Spread                       0.255                0.173               0.210


    Low Market-to-Book Spread                      −0.084               −0.117               0.008


    High Market-to-Book Spread                      0.449                0.400               0.429




                                                    45
                                                  Table V
                         Autocorrelations of Characteristic-Sorted Portfolio Returns

The table reports statistics on autocorrelations of characteristic-sorted long-short portfolio returns measured at
one year and five year intervals. The population autocorrelations are computed by combining all simulated data
samples, whereas the in-sample autocorrelations are computed within each 50-year simulated sample. The
tables also reports the percentage of simulated samples in which the estimated autocorrelation is negative.




                                               Low minus High     Low minus High     High minus Low
                                               Market-to-Book      Asset Growth        Profitability

           One year:

                     Population                      0.209              0.202              0.165

                     In-sample mean                  0.129              0.127              0.076

                     % of samples negative          20.1%              20.9%              33.7%

           Five years:

                     Population                      0.337              0.324              0.278

                     In-sample mean                  0.073              0.069              0.022

                     % of samples negative          39.4%              39.9%              47.0%




                                                       46
                                                Table VI
                  Predictability of Average Returns of Characteristic-Sorted Portfolios

The table reports percentiles of Sharpe ratio distributions in simulated 50-year samples. Panel A reports
percentiles of the t distribution and the corresponding annualized Sharpe ratios. Panels B and C report
percentiles of the distributions of annualized Sharpe ratios for characteristic-sorted long-short portfolios in
simulations with rational and overconfident investors, respectively.

                                                                      Percentile

                                       1st        5th         10th       50th      90th      95th       99th

 Panel A: Benchmark

   t-statistic                       −2.333     −1.647       −1.283        0       1.283    1.647      2.333

   Sharpe Ratio                      −0.330     −0.233       −0.181        0       0.181    0.233      0.330

 Panel B: Rational Investors

  Low minus High Market-to-Book      −0.361     −0.265       −0.212     −0.034     0.155    0.211      0.311

  Low minus High Asset Growth        −0.383     −0.285       −0.231     −0.056     0.120    0.171      0.268

  High minus Low Profitability       −0.329     −0.243       −0.196     −0.032     0.126    0.169      0.237

 Panel C: Overconfident Investors

  Low minus High Market-to-Book      −0.712     −0.505       −0.402     −0.012     0.367    0.470      0.656

  Low minus High Asset Growth        −0.743     −0.533       −0.428     −0.039     0.326    0.428      0.610

  High minus Low Profitability       −0.568     −0.405       −0.322      0.008     0.332    0.422      0.571




                                                        47
                                  Figure 1
Sharpe Ratio Distributions of the Low-minus-High Market-to-Book Portfolio




                                   48
