NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TAX POLICY FOR INNOVATION
Bronwyn H. Hall
Working Paper 25773
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25773

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2019, Revised April 2020

I thank Laurie Ciaramella, Fabian Gaessler, Ben Jones, Jacques Mairesse, and James Poterba for
helpful comments on an earlier draft. Prepared for the NBER Conference on Innovation and
Public Policy, Washington, DC, 13 March 2020. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Bronwyn H. Hall. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Tax Policy for Innovation
Bronwyn H. Hall
NBER Working Paper No. 25773
April 2019, Revised April 2020
JEL No. H25,O32,O38
ABSTRACT
A large number of countries around the world now provide some kind of tax incentive to
encourage firms to undertake innovative activity. This paper presents the policy rationale for
these incentives, discusses their design and potential effectiveness, and reviews the empirical
evidence on their actual effectiveness. The focus is on the two most important and most studied
incentives: R&D tax credits and super deductions, and IP boxes (reduced corporate taxes in
income from patents and other intellectual property).

Bronwyn H. Hall
University of California at Berkeley
123 Tamalpais Road
Berkeley, CA 94708
and NBER
bhhall@nber.org

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

Tax policy for innovation
Bronwyn H. Hall
University of California at Berkeley, NBER, IFS London, and MPI Munich

1 Introduction – some questions
Innovative activity on the part of firms and individuals is viewed by most
economists as a key driver of productivity and economic growth. However there are
good arguments that from a social welfare perspective, innovation will be
undersupplied by such market agents. One of the ways in which policy makers hope
to encourage innovative activity is via the treatment of such activity in corporate tax
system. The two key tax policies that bear directly on innovative activity are various
R&D tax credits and super deductions for R&D expense (cost reduction for an
innovative input) and reduced taxes on profits from intellectual property (IP)
income, commonly known as an IP box.
This article reviews what we know about these two types of tax policy, one
addressed to innovation input choice, and one based on innovation output. In the
process I attempt to provide answers to the following questions:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

How does taxation affect innovation?
Why are there special tax incentives for innovative activity?
What are the consequences of different R&D design choices?
Do patent boxes spur innovation?
How does the introduction of a tax measure in one jurisdiction affect other
jurisdictions?

Before doing so, however, I highlight the broader topic of which the discussion here
is only a part. The impact of taxation on innovative activity goes beyond these
targeted measures to encompass personal and corporate taxes imposed for other
purposes. For an example, see Akcigit et al. (2018), who examine the relationship
between patents and citation‐weighted patents and the level of personal and
corporate taxation at the US state level. They find that higher taxes reduce the
quantity, quality, and location of innovation as proxied by patent measures, both for
individuals and even more strongly for firms.
The present article focuses only on those tax instruments that directly target
innovative activity, but it should be kept in mind that the broader tax environment
may also matter and may influence the efficacy of innovation‐related tax policies.
The structure of the paper is the following: The next section defines innovative
2

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

activities and discusses the rationale for their support. This is followed by a detailed
examination of the policy design issues and practice associated with innovation tax
incentives. I then review the current use of these policies around the world in
section 4 and summarize the evidence on their effectiveness in section 5. Section 6
concludes and discusses some of the broader questions that arise from the review in
the earlier sections.

2 Innovation activity and the rationale for its support
At least since the work of Arrow (1962) and Nelson (1959), economists have
understood that innovative activity in the form of R&D is likely to generate unpriced
spillovers to other firms and to the overall economy, implying that these resources
may be undersupplied due to the (relative) ease of their imitation. Arrow also noted
two additional factors that influence the supply of innovation: the associated risk
and uncertainty that cannot be diversified away or insured against, and asymmetric
information/moral hazard problems when the innovator and his financier are not
the same. These features of R&D investment lead to a high cost of financing,
especially for new firms and small and medium‐sized enterprises (SMEs).
However, R&D is only one component of innovative activity. When we look at the
other components, it is less clear a priori that the spillovers will be as large,
although this is an area about which we know relatively little empirically. The
components of innovation spending by the firm are the following:









Research – basic and applied
Development (including experimental research and design)
Purchase of external IP including patents, copyrights, trademarks, and
technical knowhow.
Purchase, installation, and use of technologically more advanced equipment
Software and database activities
Training of employees in new processes, or in supporting new products
Marketing associated with the introduction of new or improved goods and
services
Costs of organizational innovation

The extent of potential spillovers obviously varies across the type of spending, as
does appropriability via IP protection or other means. A distinction that was
highlighted long ago by Nelson (1959) and recently modelled more explicitly by
Akcigit et al. (2013) is that between basic and more applied research and
development. The former is expected to have greater and less predictable spillovers
than the latter, which would argue that it be targeted by R&D policy. It might also be
3

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

argued that the returns from the purchase of new equipment as well as software
and database development are largely internalized by the firm and therefore require
less subsidy. However, the returns to training expense depend very much on both its
specific (to the firm) nature and also on the degree to which employees are able to
capture these returns in their wages in the future. The extent to which training
employees raises the cost of firm wages because it increases value of the employees’
outside options makes the allocation of the returns from such training between
private and social more complex.
Beyond the usual market failure arguments of government policy towards private
innovation expenditure, it is important to note that there is another argument in
favor of government policy towards research and innovation. This argument is the
fact that the production of public goods (health, environment, defense, etc.) may be
greatly enhanced by research targeted towards them. This kind of research may be
undersupplied for the usual reasons of lack of appropriability and risk, but is also
directed towards goods which themselves can be undersupplied because of their
nonrival and/or nonexcludable nature. Economists sometimes refer to this as the
double externality problem.

3 Tax policies for innovation
If we accept the rationale for the government role in encouraging innovation, what
policies are commonly used to this end? There are several, some of which take the
form of increasing firm incentives, and some of which involve direct spending by the
government. The main difference between the two is that modifying the incentives
for innovation generally leaves the direction of innovation in the hands of firms,
while direct spending usually allows the government a larger role in choosing the
projects that will be funded.
The potential incentive measures include reduced taxes depending on the level of
innovation inputs or outputs of the firm as well as the grant of intellectual property
rights (IPRs) such as patents on new inventions. Drawbacks to these instruments
are that the firm may choose privately profitable avenues of innovation which do
not add much to social welfare. A leading example is the development of “me too”
drugs, slightly improved versions of existing remedies that take a large market
share and therefore profits from the drug they displace, but provide only a small
benefit in terms of increases in consumer welfare. In the case of IPRs, there is an
additional cost due to the creation of some ex post market power that may restrict
output or raise the cost of follow‐on innovation.

4

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

Direct spending by government consists of subsidies for R&D or innovation, often
targeted to particular type of firm or project, as well as government‐performed R&D
directed towards public goods (e.g., health research, defense, etc.). Targeted
subsidies, especially those that choose specific projects to support tend to have high
administrative costs for evaluation and auditing. Nevertheless, they are widely used
around the world (Hall and Maffioli, 2008; EYGM, 2017). As Cohen and Noll (1991)
point out, one drawback of this kind of government project is that political support
arising from the beneficiaries may make them difficult to terminate when they are
unsuccessful, especially if they are large, create local employment, and require
considerable investment before a path to success is seen. Nevertheless, one can also
point to successful projects of this type, especially in the area of space exploration.
In this paper I focus on tax‐related incentive measures to encourage innovation. The
next few sections discuss issues in tax measure design and the two commonly used
tax incentives that directly target innovative activity: R&D tax credits and super
deductions, and IP boxes (reduced tax on the profits from innovation).

3.1 Some issues in design
Before describing the most commonly used tax instruments, it is useful to review
the features of these instruments that are more likely to make them effective at
achieving their goals. First, is the policy instrument visible to the firm’s decision‐
makers? That is, given limited attention and bounded rationality, does it affect their
bottom line enough so that it becomes salient in decision‐making? Related to this,
are there significant accounting and reporting costs required to make use of the
instrument?
Second, does the time horizon of benefits match that of the subsidized investment?
That is, does it reduce cost or increase income in the near term, when the firm may
have losses due to investment spending? Third and related, is the system stable
enough to allow forward planning of their investment strategy by the firm?
Fourth, does it target activities with greater potential spillovers, such as basic
research, standard setting, or spending at universities and non‐profit research
organizations, rather than incremental innovation of existing products in which a
firm already has a strong market position? Also, given the evidence that SMEs face
larger financial constraints, does it target their activities?
Fifth, what is the appropriate level of the tax subsidy? In principle, it should be
designed to lower the cost of private R&D capital to a level that induces the socially
optimal level of private R&D. What we usually observe is a different quantity: the
gap between the social and private rate of return to R&D. This is generally found to
5

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

be quite large, but imprecisely determined (Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen 2010;
Lucking, Bloom, and Van Reenen 2019). One reason for the indeterminacy is that
the social return to R&D is an unintended consequence of the individual firm
decisions. That is, the firm attempts to set its expected return to some estimate of
the cost of capital, whereas no such mechanism determines the social rate of return.
At the macroeconomic level, Jones and Williams (1998) uses an endogenous growth
model to suggest that the optimal R&D investment level for the U.S. may be as high
as four times the current level.
The problem of determining the optimal subsidy using the estimated private and
social returns to R&D is illustrated in Figure 1 below, which presents a stylized
version of the impact of a tax subsidy on R&D spending by the firm. The horizontal
access gives the level of R&D spending and the vertical access its price in terms of
cost of capital or rate of return. The firm’s return to R&D is assumed to slope
downwards, as does the return to society as a whole, but society’s return is higher
because of spillovers. The cost of capital is assumed to increase with an increase in
R&D, although this is not essential for the argument and it could be constant. What
we usually observe in the various econometric studies of R&D returns is the gap
between point A (the social returns to the firm’s choice of R&D) and point C (the
private returns to R&D at the firm, chosen to be equal to the expected cost of
capital). In order to move the firm’s R&D from the competitive level RC to the
socially optimal level RS, the subsidy required is a reduction in cost from point S to
point B, which is not necessarily of the same magnitude as A‐C, unless the return
lines are parallel.

6

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

Figure 1: Determining the optimal subsidy

Return
or cost
of R&D

A
S

cost

C

Social return

B
Private return

RC

RS

Optimal competitive
level of R

Optimal social
level of R

Obviously, even this picture is oversimplified. First, there is no reason to think that
the ordering of R&D projects by rate of return is the same for private and social
rates. That is, the social return curve may not be a simple downward sloping curve
when plotted versus R&D spending ordered by the firm’s preferences. In addition,
the magnitude of the spillover gap will vary by country, industry, and technology
type. Attempts to take account of these factors in policy design will necessarily be
fairly crude and confined to attempts to distinguish basic from applied research and
development.
A final design question is whether the instrument is comparatively easy to audit?
That is, do the tax authorities find it straightforward to identify expenditure or
income that is qualified for the tax measure? This has proved to be difficult for many
governments (Guenther, 2013, 2015) and also can discourage firms from using the
measures (Appelt et al. 2017, Guenther 2015).

3.2 The practice of corporate tax in the innovation area
A number of features in the corporate tax system can be seen to subsidize
innovation. The most obvious are the widely used R&D tax credit or super‐
deduction and the various IP boxes (reduced tax rates on income generated by
7

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

intellectual property such as patents, design rights, copyright, and trademarks). Tax
credits are a reduction in taxes that are based a measure of R&D spending, whereas
an R&D super deduction allows for expensing of R&D at a rate higher than the 100
per cent commonly used.1 In some cases these measures are targeted towards basic
research, university cooperation, and the use of public non‐profit research
organizations.
But there are other instruments that favor innovative activity. The first and most
important is the investment tax credit or accelerated depreciation, which reduces
the cost of acquiring new equipment and information technology (IT). Surveys of
innovation spending based on the Oslo Manual (OECD/Eurostat, 2018) such as
those reported by Eurostat show that in many countries the most important share of
innovation spending is the acquisition of new equipment, IT hardware and software
related to innovation, rather than R&D spending (Eurostat 2020).
Another tax feature that may favor or disfavor innovative activity is the relative
treatment of debt versus equity finance. If debt is favored due to the tax
deductibility of interest expense, the cost of intangible non‐securable finance is
relatively more expensive than investment in tangible assets (Hall, 1992).
However, the most commonly used corporate tax instrument specifically targeted
towards innovation is the R&D tax credit. Given that this instrument has been used
at least since the 1980s in some countries, there is considerable experience with its
design. The first design problem is that basing a credit on the total R&D spending by
a firm can be expensive, given the relative smoothness of R&D spending within the
firm. That is, most R&D will be done anyway and it would be desirable only to
subsidize an incremental amount. The difficulty is to measure that increment – that
is, what would the firm have done in the absence of the tax credit? Using the firm’s
own past history of spending has the negative effect of greatly reducing the nominal
incentive offered by the credit due to the impact an increase today has on the
increment available in the future (Appendix 9.2 and Hall, 1993). So although
incremental schemes can be cheaper, they have been abandoned or greatly modified
over time by several countries (e.g., US and France).
A tax credit or super deduction may not be useful unless there are taxes to be paid,
so the better designed instruments allow for loss carry‐forwards of the tax benefits,
The main difference between the two is that the super‐deduction portion is reduced by one minus
the corporate tax rate, whereas the credit does not depend on the level of the tax rate on corporate
profits. If the credit is recaptured as has sometimes been the case, it will behave like a super‐
deduction, assuming the firm is profitable. In the case of a loss‐making firm, the comparison between
a credit and super‐deduction will depend on the precise carry‐forward rules.
1

8

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

to reduce future taxes. This can be especially helpful for startups, although it still
leaves them facing higher costs for their initial investments. Administratively, one
way to handle this problem is that introduced by the Netherlands: reduced social
charges on science and engineering employment for R&D. This is an attractive
design, as the audit cost is relatively low, and it is immediately effective in reducing
the firm’s costs, avoiding the carry‐forward problem. The downside is that it may be
more complex to administer in the case of purchased external R&D. The
effectiveness in this case will depend to some extent on whether the supplying firm
passes through the reduced cost of their R&D to the buyer.
A second drawback to using a social charge reduction as an R&D incentive is that in
some countries the accounts for social security and retirement pensions are
administered quite separately from the general government budget. It is not always
easy to make up for reducing the social charges from the general government
budget for administrative reasons and would require additional legislation.
Recently a number of countries have introduced so‐called “IP boxes,” which permit
considerably reduced corporate tax rates on income that is generated by a firm’s
intellectual property such as patents, copyrights, designs, and trademarks. Such a
tax instrument is often justified as subsidy to or reward for innovative activity.
However, the rationale is a bit more complex than that, as I describe in what follows.
In most developed economies, the share of company assets that is intangible has
grown in recent years to the point where it is larger than tangible assets in some
firms (R. E. Hall, 2001; Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel, 2009; Lev, 2018). Many of these
intangibles are in fact intellectual property, covered by some form of exclusivity
right. Because intangibles do not necessarily have a physical location, it is fairly easy
to move them to a low tax jurisdiction, enabling lower tax obligations (Dischinger
and Riedel, 2011; Mutti and Grubert, 2009). A common strategy is to pay royalties
for the use of the IP to the low tax country, creating income there and cost in the
source (high tax) country, reducing the total taxes to be paid (Bartelsman and
Beetsma, 2003). This strategy has not escaped the attention of tax authorities and
governments, and in an effort to persuade the IP assets to stay home, it is appealing
to offer lower tax rates on their income. Such a tax strategy on the part of
governments also reflects a view that encouraging IP asset creation and location in
the country is likely to persuade firms to retain skilled jobs and R&D in the country.
The above argument implies that although the encouragement of innovative activity
and IP creation may be motives for lowering taxes on IP income, countries are
effectively forced to do this by the presence of many low tax jurisdictions around the

9

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

world into which such income could migrate.2 It is also worth noting that three of
the countries that have introduced IP boxes recently are Cyprus, Liechtenstein, and
Malta, who presumably did so mainly to attract tax revenue rather than
discouraging IP income from leaving.3
The design of IP boxes has proved even more challenging than the design of R&D tax
credits. First, what IP should be covered? All of the extant boxes include patent
rights, but the other choices include trademarks, designs and models, copyrights
(sometimes restricted to software), domain names, and trade secrets/knowhow
(Alstadsaeter et al., 2018). From a spillover perspective, the rationale for
subsidizing some of these alternative IPRs appears questionable. For example,
trademarks are traditionally for consumer protection purposes, but are also used to
secure and maintain some degree of pricing power by preventing imitation. A
similar argument applies to domain names. In the case of trade secrets or knowhow
it is unclear how one could even measure the associated income.
Second, how is IP income to be measured and expenses to be allocated between IP
and non‐IP activities? Third, is acquired or existing IP to be covered or only IP newly
developed in the country in question? This latter feature has now been to some
extent standardized in the OECD and EU economies by the Nexus principle of the
Base Erosion and Profit Shifting (BEPS) rules (OECD, 2015).4 Fourth, should any tax
benefits for the R&D associated with the patent be recaptured, to avoid too generous
an incentive? In practice, different countries have reached different answers to
these questions, so there is a wide variation around the world in patent box
implementation (Alstadsaeder et al. 2018; Gaessler et al. 2018).

3.3 Comparing R&D tax incentives and patent boxes
What is the difference between these two tax incentives and should we prefer one
over the other? There are two obvious differences: first, R&D tax credits do not
cover innovation that is not generated via R&D, and patent boxes do not cover non‐
patentable innovation. Second, R&D tax incentives directly target an input to
innovation that is under control of the firm, whereas patent boxes target an output,
The well‐known use of Ireland as an IP‐related tax haven by Apple is only the tip of a very large
iceberg (Ting 2014), although see Hines (2014) for a fact‐based review of the evidence which
suggests the problem may be less than sometimes believed.

2

3 These three countries combined account for fewer thatn 0.2 percent of European patent
applications.

The nexus approach requires a link between the income benefiting from the IP regime and the
extent to which the taxpayer has undertaken the underlying R&D that generated the IP asset (OECD
2015).

4

10

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

which may be affected by and indeed largely due to external causes and “luck”.
Obviously, in an expectational sense, the availability of lower taxes on patent income
feeds back into the firm’s decision‐making process, but it seems rather indirect
compared to a subsidy of an innovation input. In addition, tax benefits ex post do not
really help with the immediate problem of financing the investment.
Besides the fact that they are directly related to the firm decisions on the cost and
location of innovative activity, there are a number of other reasons that R&D tax
credits differ from patent boxes. Patent boxes target the most appropriable part of
innovation, which are the innovative activities that already receive a reward via the
exclusivity of the patent. They also effectively subsidize patent assertion, some of
which is “patent trolling”, because all the income of firms that specialize in patent
litigation and enforcement is patent income.5 Relatedly, they provide an additional
incentive to renew patents that might otherwise be abandoned, thus extending
potential market power and raising search costs for inventors. Depending on the
precise design of the patent box (gross income versus net income), they may
provide an incentive to choose projects with high expenditure unrelated to R&D,
since the size of the non‐R&D budget will affect the amount claimed as a tax
reduction.
IP boxes are more likely to face much higher audit cost than the R&D tax credit,
which is already one of the most contentious areas of tax compliance (Sullivan 2015,
US Congress Joint Economic Committee 2016). The tax reduction claimed depends
on the allocation of a company’s income and expense between its IP and non‐IP
assets, something that is rife with difficulty given complementarity. This fact is
probably one of the reasons that some countries have chosen to use a gross income
definition for patent income.
Before leaving this review of R&D tax credits versus patent boxes, it is useful to
consider the recent EU proposal for a common corporate tax base in Europe, which
includes a super deduction of 150 percent, to replace patent boxes and existing R&D
tax credit schemes d’Andria, Dimitrios, and Agnieszka, 2018). This may be a good
idea, but it is worth pointing out that the effectiveness of this instrument depends
on the corporate tax rate. Warda (2001) defined the B‐index as the marginal pre‐tax
profit a company needs to generate to break even when spending one unit on R&D.
This index is equal to one when there is no special tax treatment for R&D. Figure 2
shows the B‐index as a function of the corporate tax rate (from 0 to 0.4) for two
5 The definition of a patent troll is controversial, but it generally means an entity that specializes in
asserting patents against producers in situations where the legal costs are so high that the firm will
reach a financial settlement with the troll rather than defend itself even if it believes the patent is
invalid, or that it is not infringed.

11

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

different proposed super deductions (150% and 200%).6 The reduction in R&D cost
is clearly much higher for higher corporate tax rates than for lower – something to
keep in mind when setting the level of the super deduction.
Figure 2

4 The facts
In this section of the paper we briefly summarize the current use (as of 2019)
around the world of the two main innovation‐related tax policies: R&D tax credits
and super deductions, and the patent box. For more detailed information on these
instruments, see EYGM (2017), Lester and Warda (2018), and OECD (2019).

4.1 R&D tax credits
From its beginnings in the 1970s and 1980s in the US and Canada, this policy
instrument is now very widely used. In 2000, 19 countries currently in the OECD
provided some form of tax relief, as compared to 32 out of 36 OECD countries, along
with Brazil, China, and Russia in 2018. The latest figures given in EYGM (2017)
suggest that 42 countries worldwide have some kind of tax scheme that reduces the
cost of doing R&D. Implementation of these schemes varies widely across countries
in a number of dimensions:

6 See the Appendix and Warda (2001) or OECD (2019) for the derivation and detailed definition of
the B‐Index.

12

B. H. Hall







Taxes and innovation

March 2020

Whether the scheme is a credit against taxes, or a super‐deduction (>100%)
of R&D expense, or even a reduction in social charges for R&D employees
The size of the credit or deduction
An incremental versus a level credit
Whether or not SMEs are treated more favorably
Details of the expense allowed
Whether unused credits can be carried forward to be used when the firm is
profitable

Comparing the tax credit policies across countries is usually done by computing the
user cost of R&D capital taking into account its tax treatment (R. E. Hall and
Jorgenson 1967) or by computing the B‐index defined above. In general, these
measures are computed for a profitable firm that increases its R&D in a single year.
However, the OECD has recently developed a database of the effective subsidy rate
from R&D tax incentives that is available on their website (OECD 2019), covering
the years 2000 through 2018. This database provides separate estimates for
profitable and loss‐making firms, as well as for SMEs if they face different tax
treatment. In general, loss‐making firms receive a slightly smaller subsidy and SMEs
a slightly larger subsidy (see also Lester and Warda, 2018).
Figure 3 shows the countries that have some form of R&D tax relief in 2017,
distinguishing between those administered via the corporate profits tax and those
that also include a reduction in social charges on R&D employees. In the appendix,
we present figures that show the pattern of the R&D tax subsidies over time, based
on the OECD (2019) data.
Figure 3: countries with R&D tax relief

13

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

4.2 IP boxes
At the time of writing, 22 countries have introduced some kind of IP box, most of
them in Europe. As in the case of the R&D tax credit, these instruments vary
considerably across countries. Tables comparting the various IP boxes can be found
in Altstadsaeder et al. (2018) and Evers et al. (2015).
As in the case of R&D tax schemes, there is a wide variation in the rules surrounding
IP boxes across countries:







Variations in IP covered (sometimes even informal IP)
Variations in the treatment of income and expense; reduced tax rate on gross
IP income in some countries, rather than net IP income
Recapture of past R&D expense deductions in some cases
Rules on whether purchased or pre‐existing IP is eligible, or whether further
development of the income‐generating product in the relevant country is
necessary (modified by BEPS, as described in Section 3.2).
Use is affected by Controlled Foreign Corporation (CFC) rules.7

Figure 4 shows the countries that have introduced a patent box as of 2018, many of
them quite recently. Almost all are in Europe, mostly in Western Europe. The only
exceptions to this are Israel, India, Japan, and Turkey (not shown on the graph).
Note also that several very small European countries with relatively little innovative
activity have introduced a patent box but are not visible on the graph: Andorra,
Liechtenstein, Malta, and San Marino.

CFC rules specify that if a company in a tax haven is controlled from the home country taxes are
imposed on income received in the low tax country at the domestic rate. However, the European
Court of Justice has limited the application of CFC rules with the EEA area, so they do not affect
patent transfers to patent box countries within the EU (Bräutigam, Spengel, and Steiff, 2017). See also
Deloitte Consulting (2014).

7

14

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

Figure 4

5 Recent research on innovation tax policy evaluation
5.1 R&D tax credit evaluation
Evaluating the R&D tax credit involves at least three questions: 1) Does the credit
increase business R&D as intended? 2) Do private rates of return to R&D decline, as
they should, since the effect of the tax credit is to lower the cost of capital? 3) Do
other firms receive increased R&D spillovers as a result of higher spending from the
credit? The first has been very well studied and I summarize the results here. The
second is often misinterpreted, with policy makers looking for high private returns
from subsidized R&D, rather than the relatively low returns that would be expected
if the effect of the tax credit is to lower the cost and therefore the required rate of
return to R&D. The third question is the most important but also the most difficult,
and there are few if any studies that look specifically at this question, although there
are many studies of R&D spillovers more broadly (Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen,
2010).
Since the early and somewhat skeptical work of Mansfield (1984, 1986), evidence
on the effectiveness of R&D tax credits has accumulated to show that they are
generally effective at increasing business R&D, with a price elasticity of minus one
15

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

or higher (Hall and Van Reenen, 2000) Simulation evidence such as that reported in
Hall (1993) and Mulkay and Mairesse (2012) has shown that the increase in R&D
spending approximately balances or even exceeds the lost tax revenue. Recent
research generally confirms the evidence surveyed in Hall and Van Reenen. For
example, Chang (2018) uses US state‐level data instrumented by federal tax changes
to find elasticities of R&D to its tax‐adjusted price of ‐2.8 to ‐3.8. Mulkay and
Mairesse (2012) uses the 2008 tax changes in France to find a price elasticity of ‐0.4
or higher, and Dechezlepretre et al. (2016) use a regression discontinuity approach
to find an elasticity of ‐2.6 for SMEs in the UK. Guceri and Liu (2019) use similar
data with an exogenous shift in eligibility thresholds to find an elasticity of ‐1.6. See
also Acconcia & Cantabene (2017) for a study of the impact of Italian R&D tax credit
on financially constrained and unconstrained firms. Blandinieres, Steinbrenner, and
Weiss (2020) provide a meta‐regression analysis of the various estimates of the tax‐
adjusted price elasticity of R&D, and generally center on minus one as the consensus
estimate.
One problem that is particularly important for the analyses of U.S. data is that of
obtaining the appropriate measure of research and experimentation expenses by
the firm. The legislation defines the expense eligible for the credit as research and
experimentation excluding routine development. However, the only publicly
available data on research at the firm level is that reported in the 10‐K filings at the
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission and available to researchers via Standard
and Poor’s Compustat. Rao(2016) compares the actual R&E expense claimed and
reported to the tax authorities to the R&D reported on the 10‐K for a sample of
about 60 firms between 1981 and 1991, finding substantial discrepancies. Using the
actual R&E expense and controlling for endogeneity in the relationship between the
tax price and R&E, she finds a tax price elasticity of ‐1.6, which is very similar to
those found using the public R&D data. This result does raise a further question
about the R&D production function, suggesting that the disallowed portion of the
R&D is complementary to the eligible R&E expense.
Two recent studies have examined spillovers from tax credit‐induced R&D. The first
is the previously mentioned Dechezlepretre et al. (2016). They measure the
technological closeness between firms using patent data, and show that increases in
R&D (due to changes in eligibility for the tax credit) in one firm increases the
patenting in firms that are technologically close to that firm. Aggregating over all
such firms, they find that patenting overall increases 1.7 times the direct impact on
the targeted firm. Interestingly, they find no such impact (positive or negative) for
firms that are close in product market space. The implication of their work is that

16

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

tax‐induced increases in R&D do indeed generate technological spillovers that are
fairly large in magnitude.
Balsmeier et al. (2018) base their study on the California R&D tax credit that was
introduced in 1987. They find the usual increase in R&D and patenting in response
to the credit. However, in contrast to Dechezlepretre et al., in their data when firms
are close in technology space, competitors’ market value reacts negatively to the
increase. They also find that there is a general tendency for firms to pursue existing
lines of research with the increased R&D rather than striking out in new directions.
One major difference from the Dechezlepretre et al. study is the sample: here firms
of all sizes are examined, rather than only SMEs, which may help to explain some of
the differences in the findings.
There is one further impact of changes in the tax treatment of R&D that should be
considered. That is the possibility that rapid changes in the tax price of R&D may
have the effect of increasing its cost rather than its quantity. This is because the
supply of scientists and engineers is fairly inelastic in the short run, since it takes
time to produce them. In that setting one might expect the wages of existing R&D
workers to increase in response to greater demand. This is what Goolsbee (1998)
found for the U.S., measuring a wage elasticity of about 0.3 with respect to R&D.
Using data on 15 OECD economies, Wolff and Reinthaler (2008) find an upper
bound to the long run wage elasticity of 0.2, while Lokshin and Mohnen (2013)
found a similar positive elasticity of about 0.2 for the Netherlands. Note that if the
overall impact of the tax credit is unity, these findings suggest that the majority of
the impact does go to the quantity of R&D, rather than the price.

5.2 Patent boxes
The evaluation of patent box effectiveness depends somewhat on what they are
trying to achieve: 1) Prevent taxable income from migrating to low tax countries. 2)
Encourage the production of knowledge and intangible assets within a country. In
addition, some have questioned whether the presence of a patent box induces the
transfer of patent ownership to a country without any positive benefits for the
economy other than the taxation (at a low rate) of some additional corporate
income.
A number of studies have been conducted on the patent box, looking at different
aspects of these questions. In practice, the variation in patent box features across
countries, and the limited number of countries in which they had been introduced
until recently mean that the use of the patent box as a “natural experiment”
produces somewhat imprecise and sometimes conflicting results. Accounting for all
the features leaves little variation for identification of their effect. In addition, it has
17

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

always been possible to transfer patent income to a low tax jurisdiction even
without a patent box, so one might expect that the additional patent transfer
induced by the patent box would be small (Bartelsman and Beetsma, 2003).
Gaessler, Hall, and Harhoff (2018) surveys the research that looks at the effect of
introducing a patent box on patent transfer to and from a country. We then
investigate the question using our own data and several features of the patent box,
examining both the incentive to transfer patents to a patent box country, as well as
the impact on patentable invention and R&D in the country. We are able to extend
the analysis to 2016, by which time 17 countries had a patent box in place for at
least two years.
Our review of the literature finds a large number of studies that have looked at the
relationship between taxation and patenting, a subset of which have examined
patent boxes and the location of patents. Almost none have examined other impacts
of the patent box. In general, the level of corporate taxes appears to reduce the
incentive to locate patents in a country, consistent with what Akcigit et al. (2018)
found for U.S. state data (Karkinsky and Riedel, 2012; Boehm et al., 2015; Griffith,
Miller, and O’Connell, 2014).
The evidence on patent location and ownership transfer in response to the
introduction of a patent box has been studied by a number of other researchers
(Alstadsaeter et al., 2018; Bösenberg and Egger, 2017; Ciaramella, 2017; Bradley et
al., 2015). In general, both location and transfer respond to lower tax rates on patent
income, although the studies vary considerably in their approach: observation at
patent, country, or firm level; the set of patents observed (pre‐grant only or
including post‐grant); whether initial location or transfer is examined. Because of
this variability, it is difficult to extract the magnitude of the impact from the various
estimates. Gaessler, Hall, and Harhoff (2018) find that the transfer impact could be
quite high: if the difference between the corporate tax rate and the patent income
tax rate in the potential recipient country falls by 10 per cent, that leads to a four or
five‐fold increase in patent transfers over the next 3 years. However, like
Alstadsaeter et al. and Bradley et al., we find that if there is a further development
requirement for existing patents and those acquired from abroad, the impact
disappears. As the nexus requirement of BEPS has eliminated the ability to simply
benefit from transferring patents, we would expect the patent box impact on
transfer to disappear in the future.
An interesting finding in Gaessler, Hall, and Harhoff is that patent ownership
transfer is significantly discouraged by the size of the patent income tax rate in the
sending company, a 15 per cent reduction in transfer if the tax rate on patent
18

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

income changes by 10 percent. This result is entirely consistent with the view that
patent boxes are introduced in order to keep patent ownership and related activities
in the country, rather than primarily to attract new patents.
Does the presence of a patent box increase patentable invention in a country? This is
difficult to see in the aggregate data because all countries have an upward trend in
patenting during the period. To examine this question, Gaessler, Hall, and Harhoff
estimated regressions for the log of EP filings in a country‐year on the patent box
rate, corporate tax rate, log population, log GDP per capita, log R&D per GDP,
country and year dummies, and found an insignificant impact of the patent box on
patented invention. We also found similar insignificant results for the level of
business R&D spending in the country. If there is no requirement for further
development of the transferred patents, both patented invention and business R&D
in the country actually declines significantly. The only other paper to look at the
impact of the patent box on R&D is that by Mohnen, Vankan, and Verspagen (2017),
who find an increase in R&D person‐hours in response to the patent box in the
Netherlands. This may reflect the difference in the way the patent box (which is
actually an innovation box) is administered in that country, as it has covered non‐
patentable R&D since 2010.
Summarizing the results from these studies, I conclude first that patent boxes
reduce patent ownership transfers from the country introducing them. They also
induce some transfers to the country, but only if income from existing and/or
acquired patents without development condition is covered. In addition, others have
found that CFC rules do reduce patent ownership transfer by multinationals. More
valuable patents by the usual metrics are the ones transferred, confirming the
relationship of patent value metrics to the income generated by the related
invention/innovation (Alstadsaeter et al, 2018; Gaessler, Hall, and Harhoff, 2018;
Dudar, Spengel, and Voget, 2015). However, there is little evidence that the
introduction of a patent box increases either patentable invention or R&D
investment in a country, controlling for country characteristics and overall time
trends.

6 The R&D tax credit in the U.S.
6.1 History and current status
In the United States, the R&D tax credit (properly the Research and Experimentation
Tax Credit) has a long and varied history. It was first introduced in 1981 as an
incremental credit and it did not take long for economists to point out that the
design was flawed, in that forward‐looking firms would perceive an effective rate of
19

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

the credit that was substantially lower than the statutory rate (Appendix 9.2,
Altshuler 1989, Eisner et al. 1986). In response, in 1990, the rolling base amount for
the incremental credit was switched to a fixed base, determined by the 1984‐1988
R&D to sales ratio times the current sales. This base is still in use, although it is
obviously becoming more and more irrelevant as time passes.
Since its inception, R&D spending eligible for the credit has been restricted to
Qualified Research Expenditures (QRE), which are typically about 65‐75 percent of
total R&D, although Rao (2016) uses a small sample of firms from the Statistics of
Income data to report that QRE are only 37 percent of total R&D.8 This is for two
reasons: the desire to target expenditures that are more likely to generate spillovers
and also to reduce the cost to the government of the tax credit. The definition of
qualified research is research relying on a hard science that is intended to resolve
technological uncertainty related to development of a new or improved business
component, product, process, internal use computer software, techniques, formulas
or inventions to be sold or used in the taxpayer’s trade or business. The emphasis in
the definition is on the need for testing to resolve uncertainty and the use of
engineering, computing, biological, or physical science. If the research passes this
test, QREs are defined as follows:




Wages paid to employees for qualified services (in practice 69% of spending,
US OTA, 2016).
Supplies excluding land or depreciable tangible property used in the R&D
process (about 15%).
65% of contract research expenses paid to third party performing qualified
research, regardless of success (about 16%).

The main exclusions here are therefore capital spending for R&D (which is typically
about 10 per cent of its cost) as well as some end stage development and social
science research for marketing or other purposes. The extent to which development
involves the resolution of uncertainty is the main area of auditing contention.
The US R&E tax credit has been continuously renewed, extended, and expanded at
least 16 times since its introduction, with the exception of a one year lapse between
July 1995 and June 1996. As of July 1996, the credit has generally been computed
based on the following formula:
20% x (Qualified Research Expenses less Base Amount) + 20% x (Basic Research
Payments)
In Rao’s case the denominator of this percentage also accounts for R&D performed outside the
United States, which is ineligible for the credit. This explains why her number is lower.
8

20

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

The Base Amount equals the Fixed Base Percentage multiplied by the taxpayer’s
average annual gross receipts for the preceding four tax years. The Base Amount
cannot be less than 50% of the taxpayer’s Qualified Research Expenses for the
current tax year. The Fixed Base Percentage represents the ratio of the taxpayer’s
Qualified Research Expenses for the base period of 1984 through 1988 to gross
receipts for the same period. When introduced in 1996, the Fixed Base Percentage
could not exceed 16 per cent; currently the limit on the base amount is 50 per cent
of total R&D. For start‐up companies (as specially defined for the credit), the Fixed
Base Percentage is generally 3%, but gradually shifting to a base determined by the
5th to 10th year of the startup. All of these figures must be adjusted in the case of
acquisition or disposition, and are subject to recapture by the corporate tax rate,
reducing their level. They are also subject to AMT, the Alternative Minimum Tax.
Finally, basic research payments are those made to a university or non‐profit
organization on a contract basis.
Effective with the PATH (Protecting Americans from Tax Hikes) Act of 2015, the
R&D tax credit was made permanent rather than temporary. In addition, two
exceptions to the exclusion of the R&E credit from offsetting AMT (Alternative
Minimum Tax) liability were made: 1) small businesses with gross receipts less than
$50 million averaged over the past three years; and 2) small businesses may claim
up to $250,000 of R&E tax credit as a payroll tax credit against the employer share
of OASDI taxes. The current system contains two options for computing the credit,
which differ in the definition of the base amount: 1) Regular ‐ a fixed base equal to
the average gross receipts over the preceding four years times the ratio of research
expenses to gross receipts for the 1984‐1988 period; and 2) Alternative simplified
credit (ASC) ‐ a fixed base defined as 50 percent of the average QRE for the three
preceding tax years. The statutory credit rate for the regular credit is 20 per cent,
while that for the ASC is 14 per cent. There is also a two year carry‐back and 20 year
carry‐forward of the credit available for firms without taxes in the current year.
It is helpful to illustrate the complexity of the R&E tax credit computation via a few
hypothetical scenarios. Three are presented here: 1) the Regular credit; 2) the ASC;
and 3) the special provisions for startups. All three examples avoid the
complications induced by carry‐forwards in the case of losses and the ceilings on the
amount that can be claimed. The Regular credit presumes that the firm existed in a
similar form during the 1984‐1988 period. An example of a firm that can benefit
from the regular credit is the following: Assume the total QRE to sales ratio in 1984‐
1988 is 8 percent, and the firm spends 0.9 billion out of sales of 10 billion (9 percent
QRE intensity) during a subsequent year. The fixed base for the regular credit will
be 0.8 billion = .08*10 billion, and the available credit will be 0.20*(0.9‐0.8) = 20
21

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

million. If we assume that QRE and sales are roughly constant for three years prior
to the year of interest, the Alternative Simplified Credit for the firm will be zero,
because the fixed base will be the same as the current R&D. So firms that are
relatively stable but show some growth in QRE between the 1980s and the present
will prefer the Regular credit. Obviously, this will be a shrinking percentage of the
firms as time passes, both because of firm exit and because the firm’s profile in the
late 1980s will become less relevant to its present spending.
The ASC computation is more likely to benefit firms whose sales are growing, but
whose QRE intensity has remained the same or declined over time. It is also
available to a larger number of firms, because it does not require data from the
1980s. For example, consider a firm whose sales over 5 years are 50, 55, 60, 65, and
70, and whose QRE intensity is 0.05 over the same period. The fixed bases in the
final two years will be 2.75 and 3, implying credits of 0.14*(3.25‐2.75) = 0.07 and
0.14*(3.5‐3.0) = 0.07 respectively. Assuming either that the firm did not exist in
1984‐88 or that its QRE intensity was higher than 0.05 during that period, in this
example the firm will choose the ASC, because the regular credit would yield zero.9
Some startup firm scenarios are shown in Appendix 9.3. For its first 10 years a
startup firm will follow a relatively complex set of computations that are designed
to transit the firm from a fixed base percentage of 3 percent to one that is more
reflective of the particular firm’s circumstances. The result is some fairly extreme
heterogeneity depending on the particular pattern of QRE and sales growth in the
firm. For a stylized R&D‐intensive startup (Scenario 4) with high QRE intensity in
the first three years and steady sales growth, the average credit is about 12 percent
of QRE in the first 6 years and then declines to 2 percent by year 11. The marginal
credit shows a similar pattern (see the appendix for details).
Figure 5 shows the actual evolution of the use of the different methods of computing
the R&D credit between 2001 and 2014; unfortunately the SOI detail is not available
on the SOI website prior to 2001 or post 2014. The figure shows that the amount
devoted to the credit doubled between 2006 and 2012, and that the ASC accounts an
increasing share of the credits claimed, as expected. The small amount claimed
under the alternative incremental credit (AIC) before its elimination in 2009
perhaps accounts for its discontinuation in favor of the ASC. The figure also shows
the so‐called “pass‐through” amounts of the credit, which are those claimed by S
corporations, partnerships, and Schedule C sole proprietorships; they are a very
small percentage of the total throughout the period.
This analysis ignores the impact of the increased QRE in the current period on the amount of credit
available in the future. That impact will reduce the total value of the credit but not to zero, so the ASC
will still be preferred to the regular credit.

9

22

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

Figure 5

Total R&E credit claimed on IRS Form 6765 (millions $)
14,000

12,000

10,000

8,000

6,000

4,000

2,000

0
2001

2002

Regular credit

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Alternative incremental credit (AIC)

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

Alternative simplified credit (ASC)

2013

2014

Passthrough

Source: US Dept of Treasury Statistics of Income (SOI),
https://www.irs.gov/statistics/soi‐tax‐stats‐corporation‐research‐credit

Several factors make the R&E credit rate actually experienced by the firm
considerably less than the statutory rate of 20 or 14 per cent. Table 1 presents some
computations done by the U.S. Office of Tax Analysis using a sample of corporate tax
returns during the 2013 year along with an assumed discount rate of 5 percent that
illustrate this point. Note first that the majority of returns and of returns weighted
by QRE choose to use the ASC computation, which depends on the past three years
QRE, and therefore has a similar impact on the future credit available as the former
AIC (alternative incremental credit, described in the appendix). The table analyzes
three scenarios: a firm using the regular credit and unconstrained by the
requirement that the base amount of QRE be 50 percent or higher; 10 a firm using

In 2013, this requirement essentially means that the firm’s R&D growth rate must be about 2.5
percentage points annually above the sales growth rate over the approximately 25 year period since
the late 1980s. It is therefore no surprise that only a small share of firms are unconstrained under the
regular method.

10

23

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

the regular credit, but constrained by the 50 percent requirement; and a firm using
the alternative simplified credit.
The first two lines show the relevant statutory credit rate and its value when
reduced by the recapture under a corporate income tax rate of 35 percent. The next
line shows the effective rate with no carryforward. This computation incorporates
the impact of increasing the QRE this year on the future base; note that in the rare
unconstrained case, there is no impact on the future base. This result was the
original intent of the 1989 legislation. Obviously this intent has been lost as time has
past and more firms use the ASC. Line 4 corrects the effective rate for the fact that in
many cases the credit will be carried forward due to insufficient tax in a given year,
and in some cases will be lost due to firm exit, etc. This reduces the effective
marginal credit rate even further. Finally, line 5 shows the average credit rate: the
credit claimed divided by the total QRE of the claimants who elected each of the
three scenarios in 2013.
Note three observations about this table: First, the average credit rates (credit/QRE)
are remarkably similar under the three methods. Second, the average credit rate is
not that different from the marginal effective rate, except in the little‐used
unconstrained regular method. Third, the marginal effective credit rate is rather
low, which is consistent with the OECD 2019 figure, which shows that the US
provides a lower tax subsidy to R&D than the other 30+ OECD countries that offer a
tax credit.

24

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

Table 1

Statutory, effective, and average R&E Credit rates by computation method for
corporate tax payers, 2013 (in per cent)
Rate
Statutory credit rate
Reduced credit rate (due to
recapture)
Effective credit rate with no
carryforward (1)
Effective credit rate with
average carryforward (2)
Average credit rate (3)
Share of returns (3)
Share of qualified research
expenses (QRE) (3)

Regular method:
Unconstrained by
minimum base
20

Regular method:
Constrained by 50%
minimum base
20

Alternative Simplified
Credit (ASC)
14

13

13

9.1

13

6.5

5

10.7
5.6

5.3
6.5

4.1
5.2

5

44

51

3

28

69

Notes:
(1) This assumes that firms have sufficient tax liability to use the full credit in the current year.
(2) According to OTA (Office of Tax Analysis) calculations, on average 82 per cent of the current‐year credit will
eventually be used.
(3) According to OTA calculations using the 2013 SOI corporate sample. Returns not reporting information in
approprate fields for the calculations were dropped. This elminated 9 per cent of returns but these returns only
accounted for 1 per cent of the reported credit.
Source: US Dept. of Treasury , Office of Tax Analysis, 2016.

6.2 Some thoughts on design of the tax credit
Earlier it was suggested that the relevant considerations for design of tax policy
towards innovation are saliency to the firm, appropriate time horizons, targeting
those areas where the private‐social return gap is large, and reducing auditing cost.
To these might be added some consideration of the cost of the policy in relation to
its benefits. In this section I consider whether there are potential improvements in
the R&E tax credit toward these ends.
The current take‐up of the R&E tax credit suggests that it is visible to many firms.
Holtzman (2017) reports the result of a short survey of CEOs, CFOs, and tax
directors at 40 companies across size and industry about the 2015 PATH Act
changes. The responses were uniformly positive about its impact both on take‐up
and on increasing R&D, especially the impact of permanence. However, the fact that
25

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

a majority of firms have switched to the ASC, which uses QRE spending in the recent
past to construct a base, does suggest that the effective current credit rate (marginal
or average) may be considerably lower than the 14 or 20 percent intended by the
legislation. It is also true that the United States has one of the lowest effective rates
among OECD economies with a research tax credit. If the goal is to encourage a
substantial increase in R&D spending on the grounds that the social return is much
higher than the private, it would be desirable to use a much higher credit rate along
with an incremental form of the credit, to avoid the loss of infra‐marginal tax
revenue.
With respect to targeting, in the appendix I show some detailed computations of the
operation of the credit for startup firms. These show that the startup version of the
R&E tax credit is more generous than that available to established firms, at least for
firms with high R&D intensities, but that after about 5 years, the incentive declines
considerably for the same reasons as the above. It is an open question whether the
current design is anything close to optimal.
There are some remaining open questions about the design of the credit: first, does
recapturing the credit for profit‐making firms make sense? The effect is to provide a
larger credit rate to firms with losses than to firms with profits. Second, would it be
simpler for auditing purposes to define eligible R&D the same way the accounting
standards define it, in order to simplify both recordkeeping and auditing? This
would increase QRE by about 40 percent so that it has consequences for the cost of
the credit.

7 Conclusion and discussion
In this article I have reviewed the main tax policies designed to encourage
innovative activity and the evidence on their effectiveness. Based on this review, a
number of broader policy questions suggest themselves. First, are the current tax
subsidies enough? That is, do countries provide enough support for R&D and
innovative activity? It is well‐known that although imprecisely measured, the social
returns to R&D itself are much higher than the private returns (Hall, Mairesse, and
Mohnen 2010 and for the micro evidence; Kao, Chiang, and Chen 1999, Keller 1998,
Coe and Helpman 1995 for macro evidence).
Looking in more detail at the international spillover evidence, Branstetter (2001)
and Peri (2004) find that domestic spillovers are larger than those from other
countries, while Park (1995) and van Pottelsberghe (1997) find that spillovers from
foreign R&D are more important for smaller open economies than for the US, Japan,
and Germany. The absorptive capacity of the recipient country is also important for
26

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

making use of R&D spillovers (Guellec and van Pottelsberghe 2001). All this
suggests that the optimal policy may vary depending on country size, openness, and
level of development. One fairly extreme view is offered by Jones and Williams
(1998) using an endogenous growth model to argue that the socially optimal R&D
investment in the US is at least four times the actual investment.
Although most of this literature is focused on R&D rather than innovative activity
more broadly, the conclusions are that tax incentives for innovation should be even
larger than they are already and also that those for larger economies are more
important for global welfare. The evidence also highlights a second question: Would
these policies achieve higher welfare if they were better coordinated between
countries? If so, how could that be done? There are two reasons why coordination
might be a good idea – the presence of cross‐border spillovers and the avoidance of
wasteful tax competition.
The latter has been found both for US states and across the OECD and the EU. Using
eight large OECD economies 1981‐1999, Bloom, Griffith, and Van Reenen (2002)
find that domestic R&D responds to the foreign cost of R&D with an elasticity of
about unity, roughly equal and opposite to the domestic cost response. Corrado et al.
(2016) find similar results for 10 EU countries, 1995‐2007. Wilson (2009) finds
similar, but even larger, results for US states, where the mobility of R&D is arguably
even higher. Note however that equal and opposite elasticities does not imply zero‐
sum effects, although it does imply that total worldwide R&D will respond more
strongly to R&D tax credits in the larger economies, as suggested by Park and van
Pottelsberghe. A related finding by Schwab and Todtenhaupt (2018) is that
European multinationals increase their patenting and R&D activity overall when a
patent box is introduced in one of the countries in which they operate.
Finally, one could argue that the introduction of the IP Box is in part an attempt to
reward a broader concept of innovative activity than that which is simply R&D‐
related. Although this may be true, it also has the effect of rewarding successful
R&D, in addition to subsidizing its cost with tax credits in many cases, and for a
number of reasons discussed above it may not be the ideal solution to the question
of incentivizing innovative activity more broadly. One hopes that policy makers will
develop better methods in the future. Further research might also be directed to
study of the non‐patent use of IP boxes and their effectiveness.

27

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

8 References
Acconcia, Antonio and Claudia Cantabene (2018). Liquidity and Firms’ Response to
Fiscal Stimulus. The Economic Journal 128(613): 1759‐1785.
Akcigit, Ufuk, Douglas Hanley, and Stefanie Stantcheva (2016, revised 2019),
Optimal Taxation and R&D Policies, NBER Working Paper No. 22908.
Akcigit, Ufuk, John Grigsby, Tom Nicholas, and Stefanie Stantcheva (2018). Taxation
and Innovation in the 20th Century. National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper Series No. 24982.
Akcigit, Ufuk, Douglas Hanley, and Nicolas Serrano‐Velarde (2013). Back to Basics:
Basic Research Spillovers, Innovation Policy and Growth. National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper Series No. 19473.
Alstadsæter, Annette, Salvador Barrios, Gaetan Nicodeme, Agnieszka Maria
Skonieczna and Antonio Vezzani (2018). Patent boxes design, patents
location, and local R&D. Economic Policy 33 (93): 131‐177.
Altshuler, Rosanne (1989). A Dynamic Analysis of the Research and
Experimentation Credit. National Tax Journal XLI: 453‐66.
Appelt, Sylvia, Fernando Galindo‐Rueda, and Ana Cinta Gonzalez Cabral (2019),
Measuring R&D tax support: Findings from the new OECD R&D Tax Incentives
Database, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Working Papers, No.
2019/06, OECD Publishing, Paris. Available at
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/d16e6072‐en
Appelt, Sylvia, Matej Bajgar, Chiara Criscuolo, and Fernando Galindo‐Rueda (2016),
R&D Tax Incentives: Evidence on design, incidence and impacts, OECD Science,
Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 32, OECD Publishing, Paris.
Available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5jlr8fldqk7j‐en
Arrow, Kenneth (1962). Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for
Invention. In The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity, edited by Richard R.
Nelson. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 609‐625.
Balsmeier, Benjamin, Maria Kurakina and Lee Fleming (2018). R&D tax credits:
mechanisms of private and public value. Berkeley, CA: Haas Business School.
Bartelsman, Eric J. and Roel M. W. J. Beetsma (2003). Why pay more? Corporate tax
avoidance through transfer pricing in OECD countries. Journal of Public
Economics 87(9): 2225‐2252.
Beatriz, Mikael, Simon Bunel, and Benjamin Hadjibeyli (2019). Extension of R&D Tax
Credit to innovation expenditures: Evidence from France. Crest INSEE and
College de France working paper.
Blandinieres, Florence, Daniela Steinbrenner, and Bernd Weiss (2020). Which
design works? A meta‐regession analysis of the impacts of R&D tax
incentives. Mannheim: Centre for European Economic researh (ZEW).
Working paper.
28

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

Bloom, Nicholas, Rachel Griffith, and John van Reenen (2002). Do R&D Tax Credits
Work? Journal of Public Economics 85: 1‐31.
Boehm, Tobias, Tom Karkinsky, Bodo Knoll, and Nadine Riedel (2015). The Impact
of Corporate Taxes on R&D and Patent Holdings. University of Hohenheim:
Working Paper.
Bongaerts, Willem and Ivo Ijzerman (2016). The Secrets to the Success of the Dutch
Innovation Box. Tax Notes International 2 May: 479‐483.
Bösenberg, Simon, and Peter Egger (2017). R&D tax incentives and the emergence
and trade of ideas. Economic Policy 32 (89): 39‐80.
Bradley, Sebastian, Estelle Dauchy, and Leslie Robinson (2015). Cross‐Country
Evidence on the Preliminary Effects of Patent Box Regimes on Patent Activity
and Ownership. National Tax Journal 68(4): 1047‐1072.
Branstetter, Lee G. (2001). Are Knowledge Spillovers International or Intranational
in Scope? Microeconometric Evidence from the US and Japan. Journal of
International Economics 53(1): 53‐79.
Bräutigam, Rainer, Christoph Spengel, and Frank Steiff (2017). Decline of CFC rules
and rise of patent boxes: How the ECJ affects tax competition and economic
distortions in Europe. Fiscal Studies 38 (4): 719–745.
Chang, Andrew C. (2018). Tax Policy Endogeneity: Evidence from R&D Tax Credits.
Economics of Innovation and New Technology 27(8): 809‐33.
Ciaramella, Laurie (2017). Patent Boxes and the Relocation of Intellectual Property.
Available at https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2943435
Accessed February 2019.
Coe, David T. and Elhanan Helpman (1995). International R&D Spillovers. European
Economic Review 39: 859‐887.
Cohen, Linda R., and Roger G. Noll, eds. (1991). The Technology Pork Barrel.
Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.
Corrado, Carol, Charles Hulten and Daniel Sichel (2009). Intangible capital and U.S.
economic growth. Review of Income and Wealth 55(3): 661‐685.
Corrado, Carol, Jonathan Haskel, Cecilia Jona‐Lasinio and Bilal Nasim (2015). Is
international tax competition a zero sum game? Evidence from the EU.
Presentation to the NBER‐CRIW Summer Institute, Cambridge, MA.
d’Andria, Diego, Pontikakis Dimitrios, and Skonieczna Agnieszka (2018). Towards a
European R&D Incentive? An Assessment of R&D Provisions under a
Common Corporate Tax Base. Economics of Innovation and New Technology
27 (5‐6): 531‐550.
Dechezleprêtre, Antoine, Elias Einiö, Ralf Martin, Kieu‐Trang Nguyen, and John Van
Reenen (2016). Do Tax Incentives for Research Increase Firm Innovation? An
Rd Design for R&D. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
Series No. 22405.
29

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

Deloitte Consulting (2014). Guide to Controlled Foreign Company Regimes. Available
at
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/global/Documents/Tax/
dttl‐tax‐guide‐to‐cfc‐regimes‐120314.pdf
Dischinger, Matthias, and Nadine Riedel (2011). Corporate taxes and the location of
intangible assets within multinational firms. Journal of Public Economics 95:
691–707.
Dudar, Olena, Christoph Spengel, and Johannes Voget (2015). The Impact of Taxes
on Bilateral Royalty Flows. Mannheim: ZEW Discussion Paper 15‐052.
Eisner, Robert, Steven H. Albert, and Martin A. Sullivan (1986). The New
Incremental Tax Credit for R&D: Incentive or Disincentive. National Tax
Journal XXXVII: 171‐83.
Eurostat (2016). https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/science‐technology‐
innovation/data/database, accessed 15 January 2020.
EYGM (2017). Worldwide R&D Incentives Reference Guide. Available at
https://www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/EY‐worldwide‐randd‐
incentives‐reference‐guide‐2017/$FILE/EY‐worldwide‐randd‐incentives‐
reference‐guide.pdf
Evers, Lisa, Helen Miller, and Christoph Spengel (2015). Intellectual property box
regimes ‐ effective tax rates and tax policy considerations. International Tax
Public Finance 22:502–530. DOI http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10797‐014‐
9328‐x
Fazio, Catherine, Jorge Guzman, and Scott Stern (2019), The Impact of State‐Level
R&D Tax Credits on the Quantity and Quality of Entrepreneurship. NBER
Working Paper No. 26099.
Gaessler, Fabian, Bronwyn H. Hall, and Dietmar Harhoff (2018). Should There Be
Lower Taxes on Patent Income? Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper Series No. 24843.
Goolsbee, Austin (1998). Does Government R&D Policy Mainly Benefit Scientists and
Engineers? American Economic Review 88(2): 298‐302.
Griffith, Rachel, Helen Miller, and Martin O’Connell (2014). Ownership of intellectual
property and corporate taxation, Journal of Public Economics 112: 12‐23.
Guceri, Irem, and Li Liu (2019). Effectiveness of Fiscal Incentives for R&D: Quasi‐
Experimental Evidence. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 11(1):
266‐291.
Guellec, Dominique and Bruno van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie (2001). R&D and
Productivity Growth: Panel Data Analysis of 16 OECD Countries. OECD
Economic Studies 33(2): 103‐126.

30

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

Guenther, Gary (2015). Research Tax Credit: Current Law and Policy Issues in the
114th Congress. Washington, DC: US Congressional Research Service Report
RL31181.
Guenther, Gary (2013). Research Tax Credit: Current Law, Legislation in the 113th
Congress, and Policy Issues. Washington, DC: US Congressional Research
Service Report RL31181.
Hall, Bronwyn H. (1993). R&D Tax Policy During the Eighties: Success or Failure?
Tax Policy and the Economy 7: 1‐36.
Hall, Bronwyn H. (1992). Research and Development at the Firm Level: Does the
Source of Financing Matter? Cambridge, Mass.: NBER Working Paper No.
4096.
Hall, Bronwyn H. and Alessandro Maffioli (2008). Evaluating the impact of
technology development funds in emerging economies: evidence from Latin
America. European Journal of Development Research 20(2): 172‐198.
Hall, Bronwyn H., Jacques Mairesse and Pierre Mohnen (2010). Measuring the
Returns to R&D. Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, B. H. Hall and N.
Rosenberg (eds.). Amsterdam and New York, Elsevier. Vol. II: 1034‐1076.
Hall, Bronwyn H., and John Van Reenen (2000). How Effective are Fiscal Incentives
for R&D? A New Review of the Evidence. Research Policy 29: 449‐469.
Hall, Robert E. (2001). The Stock Market and Capital Accumulation. American
Economic Review 91(5): 1185‐1202.
Hall, Robert E. and Dale W. Jorgenson (1967). Tax Policy and Investment Behavior.
American Economic Review 59(3): 391‐414.
Hines, James R., Jr. (2014). How Serious Is the Problem of Base Erosion and Profit
Shifting? Canadian Tax Journal 62(2): 443‐453.
Holtzman, Yair (2017). US Research and Development Tax Credit.
https://www.cpajournal.com/2017/10/30/u‐s‐research‐development‐tax‐
credit/ Accessed 17 january 2020.
Jones, Charles I. and John Williams (1998). Measuring the Social Return to R&D.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 113: 1119‐1135.
Kao, C., M.‐H. Chiang and B. Chen (1999). International R&D Spillovers: An
Application of Estimation and Inference in Panel Cointegration. Oxford
Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 61(S1): 691‐709.
Karkinsky, Tom and Nadine Riedel (2012). Corporate taxation and the choice of
patent location within multinational firms. Journal of International Economics
88: 176–185.
Keller, Wolfgang (1998). Are International R&D Spillovers Trade‐related? Analyzing
Spillovers among Randomly Matched Trade Partners. European Economic
Review 42(8): 1469‐1481.
31

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

Lester, John, and Jacek Warda (2018). An International Comparison of Tax Assistance
for R&D: 2017 Update and Extension to Patent Boxes. Calgary, Canada:
University of Calgary School of Public Policy Research Report 11:13.
Lev, Baruch Itamar (2018). Intangibles. Accessed 14 February 2019. Available at
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3218586 or
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3218586
Lokshin, Boris and Pierre Mohnen (2013). Do R&D tax incentives lead to higher
wages for R&D workers? Evidence from The Netherlands. Research Policy
42(3): 823‐830.
Lucking, Brian, Nicholas Bloom, and John Van Reenen (2019). Have R&D spillovers
declined in the 21st century? Fiscal Studies 40(4): 561–590.
Mansfield, Edwin (1984). How Effective is the R&D Tax Credit? Challenge 27: 57‐61.
Mansfield, Edwin (1986). The R&D Tax Credit and Other Technology Policy Issues.
AEA Papers and Proceedings 76: 190‐194.
Mohnen, Pierre, Arthur Vankan, and Bart Verspagen (2017). Evaluating the
innovation box tax policy instrument in the Netherlands, 2007–13. Oxford
Review of Economic Policy 33(1): 141‐156.
Mulkay, Benoit and Jacques Mairesse (2013). The R&D tax credit in France:
assessment and ex ante evaluation of the 2008 reform. Oxford Economic
Papers 65(3): 746‐766.
Mutti, John and Harry Grubert (2009). The Effect of Taxes on Royalties and the
Migration of Intangible Assets Abroad. In Reinsdorf, M. and M. J.
Slaughter(eds.), International Trade in Services and Intangibles in the Era of
Globalization. NBER Conference Volume, University of Chicago Press, pp.
111‐137.
Nelson, Richard R. (1959). The Simple Economics of Basic Scientific Research.
Journal of Political Economy 77: 297‐306.
OECD (2019). Measuring Tax Support for R&D and Innovation. URL:
http://www.oecd.org/innovation/rd‐tax‐stats.htm. Accessed on 11 February
2019.
OECD (2018), R&D Tax Incentive Indicators, R&D Tax Incentive Database,
http://oe.cd/rdtax
OECD/Eurostat (2018). Oslo Manual: Guidelines for Collecting, Reporting, and Using
Data on Innovation, 4th Edition, The Measurement of Scientific, Technological,
and Innovation Activities. Paris/Eurostat, Luxembourg: OECD Publishing.
OECD (2015), Countering Harmful Tax Practices More Effectively, Taking into
Account Transparency and Substance, Action 5 ‐ 2015 Final Report. Paris:
OECD Publishing. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264241190‐en
Park, Walter G. (1995). International R&D Spillovers and OECD Economic Growth.
Economic Inquiry XXXIII(4): 571‐591.
32

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

Peri, Giovanni (2004). Knowledge Flows and Productivity. Rivista di Politica
Economica 2004 (March‐April): 21‐59.
Rao, Nirupama (2016). Do Tax Credits Stimulate R&D Spending? The Effect of the
R&D Tax Credit in Its First Decade. Journal of Public Economics 140: 1‐12.
Schwab, Thomas, and Maximilian Todtenhaupt (2018). Thinking outside the box:
The cross‐border effect of tax cuts on R&D. Mannheim: ZEW Discussion
Paper No. 16‐073. Available at
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2864304
Sullivan, Martin (2015). An innovation box tax break: Good intentions gone bad.”
June 9, Available at
https://www.forbes.com/sites/taxanalysts/2015/06/09/patent‐box‐tax‐
break‐good‐intentions‐gone‐bad/#79619bd9396e, accessed 20 January
2020.
Ting, Antony (2014). iTax ‐ Apple's International Tax Structure and the Double Non‐
Taxation Issue. British Tax Review 2014 (1): 40‐71. Available at
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2411297 Accessed 4 February 2019.
U. S. Congress Joint Economic Committee (2016). Patent Boxes: A Brief History,
Recent Developments, and Necessary Considerations. Available at
https://www.jec.senate.gov/public/_cache/files/02a2a18a‐1e08‐42ce‐8c14‐
72b6138b54dd/031016‐patent‐boxes.pdf, accessed 15 January 2020.
U. S. Congress Office of Technology Assessment (2015). The Effectiveness of Research
and Experimentation Tax Credits. Washington, DC. Available at
https://ota.fas.org/reports/9558.pdf
U. S. Government Department of Treasury (2016). Research and Experimentation
(R&E) Credit. https://www.treasury.gov/resource‐center/tax‐policy/tax‐
analysis/Documents/RE‐Credit.pdf, accessed 20 January 2020.
van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie, Bruno (1997). Issues in Assessing the Effect of
Interindustry R&D Spillovers. Economic Systems Research 9(4): 331‐356.
Warda, Jacek (2001). Measuring the value of R&D tax treatment in OECD countries.
OECD Science, Technology and Industry Review 27: 185‐211 Paris:
OECD/OCDE.
Wilson, Daniel J. (2009). Beggar Thy Neighbor? The In‐State, Out‐of‐State, and
Aggregate Effects of R&D Tax Credits. Review of Economics and Statistics
91(2): 431‐436.
Wolff, Guntram B. and Volker Reinthaler (2008). The effectiveness of subsidies
revisited: Accounting for wage and employment effects in business R&D.
Research Policy 37(8): 1403‐1412.

33

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

9 Appendix
9.1 The B‐Index
“The B‐index is a measure of the level of pre‐tax profit a
“representative” company needs to generate to break even on a
marginal, unitary outlay on R&D (Warda, 2001), taking into account
provisions in the tax system that allow for special treatment of R&D
expenditures.”11
It is defined as follows:
1 A
1
Where τ is the corporate tax rate and A represents the combined reduction in taxes
due to R&D spending: credit, super deduction, and any increased depreciation
allowances for investment in R&D equipment. If R&D is simply expensed, as it is in
most countries, A=τ and the B‐index is unity. See the reference in the footnote for
further details and the more complex formulas used when losses can be carried
forward or backwards.
B  index 

9.2 Incremental tax credits
Unlike ordinary investment, R&D spending, once established, tends to be fairly
smooth from year to year within a firm (Hall 1992; Hall, Griliches, and Hausman
1986). The appeal of incremental R&D tax credits is that they target the marginal
decision to increase R&D rather than subsidizing infra‐marginal R&D that would
have been done anyway. The drawback is that every firm is different and the best
way to figure out a firm’s pre‐subsidy R&D level is to look at its own past history.
Thus incremental credits tend to be based on the firm’s own R&D history, which
implies that a firm can affect its future credit availability directly.
Figure 9.1 illustrates the tax cost savings from using an incremental credit to
subsidize a firm with an established ongoing R&D budget. The figure assumes that
the tax authority is able to identify precisely the point R0 at which the cost of capital
needs to be lowered in order to induce the firm to increase its R&D to R1. The tax
revenue loss in the case of an incremental credit is shown in the dark blue rectangle
(the difference in the cost of R&D capital times the amount of increased R&D). To

11

From OECD(2019), https://www.oecd.org/sti/b‐index.pdf

34

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

achieve the same increase in R&D using a level or volume credit would cost both the
dark blue and light blue rectangles, a much higher cost for the same impact.
Figure 9.1

Firm increasing R&D from R0 to R1
Return to R&D
Tax revenue loss
for ordinary credit
Tax revenue loss
for incremental
credit

R0

R1

Effective cost
of capital for
incremental
credit

Amount of R&D 
As was first pointed out by Eisner, Albert, and Sullivan (1986) and Altshuler (1989),
the downside of the incremental credit is that it is weakened by the fact that an
increase in R&D today causes a decrease in credit availability in the future.
The argument following explains why incremental tax credits are so difficult to
design when they are based on past R&D spending by the firm. Define the following
variables:
θ = tax credit rate
π = current profit
β = discount rate

R = R&D
Π = Present discounted value of profits

Assume that the spending eligible for the credit is the amount above the average of
the last three years spending on R&D.12 If in year t the firm increases Rt by ΔRt, the
tax credit benefit to the firm is Δπt = θ ΔRt However, for the next 3 years, this
increase is in the base R&D, so there is a cost each year given by (θ/3) ΔRt.
This was the situation in the United States when the credit was first introduced in 1981. The
current ASC uses 50 percent of the average of the last three years of spending.
12

35

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

Therefore the marginal tax benefit of a one unit increase in R&D at year t is not θ,
but the following:
é
(b + b 2 + b 3 ) ùú
= q êê1 ú
3
¶DRt
ë
û

¶DPt

The two columns of the table below show the effective tax credit as a function of the
discount rate faced by the firm, based on the above formula, for two different credit
rates, 30 and 14 percent. The first column shows the effective rate according to the
rules as they existed in 1981‐1986, while the second column shows the effective
marginal rate under the current ASC.
Nominal credit rate US in 1981 at 30%
ASC at 14%
Discount rate
Effective marginal credit rate
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.95
0.030 = 0.3*0.10 0.077 = 0.14*0.55
0.9
0.057 = 0.3*0.19 0.083 = 0.14*0.59
The only reason there is an effective credit at all from these versions of the
incremental tax credit is because the future cost to the base R&D of increasing R&D
today is discounted.

9.3 Tax treatment of startups in the U.S.
The PATH legislation of 2015 contains the following provisions for computing the
fixed base QRE against which the increment eligible for the tax credit can be
computed. This computation applies to companies that incorporated after
December 31, 1983, or had fewer than 3 years with qualified research expenditures
and revenue between January 1, 1984 and December 31, 1988. The fixed‐base
percentage is calculated according to the code as follows:
§41(c)(3)(B)(ii)(I) 3 percent for each of the taxpayer's 1st 5 taxable years
beginning after December 31, 1993, for which the taxpayer has qualified
research expenses,
§41(c)(3)(B)(ii)(II) in the case of the taxpayer's 6th such taxable year, 1/6
of the percentage which the aggregate qualified research expenses of the
taxpayer for the 4th and 5th such taxable years is of the aggregate gross
receipts of the taxpayer for such years,
§41(c)(3)(B)(ii)(III) in the case of the taxpayer's 7th such taxable year, 1/3
of the percentage which the aggregate qualified research expenses of the
36

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

taxpayer for the 5th and 6th such taxable years is of the aggregate gross
receipts of the taxpayer for such years,
§41(c)(3)(B)(ii)(IV) in the case of the taxpayer's 8th such taxable year, 1/2
of the percentage which the aggregate qualified research expenses of the
taxpayer for the 5th, 6th, and 7th such taxable years is of the aggregate
gross receipts of the taxpayer for such years,
§41(c)(3)(B)(ii)(V) in the case of the taxpayer's 9th such taxable year, 2/3
of the percentage which the aggregate qualified research expenses of the
taxpayer for the 5th, 6th, 7th, and 8th such taxable years is of the aggregate
gross receipts of the taxpayer for such years,
§41(c)(3)(B)(ii)(VI) in the case of the taxpayer's 10th such taxable year,
5/6 of the percentage which the aggregate qualified research expenses of
the taxpayer for the 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th, and 9th such taxable years is of the
aggregate gross receipts of the taxpayer for such years, and
§41(c)(3)(B)(ii)(VII) for taxable years thereafter, the percentage which the
aggregate qualified research expenses for any 5 taxable years selected by
the taxpayer from among the 5th through the 10th such taxable years is of
the aggregate gross receipts of the taxpayer for such selected years.
For purposes of the calculation, the resulting fixed‐base percentage is
multiplied by the average of the taxpayer's gross revenue for the 4 years
prior to the calculation year.13 The fixed‐base percentage should only
change for purposes of meeting the consistency rule or adjusting for an
acquisition or disposition.
The figures below show the implication of this form of computation for startups
with varying patterns of R&E spending and sales growth. There are 5 scenarios:
1. Steady slow sales growth with R&E to sales of 3 percent every year.
2. Very low sales for 4 years, followed by fairly rapid increase, with the R&E
intensity falling over the same period as sales are established.
3. A pattern taken from a random hi‐tech startup on Compustat with uneven
but growing sales and rapidly growing R&E intensity
4. High initial R&E spending accompanied by rapid sales growth that eventually
stabilizes the R&E intensity at the relatively high level of 15 percent.
5. Same as 1, but with R&E to sales at a constant 5 percent.
It seems clear although not specifically mentioned, that if fewer than four years are available prior
to the calculation year, the average over the years available should be used.
13

37

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

Figure 9.2
Sales trend scenarios for startup firms
300

250

200
Scenario 1, 5

150

Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Scenario 4

100

50

0
1

2

3

4

5

6
7
8
Year since startup

9

10

11

12

Figure 9.3
QRE to sales for startup firms
35%
30%
25%
20%

Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3

15%

Scenario 4
Scenario 5

10%
5%
0%
1

2

3

4

5

6
7
8
Year since startup

38

9

10

11

12

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

Figure 9.4
Amount of tax credit as share of QRE for startup firms
14%
12%
10%
8%

Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3

6%

Scenario 4
Scenario 5

4%
2%
0%
1

2

3

4

5

6
7
8
Year since startup

9

10

11

12

If I have interpreted the computation rules correctly, the results are a bit strange.
Prior to year 6, the average credit share seems more or less directly related to
whether the firm has an R&E intensity above 3 percent. However the differences
between firms that begin with 15, or 30 percent R&E intensity do not seem that
great. At year 6, however, the impact of the 1/6 rule is to give all the synthetic firms
an average credit that is close to the statutory 14 percent rate, since their past
histories are downweighted greatly. Following year 6, the average credit share
declines similarly for all the scenarios, whether growing or not, with the exception
of the scenario with fluctuating sales, as one would expect. Average is of course not
marginal, but it may be what is salient for the firm, as it is visible on their tax return.
It is also what will be computed when a firm does pro forma forecasting to assess
the appropriate R&D profile for which to plan.
Marginal rates that take into account the impact of current increases on the future
fixed base are also rather heterogeneous, as shown in the figure below.14 For
Scenario 1, there is no eligibility in the first 4 years because the QRE intensity is
quite low. Scenarios 4 and 5 are eligible throughout and so their effective marginal
credit declines to nearly zero at the end of the period when current increases affect
future eligibility for four years. Scenarios 2 and 3 are not eligible at the end of the
period because their QRE intensity has stopped growing, and this is reflected in
In computing these marginal rates I have used a discount rate of 0.95, which has been used in
much of the earlier work by OTA and others. I have also used perfect foresight to forecast future QRE,

14

39

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation

March 2020

marginal rates that increase again (because assuming that they remain below the
base in future periods means it is not costly to increase QRE now).
Figure 9.5
Effective marginal credit rate for startup firms
0.16
0.14
0.12
0.10
Scenario 1

0.08

Scenario 2, 3
0.06

Scenario 4, 5

0.04
0.02
0.00
1

2

3

4

5
6
7
Year since startup

8

9

10

9.4 Additional figures: R&D tax subsidy rates 2000‐2018 around the
world
The figures below show the R&D tax subsidy rates (1‐B index) for large profit‐
making firms that offer some kind of R&D tax credit or super deduction.

40

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation
Figure 9.6

41

March 2020

B. H. Hall

Taxes and innovation
Figure 9.7

Source: OECD (2019) database.

42

March 2020

