                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    DID THE 2017 TAX REFORM DISCRIMINATE AGAINST BLUE STATE VOTERS?

                                          David Altig
                                       Alan J. Auerbach
                                       Patrick C. Higgins
                                       Darryl R. Koehler
                                      Laurence J. Kotlikoff
                                        Michael Leiseca
                                          Ellyn Terry
                                            Yifan Ye

                                       Working Paper 25770
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25770


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2019




The views expressed here are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Atlanta, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research. Any remaining errors are the authors’ responsibility.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25770.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by David Altig, Alan J. Auerbach, Patrick C. Higgins, Darryl R. Koehler, Laurence J.
Kotlikoff, Michael Leiseca, Ellyn Terry, and Yifan Ye. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Did the 2017 Tax Reform Discriminate against Blue State Voters?
David Altig, Alan J. Auerbach, Patrick C. Higgins, Darryl R. Koehler, Laurence J. Kotlikoff,
Michael Leiseca, Ellyn Terry, and Yifan Ye
NBER Working Paper No. 25770
April 2019
JEL No. D15,D31,D72,E62,H20,H22,H71
                                          ABSTRACT

The Tax Cut and Jobs Act of 2017 (TCJA) made significant changes to corporate and personal
federal income taxation, including limiting the SALT (state and local property, income and sales
taxes) deductibility to $10,000. States with high SALT tend to vote Democratic. This paper
estimates the differential effect of the TCJA on red- and blue-state taxpayers and investigates the
importance of the SALT limitation to this differential. We calculate the effect of permanent
implementation of the TCJA on households using The Fiscal Analyzer: a life-cycle, consumption-
smoothing program incorporating all major federal and state fiscal policies. We find that the
average percentage increase in remaining lifetime spending under the TCJA is 1.6 percent in red
states versus 1.3 percent in blue states. Among the richest 10 percent of households, this
differential is larger. Rich households in red states enjoyed a 2.0 percent increase compared to a
1.2 percent increase among the rich in blue-state households. This gap is driven almost entirely
by the limitation on the SALT deduction. Excluding the SALT limitation from the TCJA results
in a spending gain of 2.6 percent for rich red-state households compared to 2.7 percent for rich
blue-state households.

David Altig                                      Laurence J. Kotlikoff
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta                  Department of Economics
1000 Peachtree St. NE                            Boston University
Atlanta, GA 30309                                270 Bay State Road
Dave.Altig@atl.frb.org                           Boston, MA 02215
                                                 and NBER
Alan J. Auerbach                                 kotlikoff@gmail.com
Department of Economics
530 Evans Hall, #3880                            Michael Leiseca
University of California, Berkeley               Economic Security Planning, Inc.
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                          mleiseca@gmail.com
and NBER
auerbach@econ.berkeley.edu                       Ellyn Terry
                                                 Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
Patrick C. Higgins                               1000 Peachtree St. NE
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta                  Atlanta, GA 30309
1000 Peachtree Street, N.E.                      USA
Atlanta, GA 30309-4470                           ellyn.terry@atl.frb.org
patrick.higgins@atl.frb.org
                                                 Yifan Ye
Darryl R. Koehler                                Department of Economics
Economic Security Planning                       Boston, MA 02215
416 S. Ludington Street                          US
Columbus, WI 53925                               yifanye82@gmail.com
darryl.koehler@gmail.com
      1     Introduction
      The 2017 Tax Cut and Jobs Act (TCJA) represents the most significant change
      to U.S. personal and corporate income taxation since the 1986 Tax Reform
      Act. The TCJA’s personal tax changes reduced the top marginal tax rate,
      eliminated exemptions, expanded the child tax credit, expanded the standard
      deduction, lowered the cap on future mortgage-interest deductions, and intro-
      duced a $10,000 limitation on the amount of state and local taxes (SALT) that
      can be deducted. Previously there was no limit, except for those subject to
      the Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT). This paper estimates the effect of these
      changes on U.S. households and demonstrates that the reduction in taxes and
      corresponding increase in remaining lifetime spending differentially affected
      residents of particular states, which we classify as blue, red or purple based
      on their recent voting behavior in presidential elections.
          Our analysis is based on a detailed life-cycle consumption-smoothing pro-
      gram called The Fiscal Analyzer, or TFA, described in Kotlikoff (2019). Auer-
      bach, et al.(2016, 2017, and 2018) have used TFA to study overall fiscal pro-
      gressivity, remaining marginal net lifetime tax rates on working, and the pro-
      gressivity of the TCJA. This study is the first use of TFA to study how changes
      in federal taxes differentially impact households who differ not only by resource
      percentile within age cohort, but also by state.
          To explore red-blue TCJA differences, we designate states, including the
      District of Columbia, as blue, red or purple based on the average voter margin
      over the past five presidential elections. States where the Republican share of
      total votes was, on average, five percentage points higher than the Democratic
      share of total votes over the past five presidential elections are classified as
      red. States where the Democratic share of total votes was, on average, five
      percentage points higher than the Republican share of total votes over the
      past five presidential elections are classified as blue. The remaining states are
      classified as purple.
          To examine the distributional impact of the TCJA, we classify households
      in the Federal Reserve Board’s 2016 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) into
      “resource” percentiles based on how much human wealth (such as wage income)
      and non-human wealth (such as home equity) they are projected to have over
      their lifetime relative to their same-aged peers.1 Lifetime resources for house-
      holds, along with lifetime spending and net-taxes (taxes minus transfers), are
      projected using TFA, which incorporates details of all major federal and state
      tax and transfer payment policies.
          TFA also incorporates pre-TCJA personal and corporate-income tax codes.
      As an output, TFA imputes and projects all taxes paid over the lifetime, dis-
      counting all to present value.2 Hence, it can be used to measure the TCJA-
      induced percentage change in the discounted present value of remaining life-
      time spending for each SCF household. To determine differences in annual
      TCJA treatment by state, each SCF household is run through TFA 51 times
      (once for each state, and the District of Columbia). In each of these 51 runs
      through TFA, state-specific fiscal policies are applied and state-specific weights
      are assigned to each SCF observation.
          Throughout our analysis we assume that the provisions of the TCJA are
  1
     Households are grouped into 6 age buckets: 20-29, 30-39, 40-49, 50-59, 60-69, and 70-79.
  2
     Federal and state corporate income taxes are assumed to be 100 percent borne by owners of
all assets. Employer-paid FICA taxes are assumed to be 100 percent borne by workers.


                                              2
      made permanent. According to our findings, red-state households enjoy, on
      average, a 1.6 percent increase in lifetime spending (henceforth, spending) due
      to permanent implementation of the TCJA. This compares to a 1.3 percent
      increase in spending for blue-state households. The state with the highest gain
      – 2.1 percent – is Wyoming – a red state. The state with the smallest gain –
      0.9 percent – is California- a blue state.
          The red-blue differential is explained by the limitation on the SALT de-
      duction. Excluding the SALT limitation from TCJA, the average red-state
      spending gain is 1.9 percent versus 2.1 percent for blue states. In particular,
      "rich" households in red states receive less favorable treatment than "rich"
      households in blue states, where SALT tend to be much higher. For example,
      red-state households in the top 10 percent of the national age-specific resource
      distribution receive a 2.0 percent boost to their remaining lifetime spending
      compared to just 1.2 percent for blue-state top 10-percenters. If changes to
      SALT had not occurred, the gains in spending would have been very similar for
      the top 10 percent regardless of state. In our “NO SALT” scenario, the richest
      10 percent of households in red states would receive a 2.6 percent increase in
      spending versus 2.7 percent in blue states. Thus the differential between the
      top 10% in red and blue states is driven almost entirely by SALT.
          This paper proceeds in section 2 with a brief overview of the TCJA. Section
      3 presents our data and methodology for computing the change in lifetime
      spending. Section 4 presents basic results and then considers the extent to
      which differences by state are due to socioeconomic factors or state tax policies,
      including SALT. Section 5 concludes.


      2      The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017
      The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (TCJA) was the most comprehensive tax
      reform passed since the Tax Reform Act of 1986. In addition to modifying
      individual income tax rates, including reducing the top rate from 39.6 percent
      to 37.0 percent, the TCJA modified amounts and/or limits for a number of
      important individual tax credits, deductions, exemptions and penalties. In
      particular, the standard deduction was nearly doubled for both individual and
      married filers, thresholds for the Alternative Minimum Tax and the estate
      tax were raised, and a $10,000 limit for itemized deductions on state and
      local taxes was introduced. No Democrat voted for the passage of the TCJA,
      while only 12 House Republicans voted against passage. All but one of the
      12 Republicans that voted "no" represented “blue” states. In many of these
      cases, the limit on the SALT deduction was cited as a factor in their vote.3
          This is not the first time SALT deductions have been under fire. The
      complete elimination of SALT deductions was included in the initial Reagan
      Administration Treasury Department 1984 tax reform proposal. However,
      apart from removing deductibility of retail sales taxes4 , there were no other
   3
     The Senate passed the TCJA 51 to 48 with no Republicans voting against it and no
Democrates voting for it. Of the 12 House Republicans voting against TCJA, five were from
New York, four from New Jersey, two from California, and one from the “red” state of North
Carolina. For examples of Congressional statements citing the SALT deduction limit as a fac-
tor in the “no” votes, see https://zeldin.house.gov/media-center/press-releases/rep-zeldin-votes-no-
final-tax-reform-bill, https://stefanik.house.gov/media-center/press-releases/stefanik-oppose-final-
tax-bill, and https://www.silive.com/news/2017/12/rep_donovan_voted_no_on_final.html.
   4
     Deductibility was partially restored with the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004 (Sammartino


                                                 3
      changes to SALT deductibility in the 1986 Act (Lindsey, 1986).
          Prior to the passage of the TCJA, there was evidence to suggest that blue
      states might be hurt if SALT were to be modified. For example, Sammartino
      and Rueben (2016) used the Urban-Institute Brookings Tax Policy Center
      Microsimulation Model (UBTPC model) to show that repealing, modifying or
      replacing SALT deductibility would have the most adverse effects for average
      federal tax rates in high-tax states with a relatively large number of high-
      income households, such as New York and Connecticut (both of which are
      blue). The least adverse effects were found for low-tax states, such as South
      Dakota and Wyoming (both of which are red).
          Since the passage of the TCJA, several researchers have studied the impact
      of the law along party lines. Auerbach et al.(2018) concluded that the reforms
      in the TCJA were, on the whole, neither progressive nor regressive. However,
      Sammartino et al.(2018) found that among the U.S. states, there were “win-
      ners” and “losers”. Using the UBTPC model, these authors also found that for
      2018 income and tax outcomes, the TCJA was more beneficial for red states
      than for blue.5 In terms of 2018 outcomes, Sammartino et al. also found the
      TCJA’s $10,000 SALT limit was much of the reason the low-tax state of Texas
      benefited more, on average, than the high-tax state of New York.
          A limitation of Sammartino et al. (2018) is the use of traditional static tax
      burden analysis, which compares current taxes with current income. Auerbach
      et al.(2018) point out the limitation of this approach, arguing that a forward-
      looking, lifetime approach is more consistent with economic theory and can
      produce different answers than static analysis. As in Auerbach et al.(2018),
      the focus of this study is whether permanent implementation of the TCJA
      disproportionately impacts red or blue states in terms of the discounted present
      value of remaining lifetime spending and/or remaining lifetime tax rates. We
      say permanent because a number of the individual tax provisions in the TCJA
      are set to expire within 10 years to permit passage with a simple majority of
      voters in the Senate under the reconciliation process. Following Auerbach et
      al.(2018), we assume that these expiring provisions will eventually be made
      permanent.6


      3      Methodology and Data
      3.1      Creating Resource Percentiles
      Throughout this analysis we examine changes in spending at different points in
      the resource distribution, referring to those in the top 10 percent of resources
      as the “rich” and those in the bottom 10 percent of resources as the “poor”.
      To create these resource percentiles, we first calculate the amount of resources
and Rueben 2016).
   5
     In particular, the authors found that six of the seven states realizing an average after-tax
income increase of more than 2.1 percent were red, whereas the three states with increases of less
than 1.5 percent were blue. Moreover, the six states, including D.C., where more than 8.0 percent
of their tax payers had an increase in their 2018 taxes as a result of the TCJA were all blue and
the five states where less than 4.0 percent of their tax payers had increased 2018 taxes were all
red.
   6
     We don’t estimate the effect on pre-tax incomes here. Simulations of the Global Gaidar Model
do suggest the TJCA could, over time, raise real before-tax wages by as much as 5.5 percent (see
Benzell, Kotlikoff and Lagarda, 2017a and 2017b). We do not consider that scenario here.



                                                4
       each household is expected to have over their lifetime. R (hereafter resources),
       is the sum of private net wealth, W, and human wealth, H. H is the expected
       discounted present value of the household’s pre-tax remaining lifetime earn-
       ings from all sources and W is the expected discounted present value of the
       household’s assets, such as home equity and savings for retirement.

                                          R=H +W                                        (1)

       Details on the calculation of equation (1) are contained in subsection 3.3 below,
       “The Fiscal Analyzer.”
           We group households within ten-year age cohorts and then rank each house-
       hold’s resources to create resource percentiles. As in Auerbach et al.(2018),
       our ten-year age groups reference households whose heads are 20-29, 30-39,
       40-49, 50-59, 60-69 and 70-79. Thus, the “rich” consist of the 10 percent high-
       est resource households among heads in their twenties, the top 10 percent of
       heads in their 30s, etc..7
           We create resource percentiles within age groups for three reasons. First,
       young households have yet to pay the bulk of their lifetime taxes or receive the
       bulk of their lifetime transfers. Second, old households have already paid most
       of their lifetime taxes and have, in many cases, already received a significant
       share of their lifetime transfers. Third, the life-cycle model predicts what
       we see in the figure below – remaining lifetime resources ultimately decline
       with age. This means that lumping together different age groups will treat
       older people as poorer than younger people even if they have identical lifetime
       resources measured as of, say age 20.


       Figure 1: Average Lifetime Resources by Age Group and Marital Status




   7
    As in Auerbach et al.(2016, 2017, 2018), prior to ranking the households, we adjust for house-
hold size and economies of shared living by dividing resources for married couples by the square
root of two.


                                                5
       3.2 Computing TCJA-Induced Percentage Changes
       in Spending of Households in Specific Age and Re-
       source Percentile Groups
       A household’s expected discounted present value of remaining lifetime spend-
       ing, S, is defined as the difference between resources, R, and the expected
       discounted present value of remaining lifetime net taxes, T, computed as total
       taxes paid less transfer payments received.8

                                           S = R − T.                                   (2)

       Throughout this analysis, we consider changes in lifetime spending as a result
       of the TCJA for particular groups (e.g. the rich). To compute group-specific
       changes in spending under the TCJA, we sum the weighted reduction in taxes
       for all households in the group and divide by the weighted sum of spending for
       all within-group households pre-TCJA.9 The percent change in the spending
       for a particular group, G, is

                                100 i∈G (wi TiP reT CJA − wi TiP ostT CJA )
                                    P
                      %∆SG =              P          P reT CJA
                                                                                  (3)
                                             i∈G wi Si

       The weighting scheme in our calculations is described in section 3.5.


       3.3     The Fiscal Analyzer
       As detailed in Kotlikoff (2019), the Fiscal Analyzer (TFA) is a detailed life-
       cycle consumption-smoothing program that incorporates borrowing constraints.
       TFA calculates remaining lifetime net taxes and remaining lifetime spending
       along all survival trajectories and then converts them to present values. TFA
       includes all federal and state income and sales tax provisions in effect pre- and
       post- TCJA. It also includes the 2015 changes to Social Security benefit provi-
       sions. All federal and some state specific transfer programs are also included.
       Transfer programs with eligibility and or benefits defined at the county level,
       including Section 8 Housing Vouchers, Low Income Energy Assistance, and
       Child Care Assistance are excluded for two reasons. First, detailed informa-
       tion is difficult to find across all jurisdictions. Second, due to rationing not all
       eligible applicants will obtain these benefits.
           The specific list of tax and transfer programs included in our calculations
       is as follows:
          Taxes
          The Federal Personal Income Tax
          The Federal Corporate Income Tax
          The FICA Tax
          State Income Taxes
          State Sales Taxes
          State Corporate Income Taxes
   8
     Spending includes the expected discounted present value of any terminal bequests that arise
under a given survival path.
   9
     The alternative method is to average, on a weighted basis, each household’s remaining lifetime
change in spending, but this would be heavily influenced by outliers.

                                                6
          Medicare Part B Premiums
          The Federal Estate and Gift Tax
          Transfer Programs
          Social Security Benefits
          Supplemental Security Income
          SNAP (state-specific)
          Temporary Assistance to Needy Families
          Medicaid Benefits (state-specific)
          Medicare Benefits
          The Affordable Care Act (state-specific)

       3.3.1    TFA’s Consumption-Smoothing Dynamic Program
       TFA’s lifetime consumption smoothing procedure begins with the reading in
       of household demographic and economic data. The demographic data include
       marital status, birth dates of each spouse/partner, maximum ages of life of
       spouse/partners, birth dates of children, ages at which children will leave the
       household. The economic data include detailed measures of earnings and as-
       sets (for both the past and the future).10 TFA assumes inflation and rates of
       return on regular and retirement account assets, household debts, and current
       primary home data.11 Preferences about the desired degree of consumption
       smoothing are also included (i.e., the preferred age-living standard path).12
       The degree and timing of future changes in Social Security benefits, federal
       taxes, state taxes, and payroll taxes, are also incorporated into the calcu-
       lations. While TFA is set up to use any data source, including data input
       directly by an individual, in this study we feed it data on households in the
       Survey of Consumer Finances (see section 3.4 below).
           TFA’s default assumption, which can be changed, is that the household
       seeks to have the same living standard per household member through time.
       The program obeys the specified desired standard of living profile to the extent
       possible without violating the household’s borrowing constraint. The program
       simultaneously calculates not just the household’s smoothest living standard
       path, but also its time-varying demands for life insurance (and, thus, the living
  10
     These include past Social Security covered labor earnings, current labor earnings and pro-
jected future labor earnings, regular (non-retirement account) assets, 401(k) and other deductible
retirement account assets, Roth retirement assets, current and projected future contributions to
each type of retirement account, retirement-account withdrawal choices (start and end date, an-
nuitization and order of withdraws as between Roth and 401(k)-type accounts), Social Security
benefit collection choices, defined benefit pensions, information on retirement income from non
Social Security-covered employment (this triggers Social Security WEP and GPO provisions).
  11
     Rent, mortgage amounts, mortgage lengths, mortgage payments, property taxes, condo fees,
homeowners insurance, maintenance, etc. are included, as well as up to two future changes in the
primary home, symmetric data on the current vacation home data and up to two changes in the
vacation home, other real estate properties.
  12
     Other items included are funeral expenses, desired bequests, current life insurance (face and
cash values), preferences about maintaining living standards of survivors, contingent plans (e.g.,
what survivors will earn and how they will change their housing), and the maximum amount the
household can borrow.




                                                7
       insurance premiums it will pay each year) and each of the above-referenced
       taxes and transfer payments.13
           The problem TFA solves is computationally challenging for three reasons.
       First, there are tens of thousands of potential paths that could occur. These
       alternate paths include, for example, various levels of regular and spouse-
       specific retirement account assets in the future when both spouses survive, and
       also in each future year when one spouse is deceased and the other alive. Take,
       for example, a 40 year-old couple that could live to 100. There are over 200,000
       survivor contingent regular and retirement account state variables. Second,
       annual taxes, annual transfer payments, annual discretionary spending, and
       annual life insurance holdings must be determined simultaneously since taxes
       and life insurance premiums constrain what can be spent. But what is spent
       through time determines the path of asset income, which helps determine the
       path of taxes. Third, the program needs to run in finite time to be useful for
       research.
           TFA’s algorithm handles these complexities in a highly efficient manner.
       Indeed, it solves the typical SCF observation’s consumption-smoothing, net
       taxation, and life insurance needs problem within a half second and does so
       with precision below $1.


       3.4     The Use of The Survey of Consumer Finances
       The Federal Reserve’s 2016 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) collected
       highly detailed data from 6254 households. These data included detailed in-
       formation on household labor and asset income, assets and liabilities, and
       demographic characteristics.14
           The SCF combines an area-probability sample of households with a “list”
       sample of generally wealthier households from administrative tax records from
       the IRS. The SCF includes sampling weights to account for oversampling of
       wealthier households from inclusion of the “list” sample and for differential
       response rates among wealthier groups15 . The oversampling of wealthy house-
       holds allows for inference about households in the top 1 percent of the resource
       distribution.16
           We run each household in the SCF through TFA to generate the TCJA-
       induced change in taxes and spending for each household. As in Auerbach et
       al. (2016, 2018), we restrict our analysis to households with heads between
       20 and 79 years old. The SCF does not collect data on respondents’ past
  13
      The precise algorithm is proprietary to Economic Security Planning, Inc., which uses it in its
commercial lifetime financial planning tools. But its details are available to academic researchers
upon receipt of a request emailed to www.kotilkoff@gmail.com, subject to the signing of a non-
disclosure agreement.
   14
      Using a multiple imputation algorithm, the Fed includes each household’s record in the public-
use SCF dataset in five so-called replicates to account for estimation of non-reported values (item
non-response) or for disclosure limitations. We use the first replicate for our analysis. Auerbach
et al. (2016, 2018) report no significant differences in results across replicates.
   15
      Wealthier households have lower response rates, particularly at the highest levels. See Bricker
et al. (2016).
   16
      For the 2004 SCF, Kennickell (2007) shows that 15.8 percent of sampled households were in
the top 1 percent of the net worth distribution for the U.S. with 96.4 percent of these coming from
the list sample. Another 38.5 percent of the 2004 SCF-sampled households were in the bottom 50
percent of the net worth distribution with only 5.7 percent of these households coming from the
list sample.



                                                 8
       earnings histories, which is needed for TFA’s Social Security benefit calcu-
       lation. Consequently, we follow the methodology in Auerbach et al. (2016,
       2018) to impute past earnings and forecast future earnings using past waves of
       the Current Population Survey through 2013. Future mortality of household
       members, assumed to begin at age 55 and end with certain death at age 100,
       is also projected using the method described in Auerbach et al. (2016, 2018).
       And, as in that study, the present value of human resources, spending and net
       taxes are calculated as probability weighted averages of their outcomes for all
       possible survivor paths for either a single person or married couple. Kotlikoff
       (2019) provides details of updates to TFA subsequent to the Auerbach et al.
       (2016, 2018) studies.


       3.5     Generating State-Level Results
       The SCF is a nationwide survey and its household weights permit data aggre-
       gations that are representative of the nation, but not of any particular state.
       While the SCF does collect geographic-specific identifiers, like the state-county
       FIPS code, they are not available in the public use survey data. Moreover,
       the sample design of the SCF is not constructed to be representative of states,
       or other geographies, according to correspondence with administrators of the
       survey.
           In the absence of reliable SCF state-specific data, we perform our state-
       by-state analysis by running each household in the SCF through TFA for
       each state and Washington D.C., assuming in each of the 51 runs that all SCF
       households lived in the same state. That is, we ran all SCF households through
       TFA under the assumption that they all lived in Alabama, then Alaska, etc..
           To form state-specific statistics, we impute a separate weight for each
       household by doing a statistical match of the SCF data with data from the U.S.
       Census Bureau’s 2016 American Community’s Survey (ACS).17 In particular,
       we first restrict both the SCF and ACS to household heads between the ages
       of 20 and 79. We then partition households into 1536 distinct cells (c) based
       on the household head’s age, race/ethnicity, marital status and educational
       attainment as well as the value of the primary residence, total household in-
       come in 2015 and the presence or absence of at least one child under 17 years
       of age. For households in a given cell-c, we create the household’s weight for
       each state by multiplying their SCF sample weight by the weighted fraction
       of cell-c households in the 2016 ACS that reside in that state. Thus, the sum
       of all state weights for each state will equal the population of that state. We
       then duplicate all of the data 51 times, running it through TFA to apply all
       state specific tax and transfer program rules.18 We are left with more than
       4,500 SCF records in each of the 51-state residencies.
           Note that the categorization of rich and poor by resources R is done at
       the national level. Thus, examination of the “rich” is not done within the
       household’s assumed state of residence. So for example, California has a higher
       weighted fraction of households (17.1 percent) in the top 10 percentile than
       does Mississippi (4.5 percent), and has significantly more residents. Thus,
       rich households in the U.S. are more likely to be located in California than in
       Mississippi (18.2 percent of the top 10 percentile of households are in California
  17
    The ACS includes over 1.3 million households covering 1 percent of the U.S. population.
  18
    We remove households with a present value of spending under $5000 and households where
the program does not converge for every state in the sample.


                                               9
versus 0.4 percent in Mississippi).


4       Results
Here we present evidence that taxpayers living in states that tend to vote
Republican in presidential elections (red states) receive a greater benefit on
average from the TCJA than taxpayers living in states that tend to vote
Democrat (blue states). In particular, we find this state variation is driven by
those in top 10 percent of each age cohort’s resource distribution. This appears
largely due to variation in state and local taxes (SALT) and the TCJA law that
affected the ability to deduct these taxes. If we remove the $10,000 limitation
on SALT that was introduced in the TCJA, the variation by state mostly
disappears, particularly for the rich.
    It’s possible that this state variation is due to differences in age, home
values or incomes across state. To test for this, we conduct an experiment
where we keep socioeconomic factors across states the same and only allow tax
policy to vary. We find our results essentially unchanged by this experiment,
suggesting differences across state are mostly due to differences in tax policies
between the states.
    The first subsection below discusses the variation in the TCJA gains by
state and for different points in the resource distribution. In the second sub-
section, we remove the limitation on the amount of state and local taxes that
can be deducted. This adjustment enables us to see how states would have
fared if the SALT limitation had not been implemented. In the third subsec-
tion, we remove any socioeconomic differences between states and reexamine
the results.


4.1     Variation in the TCJA Gains
4.1.1    Variation by state
According to our calculations, households are projected to pay $25,000 less on
average, in present value, in net taxes over their lifetimes due to permanent
implementation of the TCJA. As indicated in equation (3) and described in
Kotlikoff (2019), TFA guarantees that any reduction in expected remaining
lifetime net taxes produces an equal-sized increase in expected remaining life-
time spending. Hence, the $25,000 decline in average tax payments translates
to a 1.5% increase in spending across all states.
    Figure 2 below provides an overview of the TCJA’s impacts across the
country. The shade of green indicates the magnitude of the state’s gain in
lifetime spending. The darker the green, the larger the change in lifetime
spending of households in the state. States shaded darkest or second darkest
green experienced a 1.6 percent to 2.1 percent increase in remaining lifetime
spending per household. Households in states shaded very light or light green
experienced, on average, a 0.9 to 1.4 percentage increase in remaining lifetime
spending.
    Figure 3, shows the percentage change in spending resulting from TCJA
on the left hand side and the absolute TCJA-induced spending increase on
the right hand side, ranked by the percentage change from high to low. The
state with the smallest percentage increase in lifetime spending is California
– a far leaning blue state – with a gain of 0.9 percent. The state with the


                                       10
     largest percentage increase is Wyoming- a far leaning red state- with a gain
     of 2.1 percent. The ten states receiving the smallest percentage spending gain
     from the tax reform are all blue. Moreover, of the 10 states with the highest
     average percent TCJA lifetime spending gains, only one, Washington State, is
     blue. Seven are red and three are purple.
         The right side of the figure shows lifetime spending changes in absolute
     dollar terms. Some states that had a relatively small percentage change aver-
     aged relatively larger absolute spending increases. New Jersey is an example.
     It’s spending increase was the ninth lowest in percentage terms (1.3 percent),
     but it’s absolute increase in spending exceeds that of all but two of the red
     states ($31,000).

Figure 2: Average Percentage Change in Household Lifetime Spending Resulting
from TCJA




          Note: Dots indicate if state is red, blue, or purple.




                                          11
Figure 3: Change in Lifetime Spending Resulting From TCJA
Rank ordered by percent change in TCJA gains




Note: Color of bars indicate if state is red, blue, or purple. We define red states as those that
voted Republican in the past five presidential elections by a margin of 5 or more percentage
points, on average. Blue states, are those that on average voted Democratic by a margin of 5 or
more percentage points in the past five presidential elections. The remaining states are
designated as purple states



          The left hand side of Figure 3 suggests a systematic relationship between
      a state’s political leanings and the percentage increase in spending due to the
      change in tax policy. As shown in figure 4, there is in fact a distinct positive
      relationship between the percentage gain from TJCA and the voting pattern of
      the state. Figure 4 plots for each state its average percentage change in lifetime


                                               12
spending against its average net Republican voter margin over the past five
presidential elections. The correlation between the two variables is 0.5. The
weighted regression of each state’s percentage spending change from TCJA
on a constant and its average Republican voter margin yields a coefficient of
0.009 with a standard error of 0.000002. In other words, a ten percentage
point higher Republican voter margin corresponds to a 0.09 percentage point
higher increase in average lifetime spending due to TJCA.
    Grouping states together into their Republican or Democratic leanings
yields an average of a 1.6 percent gain for red states versus a 1.3 percent
gain for blue states. This 30 basis point difference is statistically significant
at the 1 percent level. The average lifetime spending gain for purple states is
also 1.6 percent and is significantly different from average lifetime spending of
blue states at the 1 percent level.

     Figure 4: Change in Lifetime Spending Resulting from TCJA




     Note: Dots indicate if state is red, blue, or purple.



4.1.2    State Variation by Resource Level
State variation in per household average TCJA gains differs by income level.
TCJA’s biggest impact on the middle- and lower-income households was through
its elimination of exemptions, increase in the standard deduction, and, in fami-
lies with children, increase in the child tax credit. Because the standard deduc-
tion changed by such a large amount (from $6,350 to $12,000 for single filers,
from $12,700 to $24,000 for married filing jointly and widowed tax payers, and
from $9,350 to $18,000 for head of household filers), the Joint Committee on
Taxation expects that relatively few people - 18 million (12 percent) down
from 46 million (31 percent) – will gain from itemizing their deductions when
they file their taxes in 2019. Table 1 shows how the number of people itemizing
deductions is expected to change over time by income category.




                                       13
Table 1: Estimated Number of Taxpayers Who Itemize Deductions: 2017 vs 2018
(in thousands)

            Income                           2017      2018     Percentage Change
            Less than $50,000               5,445     1,501                   -72
            $50,000 to $100,000            13,305    11,091                   -17
            $100,000 to $200,000            17959      6513                   -64
            $200,000 to $500,000             8207      4185                   -49
            $500,000 to $1,000,000           1089       791                   -27
            $1,000,000 and over               509       444                   -13
             Total, All Taxpayers           46514     18012                   -61


Source: Joint Committee on Taxation
Note: Income is adjusted gross income plus (1) tax-exempt interest, (2) employer contributions
for health plans and life insurance, (3) employer share of FICA tax, (4) workers’ compensation,
(5) nontaxable Social Security benefits, (6) insurance value of Medicare benefits, (7) alternative
minimum tax preference items, (8) individual share of business taxes, and (9) excluded income of
U.S. citizens living abroad. Categories are measured at 2018 levels. Table includes non filers, but
excludes dependent filers and returns with negative income.



          Table 2 shows how the value of the SALT deduction has changed between
      2017 and 2018 for different ranges of income. In total, the amount of tax
      deductions under SALT is expected to fall from $109 billion to $20 billion,
      most of which stems from a reduction in the benefits for those with incomes
      over $100,000. In 2017, nearly all of the total value of SALT deductions – $99.7
      billion out of $109 billion – accrued to those with incomes over $100,000. In
      2018 taxes, this number is expected to fall to just $17 billion, a reduction of
      $82 billion.

            Table 2: Estimated Value of the SALT Deduction by Income

                                          2017                        2018
 Income category               Returns (000s) Millions ($) Returns (000s) Millions ($)
 Less than $50,000             3,303           915         799                     224
 $50,000 to $100,000           11,988          8,796       4,097                 2,580
 $100,000 to $200,000          17,650          27,878      6,382                 6,920
 $200,000 to $500,000          7,816           26,160      4,148                 7,081
 $500,000 to $1,000,000        1,015           11,491      780                   2,191
 $1,000,000 and over           490             34,202      418                   1,287
 Total, All Taxpayers          42,262          109,443     16,624               20,282


Source: Joint Committee on Taxation
Note: Income is adjusted gross income (AGI) plus: (1) tax-exempt interest, (2) employer contribu-
tions for health plans and life insurance,(3) employer share of FICA tax, (4) worker’s compensation,
(5) nontaxable Social Security benefits, (6) insurance value of Medicare benefits, (7) alternative
minimum tax preference items, (8) individual share of business taxes, and (9) excluded income of
U S. citizens living abroad. Categories are measured at 2018 levels.




                                                14
             The amount of SALT a household pays is a function of the household’s
         home value, the nature of property taxation (millage rate, assessment policy,
         homestead exemptions, etc.), income and the state’s income tax rate. The
         extent to which these factors vary by state will greatly affect the amount of
         state and local taxes paid, and thus how much can potentially be deducted.
         State and local tax rates vary substantially by state. As shown in table 3, blue
         states tend to face slightly higher taxes (11.5 percent for the median household
         in blue states versus 10.1 percent in red states). Further, the lowest state and
         local tax rate is 5.7% in Alaska (a red state) and the highest state and local
         tax rate is 14.5% in Illinois (a blue state). The average home value among
         blue states is also higher ($371 thousand versus $209 thousand).19


Table 3: Tax Rates, Home Values, and State and Local Taxes Paid Averaged by
Red/Blue/Purple Designation

        State and Local                    Average Home                 Amount of State and
        Rates for Median                   Value                        Local Taxes for Me-
        U.S. Household                                                  dian State Household
 Red    10.2 %                             $208,620                     $ 5,219
 Blue   11.3 %                             $370,863                     $ 7,950
 Purple 11 %                               $260,233                     $ 6,371
 All    10.8 %                             $274,991                     $ 6,386


Source: Kiernan, John. "2019 Tax Rates by State" and authors’ calculations from the
American Community Survey
Note: State and local taxes include real estate taxes, vehicle property taxes, income taxes and
sales excise taxes. Assumes “Median State Household” has an annual income equal to the mean
third quintile income of the state, owns a home at a value equal to the median of the state, owns
a car valued at $24,350 (the highest-selling car of 2018); and spends annually an amount equal to
the spending of a household earning the median state income. Assumes "Median U.S. Household”
has an annual income of mean third quintile of U.S. income ($58,082), owns a home valued at
median U.S. home value ($193,500), owns a car valued at $24,350 (the highest-selling car of 2018),
and spends annually an amount equal to the spending of a household earning the median U.S.
income.




  19
       See the Appendix for a full list of average home values and income tax rates by state.


                                                  15
         With itemized deductions far less important to middle- and low-income
     households, one would expect small differences by state in the TCJA’s treat-
     ment of such households. That’s not the case for high-income households. As
     table 1 indicates, among households with more than $1 million in annual in-
     come only 13 percent fewer households are expected to itemize deductions in
     2018 compared to 2017. In contrast, among households with incomes below
     $50,000, there’s a 72 percent predicted decline in itemizers. Since the largest
     itemizable deduction for high-income households is SALT, the TCJA’s lim-
     itation of the SALT deduction to $10,000 is particularly onerous for higher
     income households living in high SALT states.
         Thus, it’s not surprising that when we narrow figure 4 to households who
     rank among the richest 10 percent in their age cohort by resources, we find
     even more variation by state in TCJA’s average household treatment. Impor-
     tantly, the relationship between Republican voter margin and percent change
     in lifetime spending resulting from the TCJA becomes even stronger (see Fig-
     ure 5). The weighted regression of each state’s percentage spending change
     from the TCJA on a constant and its average Republican voter margin yields a
     coefficient of 0.02 with a standard error of 0.00001. In other words, a ten per-
     centage point higher Republican voter margin corresponds to a 0.2 percentage
     point higher increase in lifetime spending. In contrast, at the opposite side
     of the income distribution, those in the bottom 10th percentile, experienced
     similar gains under the TCJA across states (see Figure 6 below).


Figure 5: Percentage Change in Lifetime Spending Resulting from TCJA by Re-
publican Voter Margin, Richest 10 Percent of Households




          Note: Dots indicate if state is red, blue, or purple.




                                           16
Figure 6: Percentage Change in Lifetime Spending Resulting from TCJA by Re-
publican Voter Margin, Poorest 10 Percent of Households




           Note: Dots indicate if state is red, blue, or purple.




     4.2    The No-SALT Experiment
     We next repeat our analysis of the TCJA’s differential treatment of the rich
     in red versus blue states, but under the counterfactual assumption that TCJA
     didn’t include a cap on SALT deductions. The left-hand-side of Figure 7 shows
     average percentage spending changes by state, ranked from high to low, as in
     Figure 3. The right-hand-side of figure 7 preserves the left-hand-side ordering
     of states, but displays the spending impact of the TCJA assuming it had been
     passed with no SALT deduction limitation.
         The importance of SALT is apparent. On average, spending would in-
     creases by 2.0 percent under the no-SALT scenario versus 1.5 percent under
     the TCJA. In addition, the red-blue differential is reversed in this scenario:
     Households in blue states experience a 30 basis point increase in spending
     relative to those in red states (instead of 30 basis points lower under TCJA).
         The ten states with the smallest TCJA spending gains with the SALT
     limitation experience a notably larger spending increase without the limitation.
     Instead of experiencing an average spending gain of 1.1 percent under the
     permanent version of TCJA as legislated, they would have experienced a 2.1
     percent gain had the SALT provisions been excluded. This is nearly the same
     as the average gain of 2.0 percent across all states under the no-SALT scenario.
         Figure 8 repeats this experiment for the top 10 percent of households.
     Importantly, the same result described with respect to the average across states
     is generally true when we restrict attention to the rich: There is much less
     variation across states in the TCJA gains under the no-SALT scenario. But
     the difference between TCJA and no-SALT is larger among those in the top
     10 percentile. The average gain under the no-SALT scenario for the top 10th
     percentile is 2.6 percent, compared to 1.5 percent under the TCJA. There


                                           17
     is essentially no difference between the TCJA and no-SALT TCJA for the
     bottom 10 percentile (with both scenarios producing a gain of 0.4 percent).

Figure 7: Change in Lifetime Spending: TCJA versus no-SALT Change Scenario
Rank ordered by TCJA gains




       Note: Color of bars indicate if state is red, blue, or purple.




                                         18
Figure 8: Change in Lifetime Spending: TCJA versus no-SALT Change Scenario
Rank ordered by TCJA gains
Richest 10 Percent of Households




       Note: Color of bars indicate if state is red, blue, or purple.




                                         19
4.3     Removing Socioeconomic Factors
The differential impact of TCJA that we report above is a result of both
differences in tax policies across states and differences in demographic char-
acteristics across states. With respect to the effect of demographics, consider
for a state which is much younger than an otherwise identical state. Because
the older rich are more likely than the younger rich to itemize, TCJA will
appear to be benefiting the younger state relative to the older state simply
because SALT deduction restrictions will disproportionately impact the lat-
ter. In order to isolate the influence of state-level tax policies from state-level
demographics, we repeat the experiments cited above using U.S. weights from
the SCF, rather than the state-specific weights described in subsection 3.5
above.
    The results of these experiments are shown below in Figure 9. The column
on the left is the same as the left column of Figure 7 above and shows the
change in lifetime spending under the TCJA with the state specific weights
applied. The column on the right shows what happens if the U.S. weights
are applied to each state instead. If socioeconomic differences between states
are driving the state by state variation in the TCJA gains, those differences
should be revealed in a comparison of these two columns.
    While there are differences for specific states, the average TCJA gain is 1.5
percent with uniform weights as opposed to 1.6 percent with state weights.
This suggests that the variation in the TCJA gains by state are mostly a
function of differences in tax polices between states.
    Importantly, significant differences across states remain even when socioe-
conomic factors are identical between states. The state with the biggest gain
is Nevada (2.0 percent) and the state with the smallest gain is Oregon (1.1
percent). Further, as shown in Figure 10 below, this is also true for the rich-
est 10 percent of households. The average gain in spending under the TCJA
for the top 10 percent calculated with state-weights is 1.6 percent versus 1.5
percent when US weights are applied.




                                        20
Figure 9: Change in Lifetime Spending Resulting from TCJA
State Specific Demographics versus Uniform Demographics
Rank ordered by TCJA gains




        Note: Color bars indicate if state is red, blue, or purple.




                                         21
Figure 10: Change in Lifetime Spending Resulting from TCJA
State Specific Demographics versus Uniform Demographics
Rank ordered by TCJA gains
Richest 10 percent of households




       Note: Color of bars indicate if state is red, blue, or purple.




                                         22
5     Summary and Conclusion
In this paper we estimate the state-by-state effects deriving from permanent
implementation of the TCJA. We find a small but important difference in the
effects on households across red and blue states. Households in red states
enjoyed, on average, a 1.6 percent increase in remaining lifetime spending due
to the TCJA compared with 1.3 percent for blue-state households. Among
the top 10 percent of households, the differential is larger. Rich households in
red states enjoyed a 2.0 percent increase relative to a 1.2 increase among the
rich in blue states.
    The major factor underlying the TCJA’s distinct impact on rich households
across red and blue states is the TCJA’s $10,000 limitation on the deductibil-
ity of SALT – state and local taxes. Indeed, as we show, almost all of the
difference in the TCJA’s treatment of the rich in red and blue states reflects
TCJA’s SALT deduction limitation. Furthermore, it appears that these differ-
ential effects are mainly driven by differences in state tax policies, as opposed
to differences in demographics across states (including income and property
values).
    There are a host of interesting questions that arise from the observations
reported in this (and related) work. Do households have incentives to vote
for one candidate versus another based on perceived tax advantages offered by
the competing political parties? Do voters act on these incentives? As shown
by Feldstein and Metcalf (1987), for those that itemize, SALT deductibilty
acts as a federal subsidy for state and local tax collections at the rate of their
marginal federal tax rate. Gramlich (1985) notes that removal of this subsidy,
and the possible consequences in terms of lower state and local government
spending, may result in migration of high-income households from high-tax
areas to low-tax areas. Will this prediction hold if, as we assume here, the
relevant TCJA provisions remain permanent?
    Answers to these questions are well beyond the scope of our analysis here.
But our results begin to develop a factual basis for potentially addressing these
and a variety of other political economy questions.


6     References
Auerbach, Alan J., Laurence J. Kotlikoff, and Darryl Koehler. 2016. “U.S. In-
equality, Fiscal Progressivity, and Work Disincentives.” NBER working paper
no. 22032.

Auerbach, Alan J., Laurence J. Kotlikoff, and Darryl Koehler. 2018. “The
New Tax Bill – Winners and Losers.” Manuscript available at
https://www.kotlikoff.net/node/633

Auerbach, Alan J., Laurence J. Kotlikoff, Darryl Koehler and Manni Yu. 2017.
“Is Uncle Sam Inducing the Elderly to Retire?” in Tax Policy and the Econ-
omy. NBER vol. 31, no 1, pp. 1-42.

Benzell, Seth G., Laurence J. Kotlikoff, Guillermo Lagarda. 2017a. “Simulat-
ing Business Cash Flow Taxation: An Illustration Based on the “Better Way”
U.S. Corporate Tax Reform.” NBER working paper 23675.



                                       23
Benzell, Seth G., Laurence J. Kotlikoff, Guillermo Lagarda. 2017b. “Simulat-
ing the Unified Framework Tax Reform.” October.
https://www.kotlikoff.net/sites/default/files/
Simulating the Unified Framework Tax Reform Plan_0.pdf

Bricker, Jesse, Alice Henriques, Jacob Krimmel, and John Sabelhaus. 2016.
“Measuring Income and Wealth at the Top Using Administrative and Survey
Data.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 2016, pp. 261-312.

Feldstein, Martin and Gilbert Metcalf. 1987. "The Effect of Federal Tax
Deductibility on State and Local Taxes and Spending." Journal of Political
Economy 95(4): 710-736.

Gale, William, Hilary Gelfond, Aaron Krupkin, Mark J. Mazur, and Eric
Toder. 2018. “Effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act: A Preliminary Analysis.”
Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center Research Report.

Gramlich, Edward M. 1985. "The Deductibility of State and Local Taxes."
National Tax Journal Vol. 38, No. 4 (December, 1985), pp. 447-465.

Lindsey, Lawrence B. 1988. "Federal Deductibility of State and Local Taxes:
A Test of Public Choice by Representative Government." Chapter 5 in NBER
book Fiscal Federalism: Quantitative Studies (1988), Harvey S. Rosen, editor
(p. 137 - 176).

Kennickel, Arthur. 2007. “The Role of Over-sampling of the Wealthy in the
Survey of Consumer Finances.”
https://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/scf/files/isi2007.pdf

Kiernan, John. 2019. “2019 Tax Rates by State.”
https://wallethub.com/edu/best-worst-states-to-be-a-taxpayer/2416/

Kotlikoff, Laurence J. 2019. “The Fiscal Analyzer Online Documentation.”
Manuscript available at
https://www.kotlikoff.net/node/672

Nunns, Jim, Len Burman, Ben Page, Jeff Rohaly, and Joe Rosenberg. 2016.
“An Analysis of Donald Trump’s Revised Tax Plan.” Urban-Brookings Tax
Policy Center Research Report.

Ryan, Paul. 2016. “A Better Way: Tax.”
https://www.novoco.com/sites/default/files/atoms/files/
ryan_a_better_way_policy_paper_062416.pdf

Sammartino, Frank, and Kim Rueben. 2016. “Revisiting the State and Local
Tax Deduction.” Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center Research Report.

Sammartino, Frank, Philip Stallworth and David Weiner. 2018. “The Effect
of the TCJA Individual Income Tax Provisions Across Income Groups and
Across the States.” Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center Research Report.



                                    24
      Staff of the Joint Committee on Taxation. 2018. “Tables Related to the Fed-
      eral Tax System as in Effect 2017 through 2026.” Joint Committee on Taxation.



      7      Appendix

          Table 4: Tax Rates, Home Values, and State and Local Taxes Paid

                      State and Local                    Average Home                 Amount of State and
                      Rates for Median                   Value                        Local Taxes for Me-
                      U.S. Household                                                  dian State Household
 Alaska               5.7 %                              $286189                      $ 4439
 Delaware             6.1 %                              $271288                      $ 4047
 Montana              7.1 %                              $269771                      $ 3968
 Wyoming              8.1 %                              $278089                      $ 4902
 Nevada               8.2 %                              $283458                      $ 4797
 Utah                 8.4 %                              $293591                      $ 5638
 Florida              8.4 %                              $270802                      $ 4396
 Idaho                8.6 %                              $226958                      $ 4431
 Colorado             8.7 %                              $374343                      $ 6009
 Tennessee            8.7 %                              $204838                      $ 4183
 District of Columbia 8.9 %                              $679321                      $ 8487
 California           8.9 %                              $625349                      $ 7703
 South Carolina       9%                                 $211428                      $ 4415
 Oregon               9.1 %                              $332659                      $ 5948
 Alabama              9.1 %                              $175313                      $ 4186
 West Virginia        9.7 %                              $157126                      $ 4167
 Arizona              9.7 %                              $259099                      $ 5350
 New Hampshire        9.9 %                              $286830                      $ 7152
 North Dakota         10 %                               $208900                      $ 5850
 New Mexico           10.4 %                             $214359                      $ 4931
 Georgia              10.4 %                             $222388                      $ 5403
 Louisiana            10.5 %                             $193820                      $ 4922
 Hawaii               10.6 %                             $685545                      $ 8826
 North Carolina       10.6 %                             $216827                      $ 5340
 Virginia             10.7 %                             $337009                      $ 7409

Source: Kiernan, John. "2019 Tax Rates by State" and Author’s calculations from the
American Community Survey
Note: State and local taxes include real estate taxes, vehicle property taxes, income taxes and
sales excise taxes. Assumes “Median State Household” has an annual income equal to the mean
third quintile income of the state, owns a home at a value equal to the median of the state, owns
a car valued at $24,350 (the highest-selling car of 2018); and spends annually an amount equal to
the spending of a household earning the median state income. Assumes "Median U.S. Household”
has an annual income of mean third quintile of U.S. income ($58,082), owns a home valued at
median U.S. home value ($193,500), owns a car valued at $24,350 (the highest-selling car of 2018);
and spends annually an amount equal to the spending of a household earning the median U.S.
income.




                                               25
  Table 5: Tax Rates, Home Values, and State and Local Taxes Paid, Continued

               State and Local                   Average Home                 Amount of State and
               Rates for Median                  Value                        Local Taxes for Me-
               U.S. Household                                                 dian State Household
 Massachusetts 10.8 %                            $444081                      $ 9175
 South Dakota 11 %                               $197356                      $ 5626
 Vermont       11.2 %                            $259807                      $ 6992
 Arkansas      11.3 %                            $162859                      $ 4850
 Minnesota     11.3 %                            $249862                      $ 7185
 Missouri      11.3 %                            $195100                      $ 5653
 Oklahoma      11.4 %                            $169411                      $ 5297
 Maryland      11.4 %                            $368012                      $ 9392
 Maine         11.7 %                            $222236                      $ 6323
 Indiana       11.8 %                            $167347                      $ 5814
 Mississippi   12 %                              $152118                      $ 5056
 Washington    12.1 %                            $381518                      $ 8716
 Kentucky      12.3 %                            $172111                      $ 5609
 New Jersey    12.4 %                            $395402                      $ 11119
 Michigan      12.4 %                            $182871                      $ 5951
 Texas         12.7 %                            $220989                      $ 6576
 Iowa          12.9 %                            $179461                      $ 6546
 Ohio          13.1 %                            $176557                      $ 6247
 Rhode Island 13.2 %                             $303227                      $ 8667
 Wisconsin     13.3 %                            $211559                      $ 7199
 Kansas        13.4 %                            $185462                      $ 6813
 Nebraska      13.4 %                            $179799                      $ 6778
 New York      13.7 %                            $435167                      $ 10074
 Pennsylvania 13.8 %                             $222075                      $ 7580
 Connecticut   14.4 %                            $377209                      $ 10987
 Illinois      14.9 %                            $247626                      $ 8585


Source: Kiernan, John. "2019 Tax Rates by State" and Author’s calculations from the
American Community Survey
Note: State and local taxes include real estate taxes, vehicle property taxes, income taxes and
sales excise taxes. Assumes “Median State Household” has an annual income equal to the mean
third quintile income of the state, owns a home at a value equal to the median of the state, owns
a car valued at $24,350 (the highest-selling car of 2018); and spends annually an amount equal to
the spending of a household earning the median state income. Assumes "Median U.S. Household”
has an annual income of mean third quintile of U.S. income ($58,082), owns a home valued at
median U.S. home value ($193,500), owns a car valued at $24,350 (the highest-selling car of 2018);
and spends annually an amount equal to the spending of a household earning the median U.S.
income.




                                               26
