                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       ASSET PRICE BUBBLES AND SYSTEMIC RISK

                                    Markus K. Brunnermeier
                                       Simon C. Rother
                                       Isabel Schnabel

                                       Working Paper 25775
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25775


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2019




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. Financial support from the Frankfurt Institute for Risk
Management and Regulation (FIRM) is gratefully acknowledged.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25775.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Markus K. Brunnermeier, Simon C. Rother, and Isabel Schnabel. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Asset Price Bubbles and Systemic Risk
Markus K. Brunnermeier, Simon C. Rother, and Isabel Schnabel
NBER Working Paper No. 25775
April 2019
JEL No. E44,G01

                                          ABSTRACT

We analyze the relationship between asset price bubbles and systemic risk, using bank-level data
covering almost thirty years. Systemic risk of banks rises already during a bubble’s build-up
phase, and even more so during its bust. The increase differs strongly across banks and bubble
episodes. It depends on bank characteristics (especially bank size) and bubble characteristics, and
it can become very large: In a median real estate bust, systemic risk increases by almost 70
percent of the median for banks with unfavorable characteristics. These results emphasize the
importance of bank-level factors for the build-up of financial fragility during bubble episodes.


Markus K. Brunnermeier                           Isabel Schnabel
Princeton University                             University of Bonn
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
Bendheim Center for Finance                      Adenauerallee 24-42
Princeton, NJ 08544                              D-53113 Bonn
and CEPR                                         Germany
and also NBER                                    isabel.schnabel@uni-bonn.de
markus@princeton.edu

Simon C. Rother
University of Bonn
Department of Economics
Adenauerallee 24-42
D-53113 Bonn
Germany
simon.rother@uni-bonn.de
1    Introduction
      Financial crises are often accompanied by a boom and bust cycle in asset prices (Borio and

Lowe, 2002; Kindleberger and Aliber, 2005). Bursting asset price bubbles can have detrimental

effects on the financial system and give rise to systemic financial crises. Yet, not all bubbles are

equally harmful. Some, like the one preceding the Great Financial Crisis, contribute to the collapse

of the entire financial system, while others, like the dotcom bubble, cause high financial losses

without any wider macroeconomic consequences.

      Historical evidence suggests that the severity of crises after the burst of a bubble depends

on the state of the financial system. Bubbles accompanied by strong lending booms tend to be

followed by more severe crises (Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor, 2015b; Brunnermeier and Schnabel,

2016). Moreover, disturbances may be amplified through the financial sector. For example, the

US subprime mortgage market accounted for only 4 percent of the total US mortgage market at

the time of the burst of the subprime bubble (Brunnermeier and Oehmke, 2013, p. 1223). Yet,

this burst gave rise to one of the largest financial crises in history, because the initial shock was

amplified by the imbalances that had built up in the financial sector.

      While the impact of asset price bubbles on macroeconomic variables is well-documented

(Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor, 2013, 2015a,b), little is known about the role of individual financial

institutions in the build-up of systemic risk during asset price bubbles. However, this knowledge

is crucial to understand the channels through which asset price bubbles affect systemic risk and to

design appropriate policy responses. Moreover, a single systemically important financial institution

can play a critical role in a financial crisis, just like Lehman Brothers did in the Global Financial

Crisis. Hence, not only the overall size of financial sector imbalances during asset price bubbles

matters but also the allocation of risks across banks.

      We fill this gap in the literature by empirically analyzing the relationship between asset price

bubbles and systemic risk at bank level. Our analysis covers stock market and real estate bubbles in

17 countries over almost thirty years, focusing on the role of banks’ size, loan growth, leverage, and

maturity mismatch. Moreover, we analyze the role of bubble characteristics, namely their length

and size.


                                                  1
       Measuring systemic risk at bank level yields additional insights compared to employing a

binary indicator of financial crises for three reasons. First, it allows us to analyze the changes in

systemic risk across banks during asset price bubbles in addition to the aggregate level of systemic

risk. This is important because financial crises are often not merely the result of macroeconomic

shocks but are reinforced by contagion effects within the financial sector, for which a small number

of banks often play an important role. Second, using continuous measures of systemic risk raises the

statistical power of our estimates due to their variation over time and across banks, whereas banking

crises are rare events. Third, systemic risk measures are useful from a conceptual perspective.

Unlike a financial crisis dummy, they also account for episodes of high financial fragility that did

not result in a crisis. In fact, increased systemic risk predicts future declines in real activity

(Allen, Bali, and Tang, 2012; Engle, Jondeau, and Rockinger, 2015; Giglio, Kelly, and Pruitt, 2016;

Brownlees and Engle, 2017), which points towards costs of financial fragility independent of whether

the risks materialize. Hence, regulation should care about episodes of high systemic risk due to

their crisis potential and the real effects of financial fragility.1

       Our analysis is based on a broad, bank-level dataset spanning the time period from 1987 to

2015. The dataset contains monthly observations on 1,264 financial institutions. The empirical

analysis models banks’ contributions to systemic risk, or banks’ exposures to systemic risk, as

a function of financial bubbles as well as bank- and country-level characteristics. Our analysis

distinguishes between the boom and bust phases of bubble episodes to analyze both the build-up

of asset price bubbles as well as their bursting. We allow the effect of bubbles to depend on bank

characteristics (bank size, loan growth, leverage, maturity mismatch) and on bubble characteristics

(boom and bust length and size) to account for the heterogeneity across banks and bubble episodes.

       The key challenges for our analysis are twofold. First, bubble episodes need to be iden-

tified. Asset price bubbles that were followed by deeper turmoil when bursting have attracted

most attention in the literature. Relying on such bubbles could, however, lead us to overestimate

the relationship between asset price bubbles and systemic risk. To prevent this sample selection

bias, we instead estimate bubble episodes by applying the Backward Sup Augmented Dickey-Fuller

   1
    Moreover, the estimation of the systemic risk measures applied in this paper is based on equity return losses,
which also capture the intensity of financial crises (Baron, Verner, and Xiong, 2018).



                                                        2
(BSADF) approach introduced by Phillips, Shi, and Yu (2015a,b). This approach identifies bubble

episodes based on episodes of non-stationary behavior in price data. We also consider price-to-rent

and price-to-dividend data to account for fundamentals. Additionally, we apply an alternative

bubble identification approach proposed by Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2015b), which relies on

price deviations from trends.

      The second challenge lies in the quantification of systemic risk at bank level. We apply

∆CoVaR (conditional value at risk) introduced by Adrian and Brunnermeier (2016) and the

marginal expected shortfall (MES) proposed by Acharya, Pedersen, Philippon, and Richardson

(2017). Both measures quantify systemic risk at bank level, while taking a complementary per-

spective. ∆CoVaR quantifies the contribution of a financial institution to the overall level of sys-

temic risk by estimating the additional value at risk (VaR) of the entire financial system associated

with this institution experiencing distress. Hence, this measure thinks of banks as risk inducers.

Contrary to this perspective, MES treats banks as risk recipients by calculating the equity losses

of a bank conditional on the financial system experiencing distress.

      Our results are in line with the common conjecture that asset price bubbles pose a threat to

financial stability. As summarized in Figure 1, asset price bubbles of median length and size go

along with a significant increase in systemic risk for banks of median size, loan growth, leverage,

and maturity mismatch (light blue bars). This increase in systemic risk is not limited to the turmoil

following the burst of a bubble, but exists already during its build-up phase. To prevent financial

fragility resulting from asset price bubbles, it may thus be advisable to counteract the risks building

up in the financial system early on.


                                        [Figure 1 about here]


      Moreover, the increase in systemic risk depends strongly on bank characteristics (grey bars)

and somewhat less on bubble characteristics (dark blue bars). During the bust phase of a bubble

with median bust size and length, the systemic risk contribution of a bank with unfavorable bank

characteristics increases by 54 percent of the median of ∆CoVaR. Bank size is the most important

determinant of this increase, underlining large banks’ potential to propagate and amplify shocks


                                                  3
from a bursting asset price bubble when getting under distress. High loan growth and a large

maturity mismatch also contribute to a larger increase in systemic risk, but to a smaller extent.

The findings regarding leverage are mixed and economically small. With respect to bubble charac-

teristics, we find longer and larger bubbles to be associated with larger increases in systemic risk

during the boom phase. During the bust phase, the increase in systemic risk is smaller the more

time has passed since the burst and the more the bubble has deflated already. This points towards

a fading out of the effects of bursting bubbles.

      The increase in systemic risk is largest during real estate busts, especially in case of unfavor-

able balance sheet characteristics: The 95th percentile of the increase in systemic risk in dependence

of balance sheet characteristics amounts to 55 percent of the median of ∆CoVaR, the 99th per-

centile to almost 70 percent. To further put the size of the effect into perspective, consider the

most prominent example of a single bank’s distress translating into a worldwide systemic financial

crisis, namely the collapse of Lehman Brothers. Shortly before its collapse during the bust phase

of the US subprime housing bubble in 2008, our estimates imply that systemic risk associated with

Lehman getting under distress would have been 40 percent lower if there had not been a bubble.

While the risks associated with stock market bubbles are smaller, the estimated increase in systemic

risk during these episodes suggests that stock market bubbles should not be disregarded either as

a potential source of financial fragility.

      In order to check the robustness of our results, we apply different measures of asset price bub-

bles and systemic risk. Specifically, we normalize price series by rents and dividends, respectively,

in the BSADF test. Alternatively, we identify bubble episodes based on deviations of prices from

trends. As a second measure of systemic risk, we use MES to capture banks’ exposures to systemic

risk. The robustness checks confirm the rise of systemic risk in bubble episodes (although the result

on real estate bubbles is weakened for the trend-deviation approach) and the important role played

by bank and bubble characteristics. For MES, the relationship to specific bank characteristics

is different from ∆CoVaR due to the conceptual differences, but the overall relationship between

bubbles and systemic risk is again similar, with a strong role for bubble and bank characteristics,

especially bank size.




                                                   4
      We additionally account for a potentially mechanical correlation between our bubble and

systemic risk measures and find that systemic risk increases less during stock market bubbles in

some specifications. When distinguishing between banks of different sizes, we show that both small

and large banks are affected to a similar extent. Moreover, neither a certain country nor a specific

time period is driving our main result that increases in systemic risk differ systematically across

banks and bubble episodes. Finally, accounting better for business cycles does not affect our main

results.

      Overall, our results suggest that strengthening the resilience of the financial system at the

bank level may significantly decrease the system’s vulnerability to asset price bubbles. Moreover,

it may not be sufficient to intervene after a bubble has burst as a longer and larger bubble tends

to increase the build-up of systemic risk.

      The paper proceeds as follows. We start with a brief discussion of the related literature and

our contribution in Section 2. Section 3 elaborates on the data, the identification of bubble episodes,

the estimation of systemic risk measures, as well as the empirical model. Section 4 contains our

baseline results, followed by a discussion of the results using alternative measures in Section 5.

Section 6 presents further robustness checks. Section 7 concludes. The Appendix provides further

details on the data, estimation procedures, as well as additional figures and tables.


2    Contribution to the literature

      Our paper contributes to the strands of literature in macroeconomics and finance studying

asset price bubbles, systemic risk, and financial crises. Financial crises are frequently accompanied

by a boom and bust of asset prices in both developed and developing economies. Although the

corresponding narrative has been known for a long time (Minsky, 1982), the relationship between

asset price bubbles and systemic risk has hardly been analyzed empirically. Historical accounts

of prominent financial bubbles have been given, among others, by Shiller (2000), Garber (2000),

Kindleberger and Aliber (2005), Allen and Gale (2007), Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), as well as

Brunnermeier and Schnabel (2016). Our paper speaks to this literature by analyzing a large

number of asset price bubbles, based on a broad set of countries and a time period of almost thirty

years. It thus complements this literature with an econometric perspective.


                                                  5
       The notion of systemic risk as a concept for financial stability appeared only in the late

1990s and early 2000s, which has given rise to a large literature attempting to measure systemic

risk at bank and system level, including Acharya, Engle, and Richardson (2012), Adrian and

Brunnermeier (2016), Brownlees and Engle (2017), as well as Acharya, Pedersen, Philippon, and

Richardson (2017). An early literature review of the concepts of systemic risk is provided by de

Bandt and Hartmann (2000). Bisias, Flood, Lo, and Valavanis (2012) provide a taxonomy and

discuss the advantages and drawbacks of different approaches. Allen, Babus, and Carletti (2012)

as well as Brunnermeier and Oehmke (2013) provide comprehensive reviews, also including the

theoretical literature. We draw upon this literature by applying established measures of systemic

risk and by analyzing asset price bubbles as a new driver of these measures. We also shed light

on the interplays between asset price bubbles and bank characteristics that have been shown to be

linked to systemic risk, such as bank size, leverage, and maturity mismatch.

       Similarly, we build on the literature dealing with the identification of asset price bubbles by

applying some of the most prominent approaches. Many strategies are built around tests for non-

stationary behavior in price data (Kim, 2000; Kim and Amador, 2002; Busetti and Taylor, 2004;

Breitung and Homm, 2012).2 One of the most prominent estimation procedures is the Backward

Sup Augmented Dickey-Fuller (BSADF) approach introduced by Phillips, Shi, and Yu (2015a,b)

and developed further by Phillips and Shi (2018). The quantitative procedures allow to objectify

the classifications. This reduces the selection bias inherent in historical accounts of bubbles and

financial crises, which tend to focus on the most severe events, because these were most likely to be

reported. We contribute to this literature by contrasting the results of the applications of several

conceptually different measures and by analyzing the relationship between the identified bubble

episodes and systemic risk.

       We also draw upon the theoretical literature suggesting channels through which asset price

bubbles may give rise to financial instability. Bursting asset price bubbles can set in motion loss and

liquidity spirals, forcing distressed institutions to sell assets, thereby further depressing prices and

   2
     Early contributions were Shiller (1981), LeRoy and Porter (1981), West’s (1987) two-step tests, integration and
co-integration based tests as proposed by Diba and Grossman (1988), and tests for intrinsic bubbles as in Froot and
Obstfeld (1991). See Gürkaynak (2008) for a discussion of these approaches.




                                                         6
forcing additional asset sales. Through such dynamics, systemic risk may spread well beyond the

institutions affected by the initial shock. Brunnermeier (2009), Hellwig (2009) as well as Shleifer

and Vishny (2011) argue that it is exactly such dynamics that make risk systemic. Moreover,

already Bernanke and Gertler (1989) as well as Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1999) pointed

out that consequences of losses in net worth are usually long-lasting. Loss and liquidity spirals are

the subject of a large literature, including Shleifer and Vishny (1992, 1997, 2011), Allen and Gale

(1994), Kiyotaki and Moore (1997, 2005), Xiong (2001), Gromb and Vayanos (2002), Brunnermeier

and Pedersen (2009), Acharya, Gale, and Yorulmazer (2011), Acharya and Viswanathan (2011),

Diamond and Rajan (2011), as well as Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014).3 However, asset price

bubbles may not only trigger the materialization of financial imbalances. They can also cause

the build-up of these imbalances in the first place. Rising prices increase the value of borrowers’

collateral (Bernanke and Gertler, 1989) and the liquidity of assets (Kiyotaki and Moore, 2005),

causing banks to increase lending and reduce precautionary liquidity holdings. If the increases

in asset prices are due to a bubble, the increased lending might turn out to be excessive and

liquidity provisions may prove insufficient. Shin (2008) provides a model considering demand-side

and supply-side effects of asset prices on banks’ balance sheets and the ensuing effects on financial

institutions’ risk. To capture the role of asset price bubbles both in the build-up and in the

realization of financial risks, we consider the emergence of systemic risk in the boom phase as well

as the materialization of risk in the bust phase of the bubble.

      The comparably small literature looking specifically at the relationship between asset price

bubbles and systemic risk has largely taken a macroeconomic perspective. Gertler and Gilchrist

(2018) describe how the recent theoretical and empirical literature can explain the developments

during the Great Recession. They also provide an empirical analysis, emphasizing the importance

of the disruption of financial intermediation relative to other contributing factors. Schularick and

Taylor (2012) and Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2013, 2015a,b) provide econometric analyses of

the impact of asset price bubbles on the likelihood and costliness of financial crises using long-run

historical data. Another broad strand of the literature deals with the role of monetary policy for the

   3
     Empirical evidence on such spirals is provided, for example, by Schnabel and Shin (2004), Adrian and Shin
(2010), and Gorton and Metrick (2012).




                                                      7
development of asset price bubbles and financial stability (see, for example, Bordo and Jeanne, 2002;

Galı́, 2014; Galı́ and Gambetti, 2015; Brunnermeier and Schnabel, 2016). By analyzing the role of

bank characteristics for the relationship between asset price bubbles and systemic risk, this paper

takes the analysis of bubbles from the macroeconomic to the microeconomic level while maintaining

a systemic perspective through its approach to the measurement of risk. This yields new insights

on the transmission channels between asset price bubbles and systemic risk and highlights the

heterogeneity of the increase in systemic risk across banks.


3       Data and empirical model

3.1     Data sources and sample

        Our analysis relies on a number of data sources listed in Table C1, which also provides variable

definitions. The estimation of real estate bubbles is based on real house prices and rents provided

by the OECD. Stock market bubbles are estimated using country-specific MSCI price indices and,

in some cases, dividends recovered from MSCI return indices from Thomson Reuters’ Datastream.

These indices were chosen due to their broad coverage (85% of each country’s total stock market

capitalization) and the unified methodological framework, which makes them comparable across

countries.

        For the estimation of systemic risk, we obtain daily information on the number of outstanding

shares, stock prices of common equity, and market capitalization from Thomson Reuters’ Data-

stream for all listed institutions. The control variables used in the estimation of ∆CoVaR are listed

in Table B1 in Appendix B. Bank balance sheet characteristics are taken from Bureau von Dijk’s

Bankscope. Finally, we use a large number of macroeconomic control variables.

        The sample includes all countries for which we have data on both real estate and stock

markets. We keep all banks for which balance sheet information and sufficient return data for

the estimation of systemic risk contributions are available.4 The final sample contains monthly

    4
    We exclude all institutions with fewer than 260 weeks of non-missing equity return losses to ensure convergence
of the quantile regressions used during the estimation of systemic risk contributions.




                                                        8
observations on 1,264 financial institutions located in 17 countries, yielding a total of 165,149

observations.5

3.2    Measuring asset price bubbles

       In order to identify asset price bubbles, we rely on the Backward Sup Augmented Dickey-

Fuller (BSADF) approach by Phillips, Shi, and Yu (2015a,b) and updated by Phillips and Shi

(2018), which is well established in the literature.6 It outperforms comparable approaches in terms

of size and power if multiple bubble episodes occur within a dataset, as is shown by the simulations

in Breitung and Homm (2012) and Phillips, Shi, and Yu (2015a). This property is valuable for our

study as the analyzed sample typically covers more than one bubble episode per price series. The

BSADF approach applies backward-expanding sequences of Augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) tests

to subsamples of price data.

       Figure 2 shows the recent Spanish housing bubble for illustration. The test identifies the

beginning of a bubble episode as the point in time at which the sequence of BSADF test statistics

(blue dotted line) first exceeds its critical value (red dotted line). It thus signals that the price

data (black line) is on an explosive trajectory. The end of a bubble episode is reached once the

test statistics fall back below their critical values. Appendix A provides a detailed description of

the estimation procedure.

       In alternative specifications, we apply the approach by Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2015b)

who define a bubble as an episode in which prices are elevated relative to their trend and exhibit

a large price correction. Specifically, this approach first identifies episodes of price elevation when-

ever log real asset prices exceed their Hodrick-Prescott filtered trend by more than one standard

deviation. Afterwards, a price correction signal is defined to equal one whenever prices drop by

more than 15% within three years. Finally, a bubble is any episode of price elevation during which

the price correction signal equals one at least once.

   5
     As shown in Table C2 in the Appendix, the number of banks differs widely across countries. The number of US
banks is comparably large due to the high number of small publicly traded banks. This does not drive our results as
shown in the robustness check in Section 6.2, where we explore differences between large and small banks.
   6
     Applications can be found, e. g., in Gutierrez (2013); Bohl, Kaufmann, and Stephan (2013); Etienne, Irwin, and
Garcia (2014); Jiang, Phillips, and Yu (2015).




                                                        9
       We distinguish between the boom and the bust phases of a bubble (see the blue and grey

shaded areas in Figure 2) based on the global peak of the price series during each bubble episode.

Hence, we construct four binary variables for each country, indicating episodes in which a real estate

or stock market bubble builds up or collapses, in order to capture differences across the phases of

the asset price cycle.7


                                             [Figure 2 about here]


       We apply the BSADF test to quarterly real house price data covering the period 1976 to 2016

and monthly observations of stock price indices covering the period 1973 to 2016. The data used

to estimate the bubble episodes go back further than the data used in the main analysis, which

improves the size and power of the BSADF test.8 Since the real estate data are available only at

quarterly frequency while our main analyses rely on a monthly frequency, the real estate bubble

indicators take on the value of the corresponding quarter for each month of the quarter.9

       Asset price bubbles are often thought of as price deviations from fundamental values. To

account for this property, we additionally apply the BSADF approach to normalized price series,

i. e., real house prices divided by rents and stock prices divided by dividends. Unfortunately, the

availability of rent and dividend data is limited in the time dimension. The advantage of using the

normalized price series thus comes at the cost of lower size and power. Our main analyses therefore

rely on the BSADF estimates based on non-normalized price series.10

       The dataset used in the regressions spans the time period from 1987 to 2015. It hence includes

not only the US subprime housing bubble, which marks the beginning of the global financial crisis,

but also many other bubble episodes, such as the dotcom stock market boom and bust around 2000,

    7
      Unlike the trend-deviation approach, the BSADF approach is entirely backward-looking. The boom-bust dis-
tinction introduces a forward-looking component. Our main results are robust towards dropping the boom-bust
distinction (see Table C3).
    8
      Its size distortions vary between 1 and 2.2 percentage points for sample lengths between 100 and 1,600 obser-
vations. The evolution of the size distortions over increasing sample lengths is U-shaped. The power of the test is
reported with 0.7 for T=100, 0.9 for T=200 and approaching 1 for T=1600 (Phillips, Shi, and Yu, 2015b).
    9
      The results are robust towards using quarterly data (see Table C4).
   10
      The results are virtually the same when using estimates based on the normalized price series (see Section 5.1).




                                                         10
or the real estate boom and bust cycles around 1990 in several countries.11 Table 1 provides an

overview of the number of bubble episodes resulting from the three different estimation strategies.

According to the BSADF approach, our sample comprises 33 real estate booms and 26 busts,

while it contains 45 stock market booms and 47 busts.12 On average, countries experienced 1.9

real estate booms, 1.5 real estate busts, 2.6 stock market booms, and 2.8 stock market busts.

The two alternative bubble identification strategies also find stock market bubbles to occur more

frequently than real estate bubbles. Using normalized data, the BSADF approach finds a lower

average number of stock market booms and busts per country (2.1 and 1.6) and an almost identical

average number of real estate booms and busts (1.9 and 1.6). The trend-deviation approach finds

fewer real estate booms and busts per country (1.2 and 1.3) and significantly more stock market

booms and busts (4.2 and 3.8).


                                              [Table 1 about here]


       Figure 3 displays the occurrence of booms and busts per country for our baseline bubble

estimates. Many stock market bubble episodes occur around the run-up to the global financial

crisis, the dotcom bubble, as well as the mid-1980s.13 Real estate bubbles appear to be much

more persistent, especially since the 2000s when most countries experienced a real estate bubble.

According to our estimates, real estate booms last on average five years, while the bust lasts only

one year. Stock market booms last on average less than two years, and the busts last only half

a year. The shorter lifespan of stock market bubbles is consistent with stock prices moving more

quickly than real estate prices. With the exception of the stock market bubbles between 2006 and

2008, the bubble episodes relying on normalized data generally identify similar yet shorter periods.

The stock market bubble episodes estimated using deviations from trend are again similar to those

identified by the BSADF approach. The largest differences are found for real estate bubbles in

  11
     The included countries are: Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the
Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
  12
     The number of booms and busts differs if a bubble is already in the bust phase at the beginning of our sample
period, or if a bubble is still in the boom phase at the end of the sample used in the main analysis. We can estimate
these bubble episodes since the data used for bubble identification covers a significantly longer period than the data
used in the main analyses.
  13
     The results are not driven by episodes during which a lot of countries simultaneously experience a stock market
bubble (see Table C5).



                                                         11
the second half of the sample. These occur less frequently and are less persistent compared to the

bubbles estimated with the BSADF approach (see Figures C1 and C2 in the Appendix).


                                              [Figure 3 about here]


       On the basis of the estimated bubble episodes, we calculate the bubble characteristics length

and size. Length counts the number of months a bubble has been building up since its inception,

or that it has been collapsing since its peak. During the boom phase, size is the underlying asset’s

price relative to its pre-bubble level. During the bust, size measures the size of the bust (as opposed

to the size of the bubble) as the negative of the asset’s price series relative to the current bubble

episode’s peak level. Outside of the respective bubble phases, all length and size variables are equal

to zero.

       Table 2 displays summary statistics of bubble characteristics during bubble episodes (i. e.,

conditioning on a bubble being identified). The general patterns are consistent across bubble

identification approaches. Real estate bubbles have on average been present for a longer time than

stock market bubbles, and booms are more persistent than busts. Stock market booms and busts

are on average larger than real estate booms and busts. Finally, the average size of a boom is

larger than the average size of a bust. Specifically, prices are on average 78% above the initial value

during a stock market boom, but only 38% during a real estate boom according to our baseline

BSADF approach. In a stock market bust, prices are on average 12% below the peak price, while

in a real estate bust, prices are only 6% below the peak.14


                                              [Table 2 about here]



3.3    Measuring systemic risk

       Our goal is to analyze the link between asset price bubbles and systemic risk at bank level.

There exists no single “correct” approach to quantify systemic risk at the micro level. In this paper,

  14
     Interestingly, the average bust size is very similar between our baseline BASDF estimates and the trend-deviation
approach even though the BSADF approach does not explicitly incorporate a bust criterion.



                                                         12
we rely on two prominent measures, ∆CoVaR (Adrian and Brunnermeier, 2016) and marginal ex-

pected shortfall (MES) (Acharya, Pedersen, Philippon, and Richardson, 2017).15 The combination

of both measures is appealing due to their complementary perspectives. ∆CoVaR regards banks

as “risk inducers” and quantifies the contribution of a financial institution to the system’s level of

systemic risk by estimating the additional value at risk (VaR) of the entire financial system asso-

ciated with this institution experiencing distress. Contrary to this perspective, MES treats banks

as “risk recipients” and calculates the equity losses of a bank conditional on the financial system

experiencing distress.

       In accordance with the above definition, ∆CoVaR can be written as


                                                   system|X i =V aRqi              system|X i =V aR50
                                                                                                   i
                 ∆CoV aRqsystem|i = CoV aRq                             − CoV aRq                       ,          (1)


where Xi denotes the return loss of institution i and q refers to a percentile of the loss distribution.

The VaR is implicitly defined by P r(X i ≤ V aRqi ) = q%, and CoVaR is implicitly defined by
                           system|C(X i )
P r(X system ≤ CoV aRq                      |C(X i )) = q%. Following Adrian and Brunnermeier (2016), we

estimate ∆CoVaR using quantile regressions.16 The estimation procedure is described in detail in

Appendix B.

       MES is calculated as the average bank return during the 5% days during which the financial

system exhibited the worst losses during the past year. We use overlapping windows to obtain

monthly estimates. Denoting the set of trading days with the 5% worst system returns during the

past 12 months at month t as Zsystem
                              t      , MES can be expressed as

                                                        1               X
                                   M ESti =                                      Xτi .                             (2)
                                                 # of days in Zt
                                                                    τ ∈Zsystem
                                                                        t


  15
     Alternative measures of systemic risk include the Option-iPoD (Capuano, 2008), the DIP (Huang, Zhou, and
Zhu, 2009), the measures introduced in Segoviano and Goodhart (2009) as well as in Gray and Jobst (2010), realized
systemic risk beta (Hautsch, Schaumburg, and Schienle, 2015), and SRISK (Acharya, Engle, and Richardson, 2012;
Brownlees and Engle, 2017).
  16
     For a detailed exposition of quantile regressions, see Koenker (2005). The literature suggests a number of
alternative estimation techniques: MGARCH (Girardi and Tolga Ergün, 2013), copulas (Mainik and Schaanning,
2012; Oh and Patton, 2015), maximum likelihood (Cao, 2013), and Bayesian inference (Bernardi, Gayraud, and
Petrella, 2013). All of these alternative approaches are less frequently applied than the quantile regression approach.




                                                          13
         Both measures are based on tail correlations of equity returns. As for most other systemic risk

measures, the quantified relationship is non-causal. While the measures pick up causal spillovers

from one financial institution to the system (or vice versa in case of MES), they also capture

correlated shocks that affect many banks at the same time, for example, small banks being “systemic

as part of a herd”. The common idea underlying tail-correlation measures is that the functioning

of the financial system is likely to be impaired if a large number of banks experience distress at the

same time. Given this definition of systemic risk, banks’ common exposures to shocks are equally

relevant for financial stability as spillover risks. The ability of systemic risk measures to capture

both sources of systemic risk should hence be considered a virtue rather than a bug.

         Table 3 provides summary statistics for ∆CoVaR and MES. The mean of ∆CoVaR equals

1.96 such that distress at one institution is associated with an average increase in the financial

system’s conditional value at risk of 1.96 percentage points based on weekly returns. The mean

of MES equals 1.34, meaning that, on average, a bank’s daily equity return was –1.34 percent on

days during which the financial system suffered severe market equity value losses. Figure 4 displays

the evolution of the average ∆CoVaR and MES in the four considered financial systems (North

America, Europe, Japan, and Australia) over time. Both measures evolve similarly. However,

∆CoVaR leads MES due to the use of a rolling window in the estimation of MES. Therefore, in

some regressions with MES, we lag all explanatory variables by 6 months. All four financial systems

show a marked peak in ∆CoVaR and MES at the time of the global financial crisis.17 Other times of

financial system distress, such as the euro area crisis or the Japanese banking crisis at the beginning

of the 1990s, are visible as well. In contrast, the dotcom episode is hardly reflected in the series.


                                                 [Table 3 about here]


                                                 [Figure 4 about here]


3.4      Bank-level variables and macroeconomic controls

         We include bank characteristics in our analysis that have been shown to drive an institution’s

systemic risk contribution, such as size (the logarithm of total assets), leverage (total assets divided

 17
      Despite its prominence, this crisis does not drive our results (see Section 6.3).



                                                            14
by equity), and maturity mismatch (short-term liabilities minus short-term assets, divided by total

assets). Additionally, we consider the role of loan growth (∆log(loans)), as credit-fueled bubbles

have been shown to be particularly harmful (Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor, 2015b; Brunnermeier

and Schnabel, 2016).18 We apply cubic spline interpolations to obtain monthly observations. The

bank-level variables enter the regressions winsorized at the 1 and 99-percent level to deal, for

example, with extreme leverage of defaulting institutions and high loan growth of institutions

starting from a very low loan level.

       The median bank in our sample is small with total assets of around 1.9 billion US dollar, and

size varies greatly (Table 3).19 Average and median loan growth is close to zero, but our sample

contains many observations with high positive and high negative growth rates. The median bank

has a leverage of 12 and a median maturity mismatch of 0.75, again with a wide variation.

       With respect to macroeconomic control variables, we observe a banking crisis during 36 per-

cent of observations. Median real GDP growth and inflation are 2.3 and 2.1 percent. The median

10-year government bond rate is 4.5 percent and median investment-to-GDP growth is slightly pos-

itive. Looking at the 5th and 95th percentile of the distribution, we can see that the sample includes

severe recessions as well as strong booms, mirroring the diverse macroeconomic developments of

the 17 countries over the sample period of almost thirty years.

3.5    Empirical model

       We regress systemic risk (measured by ∆CoVaR or MES) of institution i at time t on bank

fixed effects (αi ), the four binary variables indicating booms and busts in stock and real estate
          Bubble ) in country c at time t, lagged bank characteristics, the interaction terms of the
markets (Ic,t

bubble indicators with bank and bubble characteristics, and the lagged country-specific macroeco-

  18
     The literature suggests that bank activities not related to lending may also be relevant (see, e. g., Brunnermeier,
Dong, and Palia, 2012). Therefore, we also included the ratio of non-interest rate income to interest rate income
in our regressions. However, this variable and its interactions with the bubble indicators are not significant in any
regression (see Table C6) and do not change any coefficient of the other variables significantly. Therefore, we disregard
this variable in the remainder of this paper.
  19
     In Section 6.2, we check whether the link between small and large banks’ systemic risk contributions and asset
price bubbles differs beyond what is captured by controlling for total assets.




                                                           15
nomic control variables (Cc,t−1 ). We do not need to include non-interacted bubble characteristics

as they are zero outside of bubble episodes.


                                       Bubble
         Systemic riski,t = αi + β1 · Ic,t    + γ · Bank characteristicsi,t−1
                                        Bubble
                                + β2 · Ic,t    · Bank characteristicsi,t−1
                                        Bubble
                                + β3 · Ic,t    · Bubble characteristicsc,t + λ · Cc,t−1 + ui,t .    (3)



      Larger values of ∆CoVaR (MES) correspond to a higher systemic risk contribution (expo-

sure). Hence, we expect a positive sign for all coefficients included in β, corresponding to an increase

in systemic risk during asset price bubbles. The relationship between bubbles and systemic risk is

likely to depend on an institution’s balance sheet characteristics, which is captured by the inter-

action terms. We expect a stronger relationship between bubbles and systemic risk for banks with

unfavorable bank characteristics. For instance, if a bubble is financed by loans, higher loan growth

raises a bank’s exposure to the bubble and should thus also raise its systemic risk contribution.

Similarly, the relationship may depend on bubble characteristics. For example, an emerging asset

price bubble might be more harmful the longer it has lasted already because it may feed back into

banks’ risk-taking and thereby become self-reinforcing. In contrast, after a longer bust phase, the

bubble may be less harmful because the shock fades out.

      We do not include time fixed effects in the baseline regressions because these would absorb

part of the variation that we are interested in. To clarify the argument, suppose we had only

two countries in the sample that exhibit a bubble at the same time and banks experience the

same increase in systemic risk. With time fixed effects, the coefficients of the bubble indicators

would capture the change in systemic risk relative to the average of the two countries. Then, the

coefficients on the bubble indicators would suggest no change in systemic risk during asset price

bubbles (relative to the global average). In Section 6.1, we analyze the robustness of our results

with respect to time and country-time fixed effects and find that most results continue to hold.

      We subtract the median from all bank-level variables and bubble characteristics such that the

coefficients on the bubble indicators can be interpreted as the change in systemic risk contributions



                                                  16
(or exposures) of a bank of median size, loan growth, leverage, and maturity mismatch during a

boom or bust of median size and length.

      On country level, we include a banking crisis dummy, real GDP growth to capture national

business cycles, and inflation, which has been identified as a factor contributing to the occurrence of

financial crises (Demirgüç-Kunt and Detragiache, 1998).20 The 10-year government bond rates (in

logs) account for the nexus between sovereigns and banks. In a robustness check (not reported), we

use monetary policy rates instead, as extended periods of low rates can cause the build-up of risks

in the financial sector by driving banks into overly risky investments and inadequate risk buffers

(Diamond and Rajan, 2012).21 Our results are robust to the choice of the interest rate. Growth of

investment to GDP is included to control for the use of credit for investment versus consumption

(see Schularick and Taylor, 2012).

      One concern in our empirical model could be reverse causality. This problem appears less

severe than in analyses at macroeconomic level because systemic risk contributions at bank level are

less likely to impact asset price bubbles than aggregate systemic risk. Nevertheless, it is plausible

that banks themselves play a role in the creation of asset price bubbles. Cheap financing during

a credit boom may lead to large real estate investments which may culminate in, or reinforce, a

real estate bubble. Since we explicitly control for banks’ loan growth, this would not bias our

results. To further alleviate the concern of reserve causality, we also control for a number of

other bank characteristics and, in some specifications, further lags of the explanatory variables.22

These precautions make it less likely that our estimates suffer from reverse causality. In another

robustness check, we estimate simple linear probability models and run Granger causality tests to

check whether ∆CoVaR or MES predict asset price bubbles. We do not find any indication of

reverse causality in these tests (see Tables C8 and C9). Nevertheless, we are conservative in the

interpretation of our results and speak of an increase in systemic risk during rather than due to

asset price bubbles throughout the paper.

 20
    In Section 6.4, we account for business cycles more extensively, but find our results to be highly robust.
 21
    Also see the discussion in the context of the recent financial crisis in Deutsche Bundesbank (2014).
 22
    Table C7 demonstrates that our results are also robust to using different lag structures.




                                                         17
         Standard errors are clustered at bank and time level. The clustering at bank level accounts

for autocorrelation, including that introduced by interpolation of the data. The clustering at time

level allows error terms to be correlated across banks in all countries, which is important in light of

several countries experiencing asset price bubbles at similar times. Since the precise timing of asset

price booms and busts differs across countries, the bubble indicators show, however, variation in

the cross-sectional dimension even for those countries that experience asset price bubbles in similar

periods. The results are robust to alternative clustering of standard errors (see Table C10).


4        Results

4.1      Asset price bubbles and systemic risk in booms and busts

         We start by illustrating the underlying conditional correlations without allowing for hetero-

geneous effects across banks. To this end, we regress ∆CoVaR on the bubble indicators, macroe-

conomic control variables, and bank fixed effects. The coefficients of all four bubble indicators are

positive and highly significant (Table 4, column 1). Overall, asset price bubbles are associated

with a significant increase in systemic risk, which is in line with our hypothesis. The strongest

relationship is found for real estate busts.

         When looking at individual countries (results not reported), we find a significant positive

association between asset price bubbles and systemic risk for twelve out of 17 countries in our

sample. The relationship is insignificant in four countries and significantly negative only in a single

country and only in the boom period.23 Hence, the underlying correlation is pervasive in our sample

and not driven by individual countries.


                                             [Table 4 about here]


         When adding bank-level variables, the coefficients of the bubble indicators change, but the

signs and significance prevail (Table 4, column 2). The coefficients of real estate booms and busts

    23
    The negative correlation is found for asset price bubbles in Denmark. Insignificant correlations are estimated
for Switzerland, Germany, Portugal and Sweden. These results are obtained without distinguishing between asset
classes due to the low number of bubble episodes per country for each asset class.




                                                       18
decrease, while those on stock market booms and busts increase slightly. This may hint at a larger

relevance of bank characteristics during real estate bubbles compared to stock market bubbles,

which is explored further in the subsequent section.

       The signs of the coefficients of macroeconomic control variables are largely in line with ex-

pectations. Systemic risk is significantly elevated during banking crises and decreases in real GDP

growth. Higher investment-to-GDP growth is negatively related to systemic risk. The positive co-

efficient of inflation is insignificant, but points in the expected direction. The 10-year government

bond rate is negative and insignificant when bank controls are included. The coefficients of bank-

level controls are in line with the previous literature. As in Adrian and Brunnermeier (2016), the

systemic risk contributions increase in the size of an institution as well as in leverage, but decrease

in an institution’s maturity mismatch.24 Only the coefficient of loan growth is insignificant.

4.2    The role of bank and bubble characteristics

       The results presented above provide first evidence of higher systemic risk during bubble

episodes and underline the importance of bank-level characteristics for banks’ systemic risk contri-

butions. We go one step further and ask what is the role of bank and bubble characteristics for the

relationship between asset price bubbles and systemic risk.

       Columns 1 to 4 of Table 5 report regression results including one bank-level variable at a

time and the respective interactions with the bubble indicators. In Column 5, all four bank-level

variables and their interactions with the bubble indicators are included jointly. In columns 6 and

7, we add the two bubble characteristics, leading to our baseline regression in Equation (3).


                                             [Table 5 about here]


       The inclusion of interaction terms leaves the coefficients of the bubble indicators qualitatively

unchanged. However, it alters their interpretation as they now refer to a bank with median bank

(and bubble) characteristics. The interpretation of the coefficients of bank characteristics changes

as well. They now refer to normal times, i. e., outside of bubble episodes.

  24
    Adrian and Brunnermeier (2016) define the maturity mismatch inversely to our definition such that the different
sign of the corresponding coefficient in our paper is in line with the respective finding in that paper.



                                                        19
      The estimated coefficients of bank characteristics during non-bubble times are similar to those

in previous regressions. While larger bank size and leverage go along with higher systemic risk,

maturity mismatch is associated with lower systemic risk, regardless of whether we include only

one of the bank characteristics (columns 1 to 4) or all four at the same time (column 5). Loan

growth is highly significant with a negative sign, implying that higher loan growth goes along with

lower systemic risk in normal times. This finding, which proves to be very robust throughout the

analysis, is suggestive of healthy loan growth outside of bubble periods.

      Interestingly, the relationship between bank characteristics and systemic risk contributions

changes markedly during bubble episodes. For example, size is associated with larger increases in

systemic risk contributions during real estate and stock market busts and, to a lesser extent, also

during stock market booms (column 5). Hence, large banks’ contributions to systemic risk appear

to be particularly large during asset price bubbles, as would have been expected due to their greater

power to spread risks throughout the financial system. Loan growth is less benign in bubble episodes

than in normal times. While the relationship between loan growth and systemic risk is negative in

normal times, this relationship vanishes during bubble episodes. During real estate busts, systemic

risk contributions even increase in lending growth, as the sum of the coefficients of loan growth

and its interaction with the bust indicators becomes positive and statistically significant (column 5,

test not reported). This stresses the dangers for financial stability of high lending growth during

bubble episodes when rising prices induce unhealthy lending, the risks of which materialize in the

bust. Similarly, the regressions show a significantly less negative relationship between maturity

mismatch and systemic risk during all types of bubble episodes when all bank characteristics are

included (column 5). Hence, higher maturity mismatch appears more problematic during bubble

episodes. The results on leverage are more mixed as its interaction has a significantly positive

coefficient only during real estate booms, while it is not statistically significant during real estate

busts and significantly negative during stock market bubbles (column 5). Overall, these regressions

strongly support the relevance of banks’ balance sheet characteristics for the relationship between

asset price bubbles and systemic risk.

      When adding bubble length and bubble size to our analysis (columns 6 and 7), these results

regarding bank characteristics during and outside of bubble episodes remain almost identical. For


                                                  20
bubble characteristics, we find that during stock market booms the coefficients of length and size

are positive and significant. This is plausible as longer booms are likely to lead to a larger build-up

of imbalances in the financial system and larger booms have the potential for a more pronounced

bust after the burst. Since length and size are highly correlated during the emergence of stock

market bubbles (0.97), it is impossible to distinguish their effects empirically. The coefficients of

size and length are insignificant during real estate booms. The increase in systemic risk during

these episodes appears to depend more on bank than on bubble characteristics. During both real

estate and stock market busts, the coefficients of the two bubble characteristics are negative and,

with the exception of bubble size during stock market busts, statistically significant. This could be

explained by a fading out of the initial shock of the burst and policy interventions alleviating the

consequences of the burst at later stages of the bust.

4.3   Economic significance

      We now analyze the economic significance of the observed increase in systemic risk during

bubble episodes and discuss the quantitative importance of bank and bubble characteristics. During

a stock market boom or bust with median bubble characteristics, ∆CoVaR increases by around

0.37 percentage points relative to normal times for a bank of median size, loan growth, leverage,

and maturity mismatch (average of columns 6 and 7 in Table 5). This corresponds to 22 percent

(=0.37/1.68) of the median level of ∆CoVaR. The corresponding increases associated with the

boom and bust of real estate bubbles amount to 6 and 15 percent, respectively.

      From a financial stability perspective, we are more concerned about extreme events, i. e.,

about a bank like Lehman Brothers during the US subprime housing bubble rather than some av-

erage bank during a median bubble. To account for this heterogeneity, we quantify the dependence

of the systemic risk increase on bank and bubble characteristics. The boxplots in Figure 5 illustrate

the distribution of the increase in systemic risk relative to the median of ∆CoVaR. Specifically,

it depicts the median increase (white horizontal line in each box), the 75th and 25th percentile

(upper and lower end of each box), and the 95th and 5th percentile of the increase in systemic

risk (whiskers) in dependence of bank and bubble characteristics. Note that there is no reason to

expect the largest bank to also exhibit the largest loan growth, leverage, and maturity mismatch,



                                                  21
such that the range depending on all bank characteristics is smaller than the sum of the ranges of

individual bank characteristics. Moreover, as bubble length and size are highly correlated, their

effects do not add up. Since we cannot simultaneously include bubble length and size due to the

high correlation of both variables, the figure is based on the average of the estimated coefficients

in our two baseline regressions (Table 5, columns 6 and 7).

      The boxplots yield some interesting insights. It is striking that, with the exception of stock

market booms, the increase in systemic risk depends much more on bank than on bubble charac-

teristics. This corresponds well to the narrative of the rather small shock from the US subprime

housing bubble that was amplified due to imbalances in the financial sector. Comparing boom and

bust phases, the bust phases exhibit a larger median increase in systemic risk, but also a larger

range of the increase. Hence, an emerging asset price bubble goes along with increased financial

fragility, yet it is only during the bust phase that the full risk associated with the bubble material-

izes. During real estate busts, the 95th percentile of the increase in systemic risk in dependence of

balance sheet characteristics amounts to 55 percent of the median of ∆CoVaR, the 99th percentile

to almost 70 percent. For stock market busts, the corresponding increases are 46 and 56 percent,

respectively.

      The most important factor driving the heterogeneity of effects during bubble episodes is bank

size, especially during bust phases. This is plausible as a large bank under distress due to the burst

of an asset price bubble has a much higher potential to transmit this distress to the rest of the

financial system. The systemic risk contribution of a bank with bank size at the 95th percentile of

the size distribution increases by approximately 70 percent of the median of ∆CoVaR during real

estate busts and by almost 60 percent during stock market busts.

      To put these estimates further into perspective, we predict ∆CoVaR for Lehman Brothers

once with the actual values of all variables and once assuming no bubble had been present. Accord-

ing to our estimation, at the time of the burst of the US subprime housing bubble, the systemic

risk posed by Lehman Brothers would have been 40 percent lower if the bubble had not existed.

      These results do not support the view that real estate bubbles are generally more harmful

than their stock market counterparts. Instead, the ordering depends on bank characteristics. While,


                                                  22
for example, stock market busts appear to be more harmful than real estate busts at median

bank characteristics, the latter are more harmful at sufficiently unfavorable bank characteristics.

Moreover, our results support the view that developments within the financial sector are more

relevant than a bubble’s asset class, as has already been argued by Brunnermeier and Schnabel

(2016).


                                        [Figure 5 about here]



5     Results for alternative measures

      Our baseline results are based on regressions using one identification procedure for asset price

bubbles and one specific measure of systemic risk. While the measures we rely on are widely used,

others constitute reasonable alternatives. Therefore, we repeat our regressions using alternative

measures of asset price bubbles and systemic risk.

5.1   Results using alternative bubble measures

      We first repeat our main analyses using the alternative bubble measures, applying the BSADF

approach to price-to-rent and price-to-dividend data, or the trend-deviation approach (see Sec-

tion 3.2). Table 6 restates our two baseline regressions alongside estimates obtained from an

identical specification, but using the alternative bubble measures.

      Compared to the baseline results (columns 1 and 2), the regressions using bubbles identified

through the BSADF test applied to normalized price data (columns 3 and 4) confirm most of our

previous findings, with slightly lower significance levels. Again, all bubble episodes are associated

with increased systemic risk at median bank and bubble characteristics. Moreover, systemic risk

contributions increase in bank size, decrease in maturity mismatch, and do not significantly differ in

leverage during normal times. The coefficients of loan growth remain negative but turn insignificant.

During bubble episodes, we once more see that the increase in systemic risk during real estate busts

and stock market booms and busts is more pronounced for larger banks. Only during real estate

boom phases, it is still less pronounced, but it now turns significant. The relationship between

loan growth and systemic risk during bubble episodes remains positive but becomes less significant


                                                 23
during real estate bubbles and more significant during stock market booms. In economic terms,

however, the relationship remains small (see Figure C3). The results on leverage remain mixed.

For maturity mismatch, there is no significantly different relationship during real estate bubbles

anymore, while results on stock market bubbles are unchanged.

      The results on bubble characteristics are again similar. Some bubble characteristics lose

significance, suggesting a higher relevance of bank characteristics. Only the coefficient on the size

of real estate busts changes its sign, a finding that only appears in this particular specification.

As before, bust phases of the bubble exhibit a higher level and a higher range of the systemic risk

increase compared to the boom phases. Bank size remains the most relevant driver of the increase

in systemic risk contributions (see Figure C3).

      The results based on bubbles estimated with the trend-deviation approach are very similar

to those using the normalized price series, with one important exception. The increase in systemic

risk during real estate bubbles is much smaller. At median bank and bubble characteristics, real

estate bubbles are not associated with increased systemic risk. This could be driven by the much

smaller number of observations for real estate bubbles (see Figure C2). In fact, standard errors are

now much larger, while coefficients are not that much smaller. Moreover, as argued before, extreme

cases are more relevant than average bubble episodes. In case of unfavorable bubble characteristics,

the results again show a significant increase in ∆CoVaR by 53 percent of its median (see Figure C4).


                                        [Table 6 about here]


      Hence, despite some quantitative differences, the regressions with the alternative bubble

measures support the finding that systemic risk increases during asset price bubbles, especially

for unfavorable bank characteristics. As before, bank size stands out, while the results on bubble

characteristics are slightly weaker than before, at least for real estate bubbles.

5.2   Results using MES as an alternative systemic risk measure

      To assess whether the results depend on the choice of systemic risk measure, we repeat our

baseline regressions using MES instead of ∆CoVaR. In the interpretation, one has to keep in mind


                                                  24
the conceptual differences between the two measures. MES quantifies the average return loss of a

financial institution during the 5 percent days with the worst financial system returns during the

past year. Hence, a higher MES signals a larger systemic risk exposure of a bank. In contrast,

a higher ∆CoVaR stands for a larger systemic risk contribution of a bank. Based on the similar

evolution of ∆CoVaR and MES in the aggregate (see Figure 4), we expect MES to also increase

during bubble episodes. In contrast, due to the conceptual differences, there is no reason to expect

the same relationships with bank characteristics. In fact, ∆CoVaR has been shown to react more

to the size of banks, while other measures are driven more by leverage (see, e. g., Benoit, Colletaz,

Hurlin, and Pérignon, 2013).

      Table 7 displays the results from re-running our baseline regressions with MES instead of

∆CoVaR as dependent variable. As in our baseline regressions, systemic risk increases during

stock market bubbles at median bank and bubble characteristics. For real estate bubbles, the

increase in systemic risk is significant only for the bust phase and only when lagged data series are

used, but then with a very large coefficient.

      The coefficients on bank characteristics in normal times are also similar to before.        As

∆CoVaR, MES increases in bank size and decreases in loan growth and maturity mismatch outside

of bubble episodes. Leverage now has a significantly negative effect in columns 1 and 2 suggesting

a higher systemic risk exposure for better capitalized banks. This may reflect the fact that better

capitalized banks can afford to be riskier and therefore take higher asset risk.

      Again, the relationship between asset price bubbles and systemic risk depends on bank char-

acteristics but in different ways than before. Large banks now show a smaller systemic risk exposure

during real estate booms. This is plausible as large banks are often less active in mortgage lending

than smaller banks. In contrast, large banks are highly exposed during stock market busts, which

is consistent with a higher share of market-based activities. Hence, while large banks are typi-

cally greater risk spreaders during bubble episodes, their exposure to systemic risk may actually

be smaller in some cases.

      Unlike for ∆CoVaR, the relationship between loan growth and MES during asset price bub-

bles is not statistically different from normal times. Hence, loan growth during asset price bubbles


                                                 25
appears to increase banks’ potential to contribute risk to the financial system but not their exposure

to systemic risk. The results on leverage point more strongly in a risk-increasing direction. Higher

leverage is associated with a higher risk exposure especially during real estate booms, suggesting

that poorly capitalized banks become highly vulnerable in such periods. Somewhat surprisingly,

the sign reverses during stock market busts. The findings regarding the interactions between ma-

turity mismatch and the bubble indicators show another noteworthy difference. The corresponding

interactions with real estate booms and busts are still significantly positive or insignificant. The

interactions with stock market booms and busts, however, are now negative and significant. This

could reflect the fact that banks with a stronger focus on the traditional banking business involving

higher maturity transformation are less susceptible to market risk especially during stock market

bubbles. If the overall effect of maturity mismatch during bubble episodes is considered (i. e., the

sum of the single and the interaction term), the relationship between the maturity mismatch and

systemic risk is negative or insignificant for both MES and ∆CoVaR.

      Looking at bubble characteristics, the results are very similar to before. During a stock

market boom, MES increases in bubble size and length, pointing towards the potential for a more

pronounced bust. MES decreases in bubble size and length during the bust phase of stock market

and real estate bubbles. Hence, we again see a fading impact of the burst, potentially due to policy

measures alleviating financial sector distress.

      Considering economic significance, the results are very similar (see Figure C5). As before,

the boxplots corresponding to the regression results show a larger dependence of the increase in

systemic risk on bank than on bubble characteristics . For MES, this ordering also applies during

stock market booms. Bust phases exhibit larger increases in systemic risk. And bank size is a

dominant factor driving the heterogeneity of effects. Hence, while the specific interpretation of the

interaction terms differs due to the different interpretations of the two measures, the main finding

regarding the important role of bank characteristics is highly robust.


                                        [Table 7 about here]




                                                  26
6         Further robustness checks

           In this section, we assess the robustness of our baseline results in several directions. First, we

account for ∆CoVaR’s variation coming from developments at macro level by considering additional

control variables, additional fixed effects, and an alternative estimation strategy for ∆CoVaR.

Second, we analyze the sensitivity of results with respect to banks’ size by considering sample

splits and, alternatively, by weighting observations by bank size. Third, we evaluate whether the

results are driven by particular episodes such as the global financial crisis, which stands out due to

its spike in systemic risk.

6.1         Controlling for additional variation at macro level

           In this subsection we check whether the results in the regressions using ∆CoVaR depend on

the specific properties of this measure, in particular the inclusion of macroeconomic variables in the

estimation. The motivation for these additional analyses becomes apparent when writing ∆CoVaR

as


                                                       i
                                                ∆CoV aRq,t = σqi + ωqi Mt−1 ,                                        (4)


                    system|i                              system|i
where σqi = β̂q                          i ) and ω i = β̂
                               (α̂qi − α̂50       q       q
                                                                               i ).25 While the cross-sectional variation
                                                                     (γ̂qi − γ̂50

in ∆CoVaR is driven by bank-specific factors, its time series variation is driven by the system

variables Mt−1 (see Equation (4)). These variables vary over time at the financial system level (see

Appendix B). While none of these variables are directly related to real estate price dynamics, the

variables include stock market returns and volatility. This may not be a concern during stock market

booms, as ∆CoVaR relies on conditional correlations in the left tail of the return distributions of

the financial system and individual banks. It may, however, raise concerns regarding our estimates

on stock market busts. In this robustness check, we therefore want to exclude that the results are

driven by a mechanical correlation due to stock market returns and volatilities being included in

both the systemic risk estimation and the bubble estimation.

    25
         The expression can be derived by substituting Equation (B3) in Equation (B6) (see Appendix B).




                                                               27
      Columns 1 and 2 of Table 8 restate our baseline results from Table 5 (columns 6 and 7). In

columns 3 and 4 of this table, we add the stock market return and volatility included in Mt−1 as

additional controls to absorb the corresponding variation (coefficients of controls not displayed).

The coefficients of the real estate bubble indicators prove to be fully robust. However, the coefficient

of the stock market boom indicator becomes smaller, and the one on stock market busts even

insignificant. Hence, it cannot be ruled out that the estimated increase in systemic risk during

stock market bubbles is partly driven by the involvement of the stock market return and volatility

during the estimation of the systemic risk measure. At the same time, the coefficients of all

bank characteristics and their interactions with the bubble indicators are remarkably robust. The

coefficients of the variables capturing bubble characteristics are also similar but become smaller

in absolute terms. This further supports the larger relevance of bank characteristics compared to

bubble characteristics for the increase in systemic risk. As before, real estate busts go along with

a larger increase in systemic risk than stock market busts for unfavorable bank characteristics. In

this robustness check, this ordering also applies for the bust phases at median bank characteristics.

      Next, we add country-time fixed effects to our baseline regression instead of the stock-price

related financial system variables. In this specification (column 5 of Table 8), the bubble indicators,

bubble characteristics, and macroeconomic control variables drop out as they vary only at country-

time level. However, we can assess the robustness of our results regarding the bank-level variables

as well as their interactions with the bubble indicators. The statistical significance of the estimated

coefficients is reduced due to the reduction in the degrees of freedom. At the same time, the

basic results are again maintained remarkably well, which provides strong support for our previous

findings.


                                         [Table 8 about here]


      We perform an additional robustness check to address ∆CoVaR’s dependence on the financial

system variables Mt−1 by modifying ∆CoVaR’s estimation procedure. So far, ∆CoVaR relied

on estimates of financial institutions’ VaR (see Equation (B3)). This estimated VaR introduces

∆CoVaR’s dependence on financial system variables (see Equation (4)). As an alternative, we now



                                                  28
calculate financial institutions’ VaR directly from their past equity returns using one-year rolling

windows. The windows are overlapping, as they move forward on a monthly basis. All other

estimation details remain unchanged. The rolling ∆CoVaR can be expressed as


                                    i
                             ∆CoV aRq,t = β̂qsystem|i (V aRq,t
                                                           i         i
                                                               − V aR50,t ),                       (5)


where we drop the hats of the VaR as it is now calculated as opposed to estimated. The time

variation in both the calculated VaR and the rolling ∆CoVaR is independent of the financial system

variables Mt−1 . These variables are now exclusively used to control for general risk factors when

estimating the dependence between bank returns and financial system returns (see Equation (B4)).

      While the mean and the median of this rolling version of ∆CoVaR are slightly lower (1.59

and 1.23 vs. 1.96 and 1.68), the standard deviation is slightly higher (1.77 vs. 1.65). The evolution

of the average rolling ∆CoVaR in all four financial systems is similar to its original counterpart.

As before, there is a pronounced peak at the time of the global financial crisis. The euro area crisis

and the Japanese banking crisis at the beginning of the 1990s show spikes, while the dotcom bubble

is hardly recognizable in the US series (see Figure C6).

      We re-estimate our baseline regression with the rolling ∆CoVaR as dependent variable. As

shown in columns 6 and 7 of Table 8, there is a significant increase in systemic risk in all bubble

episodes, as in our baseline regressions. The magnitudes are higher for real estate bubbles and

slightly lower for stock market bubbles. While some of the further variables experience changes in

their significance levels, the overall results are again robust.

      We also run regressions with time fixed effects to account for global factors (Table C11,

columns 3 and 4). As expected, the increase in systemic risk during bust episodes turns insignificant

at the median level of bank and bubble characteristics, as the bust phases are generally shorter and

often show up simultaneously to bust phases in other countries such that the remaining variation is

highly limited (see Figure 3). All other main results, particulary the significant increase in systemic

risk for unfavorable bank characteristics, are confirmed. This also applies when we consider the full

bubble episodes without distinguishing between boom and bust phases (see Table C3, column 2).




                                                   29
6.2   Large and small banks

      In a next step, we analyze whether the results differ between large and small banks. This

distinction serves three purposes. First, as mentioned in Section 3, the dataset is dominated by

relatively small banks, which are mostly located in the US (see Table C2). Small US banks are

much more frequently listed than, e. g., small European banks. Therefore, this robustness check can

also rule out that our results are driven by small US banks. Second, in the baseline regressions, we

assume that a bank is affected only by a bubble in its home country. For large and internationally

active banks, this assumption may be rather strong. A focus on small, locally active banks allows

us to address this potential concern because for them the assumption is more appropriate. Third,

small and large banks display different business models and dynamics, which might not be fully

captured by bank fixed effects and the bank size variable.

      For the analyses, we first split the sample into large and small banks. In order to avoid banks

switching groups over time, the split is based on a bank’s mean size over the sample period. Banks

with a mean size below (above) 30 billion USD are considered as small (large). The results are

robust to the choice of the cut-off value. While the dominance of US banks is mitigated substantially

in the sample of large banks, the same is not true for the sample of small banks. Therefore, we

drop the smallest US banks (again based on mean bank size) such that the number of observations

from the US is no larger than that of the country with the second largest number of observations on

small banks (France). In these regressions, we use the logarithm of ∆CoVaR as dependent variable

in order to make the size of the estimated coefficients comparable across bank groups.

      Columns 1 and 2 of Table 9 display the results for large banks, columns 3 and 4 those for

small banks. We find that the results for both bank groups are very similar to each other and

to our baseline estimates. There is, however, one interesting exception. The increase in systemic

risk during real estate booms is statistically significant only for the group of small banks. This

may be due to mortgage lending being a core activity of small banks while large banks’ business

models are more diversified. While some of the other coefficients lose significance, which may be

due to the strongly reduced sample size, the results for both bank groups are very similar to our

baseline regression. We can thus exclude that our results are driven by small banks or by the large



                                                 30
number of US observations. Moreover, our previous results do not appear to be driven by asset

price bubbles emerging outside of their home country, as they equally apply to small banks, which

are only locally active.

      As a further robustness check, we re-run our baseline regressions including the full sample of

banks, weighting each bank’s observations with their mean bank size relative to the size of their

financial system. Thereby, we simultaneously limit the relevance of observations of small banks

and eliminate the US bias in our sample. The results are reported in columns 5 and 6 of Table 9.

While the increase in systemic risk during real estate booms again turns insignificant at median

bank and bubble characteristics (similar to columns 1 and 2), the general results are once more

well in line with our previous findings. Overall, our results do not seem to be driven by banks of

particular size.


                                        [Table 9 about here]



6.3   Choice of sample period

      We then re-estimate our baseline regressions for different sample periods to exclude that the

results are driven by particular bubble episodes. First, we run the regressions excluding observations

before 1995, as the number of banks is relatively small in the beginning of our sample, which may

make this period less representative. As shown in Table 10, the results are highly robust to the

exclusion of the initial period of our sample (columns 3 and 4). While the relationship between

systemic risk and real estate booms turns insignificant at median bank and bubble characteristics,

the signs and significance levels of all other coefficients are almost always identical to the baseline

regression shown in columns 1 and 2.

      Second, one may worry that the results are unduly affected by the global financial crisis.

Moreover, real estate bubbles are more frequent during the second half of our sample. One might

be concerned about a structural break leading to both the occurrence of real estate bubbles and

increased systemic risk. A visual inspection of Figure 4, which displays the development of ∆CoVaR

over time, does not reveal a general increase in systemic risk when abstracting from the financial



                                                  31
crisis. Excluding the global financial crisis yields an even stronger relationship between systemic

risk and real estate busts (Table 10, columns 5 and 6). The remaining results are again highly

robust. Consequently, none of our results appears to be driven by particular bubble episodes.


                                       [Table 10 about here]



6.4   Business cycles

      In a final robustness check, we attempt to better account for business cycles. In our regres-

sions, we take account of the development of the real economy by controlling for GDP growth.

However, this variable may not fully capture business cycles. While parts of the recent litera-

ture have argued that business cycles and financial cycles have become less connected in recent

years (e. g., Drehmann, Borio, and Tsatsaronis, 2012), this may not be true for our entire sample.

Therefore, we use data on turning points of business cycles provided by the OECD to construct an

indicator variable that equals one during the boom phase of the business cycle, and zero otherwise.

      We plot business cycles alongside bubble boom and bust episodes. The visual inspection

reveals no significant synchronization between business and financial cycles (see Figure C7). In

fact, business cycle booms exhibit a small negative correlation with stock market and real estate

booms in our sample (see Table C12, columns 1 and 3). As an additional check, we re-estimate our

baseline regressions including the business cycle boom indicator. Only few coefficients change their

significance levels, and all main results continue to hold, which confirms our previous findings (see

Table 11).


                                       [Table 11 about here]



7     Conclusion

      Employing a broad sample of banks in 17 OECD countries over the period 1987 to 2015, this

paper empirically analyzes the relationship between asset price bubbles and systemic risk. While

most of the previous empirical literature has approached this question at macroeconomic level, we



                                                 32
provide evidence on the relationship between asset price bubbles and systemic risk at the level of

individual financial institutions. This allows us to assess the allocation of risks across banks, which

is crucial for detecting the sources of financial fragility.

      Our results show that asset price bubbles are indeed associated with increased systemic risk

at bank level. This relationship is not limited to the turmoil following the burst of a bubble, but

it exists already during its emergence. We find that the increase in systemic risk depends strongly

on bank characteristics. Higher loan growth, a stronger maturity mismatch, and especially larger

bank size tend to make financial institutions, and hence the financial system, vulnerable to asset

price bubbles. The size and length of asset price booms and busts matter as well, albeit to a lesser

extent. The increase in systemic risk is largest during real estate busts, especially for unfavorable

balance sheet characteristics: The 95th percentile of the increase in systemic risk in dependence of

balance sheet characteristics is equal to 55 percent of the median of ∆CoVaR, the 99th percentile

to almost 70 percent.

      To put the economic significance of the increase in systemic risk further into perspective, a

back of the envelope calculation for the time of the burst of the US subprime housing bubble shows

that the systemic risk posed by the distress of Lehman Brothers would have been 40 percent lower

if the bubble had not existed. Overall, the highest increases in systemic risk are found in real estate

busts for banks with unfavorable balance sheet characteristics.

      The main results are robust across different bubble and systemic risk measures. While real

estate bubbles appear less problematic at median bank and bubble characteristics when using a

trend-deviation approach, all types of bubbles show sharp increases in systemic risk for unfavorable

balance sheet characteristics. When using MES instead of ∆CoVaR as a measure of systemic risk,

the specific relationship with bank characteristics changes in line with the conceptual differences

between the two measures. But as with ∆CoVaR, busts show larger increases in systemic risk than

booms, and the increases are strongly related to banks’ characteristics, especially bank size. When

accounting for the systemic risk measures’ dependence on aggregate equity market returns and

volatilities, the increase in systemic risk during stock market busts becomes smaller. Our results

are not driven by particular episodes, such as the US subprime housing bubble and the following



                                                    33
global financial crisis, or by business cycle effects. Neither are they specific to certain countries

or a particular group of banks. Hence, the results appear to be robust across a broad range of

robustness checks.

      While we do not explicitly analyze the role of financial regulation, a number of results deserve

particular attention. First, and most importantly, an important part of the vulnerability from asset

price bubbles stems from differences across banks. The relationship between bank size and increases

in systemic risk during bubble episodes is particularly strong. Second, systemic risk rises already

in the boom phase. Bubble size and length play a noticeable role in the build-up of systemic risk,

especially in stock market booms, such that a more harmful collapse can be expected after larger

and longer-lasting bubbles. Finally, stock market bubbles cannot entirely be dismissed as a source

of financial instability because their fallout may be substantial as well, especially for weak bank

characteristics.




                                                 34
References
Acharya, V. V., R. Engle, and M. Richardson (2012): “Capital Shortfall: A New Approach
  to Ranking and Regulating Systemic Risks,” American Economic Review, 102(3), 59–64.

Acharya, V. V., D. Gale, and T. Yorulmazer (2011): “Rollover Risk and Market Freezes,”
  The Journal of Finance, 66(4), 1177–1209.

Acharya, V. V., L. H. Pedersen, T. Philippon, and M. Richardson (2017): “Measuring
  Systemic Risk,” Review of Financial Studies, 30(1), 2–47.

Acharya, V. V., and S. Viswanathan (2011): “Leverage, Moral Hazard, and Liquidity,” The
  Journal of Finance, 66(1), 99–138.

Adrian, T., and M. K. Brunnermeier (2016): “CoVaR,” American Economic Review, 106(7),
  1705–1741.

Adrian, T., and H. S. Shin (2010): “Liquidity and leverage,” Journal of Financial Intermedia-
  tion, 19(3), 418–437.

Allen, F., A. Babus, and E. Carletti (2012): “Financial Connections and Systemic Risk,” in
  Market Institutions and Financial Market Risk, ed. by M. Carey, A. Kashyap, R. G. Rajan, and
  R. M. Stulz, NBER Books. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Allen, F., and D. Gale (1994): “Limited Market Participaton and Volatility of Asset Prices,”
  American Economic Review, 84(4), 933–955.

         (2007): Understanding Financial Crises. Oxford University Press Inc., New York.

Allen, L., T. G. Bali, and Y. Tang (2012): “Does Systemic Risk in the Financial Sector
  Predict Future Economic Downturns?,” Review of Financial Studies, 25(10), 3000–3036.

Baron, M., E. Verner, and W. Xiong (2018): “Identifying Banking Crises,” SSRN Working
  Paper 3116148.

Barth, A., and I. Schnabel (2013): “Why banks are not too big to fail: evidence from the CDS
  market,” Economic Policy, 28(74), 335–369.

Benoit, S., G. Colletaz, C. Hurlin, and C. Pérignon (2013): “A Theoretical and Empirical
  Comparison of Systemic Risk Measures,” Working Paper.

Bernanke, B., and M. Gertler (1989): “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations,”
  American Economic Review, 79(1), 14–31.




                                               35
Bernanke, B., M. Gertler, and S. Gilchrist (1999): “The financial accelerator in a quanti-
  tative business cycle framework,” In: Handbook of Macroeconomics, edited by: John B. Taylor
  and Michael Woodford, 1, 1341–1393.

Bernardi, M., G. Gayraud, and L. Petrella (2013): “Bayesian Inference for CoVaR,” Work-
  ing Paper.

Bisias, D., M. Flood, A. W. Lo, and S. Valavanis (2012): “A Survey of Systemic Risk
  Analytics,” Office of Financial Research Working Paper 0001.

Bohl, M. T., P. Kaufmann, and P. M. Stephan (2013): “From hero to zero: Evidence
  of performance reversal and speculative bubbles in German renewable energy stocks,” Energy
  Economics, 37, 40–51.

Bordo, M. D., and O. Jeanne (2002): “Monetary Policy and Asset Prices: Does ’Benign Neglect’
  Make Sense?,” International Finance, 5(2), 139–164.

Borio, C., and P. Lowe (2002): “Asset prices, financial and monetary stability: exploring the
  nexus,” BIS Working Paper 114.

Breitung, J., and U. Homm (2012): “Testing for Speculative Bubbles in Stock Markets: A
  Comparison of Alternative Methods,” Journal of Financial Econometrics, 10(1), 198–231.

Brownlees, C., and R. F. Engle (2017): “SRISK: A Conditional Capital Shortfall Measure of
  Systemic Risk,” Review of Financial Studies, 30(1), 48–79.

Brunnermeier, M. K. (2009): “Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch 2007–2008,” Jour-
  nal of Economic Perspectives, 23(1), 77–100.

Brunnermeier, M. K., G. Dong, and D. Palia (2012): “Banks’ Non-Interest Income and
  Systemic Risk,” Working Paper.

Brunnermeier, M. K., and M. Oehmke (2013): “Bubbles, Financial Crises, and Systemic
  Risk,” in Handbook of the Economics of Finance, ed. by G. M. Constantinides, M. Harris, and
  R. M. Stulz, vol. 2, pp. 1221–1288. North Holland, Amsterdam and London.

Brunnermeier, M. K., and L. H. Pedersen (2009): “Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity,”
  Review of Financial Studies, 22(6), 2201–2238.

Brunnermeier, M. K., and Y. Sannikov (2014): “A Macroeconomic Model with a Financial
  Sector,” American Economic Review, 104(2), 379–421.

Brunnermeier, M. K., and I. Schnabel (2016): “Bubbles and Central Banks: Historical Per-
  spectives,” in Central Banks at a Crossroads - What Can We Learn from History?, ed. by M. D.
  Bordo, O. Eitrheim, M. Flandreau, and J. F. Qvigstad, pp. 493–562. Cambridge University Press,
  Cambridge.


                                                 36
Busetti, F., and A. M. R. Taylor (2004): “Tests of stationarity against a change in persistence,”
  Journal of Econometrics, 123(1), 33–66.

Cao, Z. (2013): “Multi-CoVaR and Shapley Value: A Systemic Risk Approach,” Working Paper.

Capuano, C. (2008): “The Option-iPoD: The Probability of Default Implied by Option Prices
  Based on Entropy,” IMF Working Paper 08/194.

de Bandt, O., and P. Hartmann (2000): “Systemic risk: A survey,” ECB Working Paper 35.

Demirgüç-Kunt, A., and E. Detragiache (1998): “The Determinants of Banking Crises in
  Developing and Developed Countries,” IMF Staff Papers, 45(1).

Deutsche Bundesbank (2014): Financial Stability Review. Frankfurt am Main.

Diamond, D. W., and R. G. Rajan (2011): “Fear of Fire Sales, Illiquidity Seeking, and Credit
  Freezes,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(2), 557–591.

        (2012): “Illiquid Banks, Financial Stability, and Interest Rate Policy,” Journal of Political
  Economy, 120(3), 552–591.

Diba, B. T., and H. I. Grossman (1988): “Explosive Rational Bubbles in Stock Prices?,” The
  American Economic Review, 78(3), 520–530.

Drehmann, M., C. Borio, and K. Tsatsaronis (2012): “Characterising the financial cycle:
  don’t lose sight of the medium term!,” BIS Working Paper 380.

Engle, R., E. Jondeau, and M. Rockinger (2015): “Systemic Risk in Europe,” Review of
  Finance, 19(1), 145–190.

Etienne, X. L., S. H. Irwin, and P. Garcia (2014): “Bubbles in food commodity markets:
  Four decades of evidence,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 42, 129–155.

Froot, K. A., and M. Obstfeld (1991): “Intrinsic Bubbles: The Case of Stock Prices,” The
  American Economic Review, 81(5), 1189–1214.

Galı́, J. (2014): “Monetary Policy and Rational Asset Price Bubbles,” American Economic Re-
  view, 104(3), 721–752.

Galı́, J., and L. Gambetti (2015): “The Effects of Monetary Policy on Stock Market Bubbles:
  Some Evidence,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7(1), 233–257.

Garber, P. M. (2000): Famous First Bubbles: The Fundamentals of Early Manias. MIT Press,
  Cambridge.

Gertler, M., and S. Gilchrist (2018): “What Happened: Financial Factors in the Great
  Recession,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 32(3), 3–30.


                                                37
Giglio, S., B. Kelly, and S. Pruitt (2016): “Systemic risk and the macroeconomy: An em-
  pirical evaluation,” Journal of Financial Economics, 119(3), 457–471.

Girardi, G., and A. Tolga Ergün (2013): “Systemic risk measurement: Multivariate GARCH
  estimation of CoVaR,” Journal of Banking & Finance, 37(8), 3169–3180.

Gorton, G., and A. Metrick (2012): “Securitized banking and the run on repo,” Journal of
  Financial Economics, 104(3), 425–451.

Gray, D. F., and A. A. Jobst (2010): “Systemic CCA – A Model Approach to Systemic Risk,”
  Working Paper.

Gromb, D., and D. Vayanos (2002): “Equilibrium and welfare in markets with financially con-
  strained arbitrageurs,” Journal of Financial Economics, 66, 361–407.

Gürkaynak, R. (2008): “Econometric Tests of Asset Price Bubbles: Taking Stock,” Journal of
  Economic Surveys, 22, 166–186.

Gutierrez, L. (2013): “Speculative bubbles in agricultural commodity markets,” European Re-
  view of Agricultural Economics, 40(2), 217–238.

Hautsch, N., J. Schaumburg, and M. Schienle (2015): “Financial Network Systemic Risk
  Contributions,” Review of Finance, 19(2), 685–738.

Hellwig, M. F. (2009): “Systemic Risk in the Financial Sector: An Analysis of the Subprime-
  Mortgage Financial Crisis,” De Economist, 157(2), 129–207.

Huang, X., H. Zhou, and H. Zhu (2009): “A framework for assessing the systemic risk of major
  financial institutions,” Journal of Banking & Finance, 33(11), 2036–2049.

Jiang, L., P. C. B. Phillips, and J. Yu (2015): “New methodology for constructing real estate
  price indices applied to the Singapore residential market,” Journal of Banking & Finance, 61,
  S121–S131.

Jordà, Ò., M. Schularick, and A. M. Taylor (2013): “When Credit Bites Back,” Journal of
  Money, Credit and Banking, 45(s2), 3–28.

         (2015a): “Betting the house,” Journal of International Economics, 96, S2–S18.

         (2015b): “Leveraged bubbles,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 76, S1–S20.

Kim, J.-Y. (2000): “Detection of change in persistence of a linear time series,” Journal of Econo-
  metrics, 95(1), 97–116.

Kim, J.-Y., and R. B. Amador (2002): “Corrigendum to “Detection of Change in Persistence of
  a Linear Time Series”,” Journal of Econometrics, 109(2), 389–392.


                                               38
Kindleberger, C. P., and R. Z. Aliber (2005): Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of
  Financial Crises. Palgrave Macmillan UK, London, 5 edn.

Kiyotaki, N., and J. Moore (1997): “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 105(2),
  211–248.

         (2005): “Liquidity and Asset Prices,” International Economic Review, 46(2), 317–349.

Koenker, R. (2005): Quantile regression, vol. 38 of Econometric Society monographs. Cambridge
  University Press, Cambridge and New York.

Laeven, L., and F. Valencia (2012): “Systemic Banking Crises Database: An Update,” IMF
  Working Paper 12/163.

LeRoy, S. F., and R. D. Porter (1981): “The Present-Value Relation: Tests Based on Implied
  Variance Bounds,” Econometrica, 49(3), 555–574.

López-Espinosa, G., A. Moreno, A. Rubia, and L. Valderrama (2012): “Short-term whole-
  sale funding and systemic risk: A global CoVaR approach,” Journal of Banking & Finance,
  36(12), 3150–3162.

Mainik, G., and E. Schaanning (2012): “On dependence consistency of CoVaR and some other
  systemic risk measures,” Working Paper.

Minsky, H. P. (1982): “The Financial-Instability Hypothesis: Capitalist Processes and the Behav-
  ior of the Economy,” in Financial Crises: Theory, History and Policy, ed. by C. P. Kindleberger,
  and J.-P. Laffargue, pp. 13–29. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Oh, D. H., and A. J. Patton (2015): “Time-varying systemic risk: Evidence from a dynamic
  copula model of cds spreads,” Working Paper.

Phillips, P. C., and S.-P. Shi (2018): “FINANCIAL BUBBLE IMPLOSION AND REVERSE
  REGRESSION,” Econometric Theory, 34(04), 705–753.

Phillips, P. C. B., S. Shi, and J. Yu (2015a): “Testing for Multiple Bubbles: Historical Episodes
  of Exuberance and Collapse in the S&P 500,” International Economic Review, 56(4), 1043–1078.

         (2015b): “Testing for Multiple Bubbles: Limit Theory of Real-Time Detectors,” Interna-
  tional Economic Review, 56(4), 1079–1134.

Reinhart, C. M., and K. S. Rogoff (2009): This Time Is Different. Princeton University Press.

Schnabel, I., and H. S. Shin (2004): “LIQUIDITY AND CONTAGION: THE CRISIS OF
  1763,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2(6), 929–968.




                                               39
Schularick, M., and A. M. Taylor (2012): “Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy,
  Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870–2008,” American Economic Review, 102(2), 1029–
  1061.

Segoviano, M. A., and C. Goodhart (2009): “Banking Stability Measures,” Financial Markets
  Group Discussion Paper 627.

Shiller, R. J. (1981): “Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to be Justified by Subsequent Changes
  in Dividends?,” The American Economic Review, 71(3), 421–436.

          (2000): Irrational exuberance. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Shin, H. S. (2008): “Risk and liquidity in a system context,” Journal of Financial Intermediation,
  17(3), 315–329.

Shleifer, A., and R. Vishny (1992): “Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity: A Market Equi-
  librium Approach,” The Journal of Finance, 47(4), 1343–1366.

          (2011): “Fire Sales in Finance and Macroeconomics,” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
  25(1), 29–48.

Shleifer, A., and R. W. Vishny (1997): “The Limits of Arbitrage,” The Journal of Finance,
  52(1), 35.

West, K. D. (1987): “A Specification Test for Speculative Bubbles,” The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 102(3), 553–580.

Xiong, W. (2001): “Convergence trading with wealth effects: an amplification mechanism in
  financial markets,” Journal of Financial Economics, 62, 247–292.




                                                40
Figures and tables




                                               Figure 1: The increase in systemic risk during bubble episodes
 The figure illustrates the increase in systemic risk during bubble episodes in dependence of bank and
 bubble characteristics. “Unfavorable characteristics” refers to the 95th percentile of this increase based
 on the distribution of bank or bubble characteristics as indicated in the legend. The pattern is robust to
 the choice of the percentile. The figure relies on regression results provided and discussed in Section 4.
                           60
           In % of the median of Delta-CoVaR
                 20        0       40




                                                   Boom phase of a bubble               Bust phase of a bubble




                                                                            41
                                                        Figure 2: Construction of the bubble indicators
The BSADF approach identifies the beginning of a bubble episode as the point in time at which the
sequence of BSADF test statistics (blue dotted line) first exceeds its critical value (red dotted line) and
thus signals the price data (black line) being on an explosive trajectory. The end of a bubble episode is
reached once the test statistics fall back below their critical values. Additionally, we distinguish between
the boom and the bust phase of a bubble (the blue and grey shaded areas) based on the peak of the
price series during each bubble episode. Using this approach, we construct four binary variables for
each country, indicating episodes in which a real estate or stock market bubble emerges or collapses.
The figure illustrates the construction of these indicators based on the recent Spanish housing bubble.
Details on the BSADF approach are provided in Section 3.2 and Appendix A.




     125                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15
                         Boom phase of a bubble

                         Bust phase of a bubble
     100                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12
                         Real house price index (left axis)

                         95% critical values (right axis)
      75                                                                                                                                                                                                                  9
                         Sequence of BSADF test
                         statistics (right axis)

      50                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6



      25                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3



       0                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0



     -25                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -3
           1994q1

                    1995q1

                             1996q1

                                      1997q1

                                               1998q1

                                                        1999q1

                                                                 2000q1

                                                                          2001q1

                                                                                   2002q1

                                                                                            2003q1

                                                                                                     2004q1

                                                                                                              2005q1

                                                                                                                       2006q1

                                                                                                                                2007q1

                                                                                                                                         2008q1

                                                                                                                                                  2009q1

                                                                                                                                                           2010q1

                                                                                                                                                                    2011q1

                                                                                                                                                                             2012q1

                                                                                                                                                                                      2013q1

                                                                                                                                                                                               2014q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                        2015q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2016q1




                                                                                                              42
                        Figure 3: Bubble episodes by country and asset class
Periods colored in blue represent the boom phase of an asset price bubble, periods in grey refer to the
bust phase of a bubble. Bubble episodes are estimated based on the BSADF approach. For details on
the estimation procedure see Section 3.2 and Appendix A. The timelines based on the BSADF approach
applied to data normalized by fundamentals and the timeline based on the trend-deviation approach
are provided in Figures C1 and C2.
(a) Stock market bubble episodes




(b) Real estate bubble episodes




                                                  43
                       Figure 4: Evolution of ∆CoVaR and MES over time
The figure displays the unweighted means of ∆CoVaR and MES in weekly percentage points and daily
percent for the four financial systems in our sample: North America, Europe, Japan, and Australia.
Details on the estimation procedure of ∆CoVaR and MES are provided in Section 3.3 and Appendix B.


                    North America                                    Europe
      8




                                                    8
      6




                                                    6
      4




                                                    4
      2




                                                    2
      0




                                                    0




       1985m1     1995m1      2005m1     2015m1     1985m1     1995m1      2005m1     2015m1


                         Japan                                      Australia
      8




                                                    8
      6




                                                    6
      4




                                                    4
      2




                                                    2
      0




                                                    0




       1985m1     1995m1      2005m1     2015m1     1985m1     1995m1      2005m1     2015m1




                                               44
                              Figure 5: Systemic risk during bubble episodes in dependence of bank and bubble characteristics
   The figure illustrates the distribution of the increase in systemic risk during bubble episodes in percent
   of the median of ∆CoVaR. The white horizontal line within each box refers to the increase at the median
   of all characteristics. The upper and lower end of the boxes refer to the increase at the 75th and 25th
   percentile of the distribution of the indicated bank or bubble characteristics. The upper and lower end of
   the lines refer to the 95th and 5th percentile. All results rely on the average of the estimated coefficients
   in our two baseline regressions (Table 5, columns (6) and (7)). The largest bank does not simultaneously
   exhibit the largest loan growth, leverage, and maturity mismatch, such that the range depending on all
   bank characteristics is smaller than the sum of the ranges of individual bank characteristics.

                                              Real estate boom                                                           Real estate bust
                  75




                                                                                                   75
                                   60




                                                                                                                    60
   In % of the median of Delta-CoVaR




                                                                                    In % of the median of Delta-CoVaR
                             45




                                                                                                              45
                     30




                                                                                                      30
               15




                                                                                                15
        0




                                                                                         0
-15




                                                                                 -15




                                             Stock market boom                                                           Stock market bust
                  75




                                                                                                   75
                                   60




                                                                                                                    60
   In % of the median of Delta-CoVaR




                                                                                    In % of the median of Delta-CoVaR
                             45




                                                                                                              45
                     30




                                                                                                      30
               15




                                                                                                15
        0




                                                                                         0
-15




                                                                                 -15




                                                                            45
                            Table 1: Number of bubble episodes per country
The estimation approaches are described in Sections 3.2 and Appendix A. The statistics are computed for
the dataset used in the baseline regression. Figures 3, C1, and C2 provide an overview of bubble episodes
estimated per country. Differences in the number of booms and busts of bubble episodes are due to bubbles
that take place only partly during the sample period. We can estimate these bubble episodes since the
data used for bubble identification covers a significantly longer time period than the data used in the main
analyses.

                                                       Real estate      Stock market
                                                      Boom Bust         Boom   Bust

                    BSADF approach
                      Average per country                1.9     1.5      2.6      2.8
                      Min per country                     1       0        1        1
                      Max per country                     4       4        5        5
                      Total                              33      26       45       47
                    BSADF approach: price-to-rent and price-to-dividend data
                      Average per country       1.9     1.6     2.1     1.6
                      Min per country             0      0       1       0
                      Max per country             4      4       5       4
                      Total                      33     27      35      27
                    Trend-deviation approach
                      Average per country                1.2     1.3      4.2      3.8
                      Min per country                     0       0        2        2
                      Max per country                     2       2        8        7
                      Total                              21      22       71       64




                                                    46
             Table 2: Descriptive statistics on bubble characteristics during bubble episodes
The statistics are computed for the dataset used in the baseline regression and conditional on the corre-
sponding bubble indicator being equal to one. For example, within stock market boom periods, a stock
market boom has on average been present for 29 months and features a 79% price increase relative to the
pre-bubble level according to estimates building on the BSADF approach. Variable definitions are provided
in Table C1. The estimation approaches are described in Sections 3.2 and Appendix A.

           Variable                              Mean     Median     Std. Dev.     5%    95%

           BSADF approach
             Real estate boom length               69        68          40.1      10     128
             Real estate bust length               15        10          16.8       1     56
             Stock market boom length              29        28          17.8       3      58
             Stock market bust length               8         8           5.5       1      16
             Real estate boom size                 38        33          29.3       3     99
             Real estate bust size                  6        5             7        0      15
             Stock market boom size                78        72          54.5       8     156
             Stock market bust size                12        13           8.3       1      24
           BSADF approach: price-to-rent and price-to-dividend data
             Real estate boom length       55       52        36.3                  8     116
             Real estate bust length       15       13        12.0                  2     38
             Stock market boom length      20       20        13.6                  2      41
             Stock market bust length       5        5          3                   1      10
             Real estate boom size         26       18        24.7                  3     80
             Real estate bust size          4        2         3.2                  0      10
             Stock market boom size        43       45        27.3                  6      87
             Stock market bust size         6        6         4.1                  0      13
           Trend-deviation approach
             Real estate boom length               34        33          18.9       4     62
             Real estate bust length               13        11          11.9       2     36
             Stock market boom length              15        13          11.3       1     35
             Stock market bust length               9         8            6        1     18
             Real estate boom size                 19        19          11.7       3     36
             Real estate bust size                  7        6            5.2       0     15
             Stock market boom size                39        33          28.7       3     82
             Stock market bust size                13        13           9.4       1     26




                                                   47
                                       Table 3: Descriptive statistics
The statistics are computed for the dataset used in the baseline regression. “Size” and “Interest rate” enter
the regressions in logs. “Interest rate” refers to 10-year government bond rates. For descriptive statistics on
bubble characteristics see Table 2. Variable definitions are provided in Table C1.

         Variable                                 Mean     Median      Std. Dev.      5%       95%
         Dependent variable
           ∆CoVaR                                  1.96       1.68         1.65       -0.11    4.91
           MES                                     1.34       1.06         1.94       -1.11    4.92
         Bank characteristics
           Bank size [billion USD]                64.58       1.88       260.79        0.25   316.73
           log(bank size)                         1.22       0.63         2.19        -1.40     5.76
           Loan growth                            0.008      0.006        0.015      -0.012    0.032
           Leverage                               13.43      11.70         7.14        5.92    27.02
           Maturity mismatch                      0.69       0.75         0.19         0.27    0.86
         Macroeconomic variables
           Banking crisis                          0.36         0          0.48         0         1
           Real GDP growth                         0.021     0.023        0.020      -0.024    0.045
           Interest rate                           4.70       4.50        1.62        2.52      7.46
           log(interest rate)                      1.33       1.44        0.51        0.43      1.96
           Inflation                               0.022     0.021        0.013      -0.002    0.041
           Investment-to-GDP growth               -0.004     0.010        0.061      -0.119    0.066




                                                      48
                 Table 4: Systemic risk during booms and busts of asset price bubbles
Bubble estimates are based on the BSADF approach. Variable definitions are provided in Table C1. Standard
errors are clustered at the bank and time levels. ***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5% and 10%
levels. P-values are in parentheses.

                                                                (1)        (2)
                                Dependent variable:                ∆CoVaR
                        Real estate boom                     0.20***   0.15***
                                                              (0.000)   (0.001)
                        Real estate bust                      0.46***  0.35***
                                                              (0.000)   (0.002)
                        Stock boom                            0.30***  0.37***
                                                              (0.000)   (0.000)
                        Stock bust                            0.35***   0.38***
                                                              (0.000)   (0.000)
                        log(Bank size)                                 0.28***
                                                                        (0.000)
                        Loan growth                                       -0.13
                                                                        (0.765)
                        Leverage                                        0.00**
                                                                        (0.019)
                        Maturity mismatch                              -0.43***
                                                                        (0.001)
                        Banking crisis                       0.27***   0.23***
                                                              (0.000)   (0.000)
                        GDP growth                            -4.22**    -3.00*
                                                              (0.019)   (0.074)
                        log(Interest rate)                   -0.22***     -0.02
                                                              (0.000)   (0.684)
                        Inflation                               4.81       5.57
                                                              (0.237)   (0.170)
                        Investment-to-GDP growth               -0.40     -0.62*
                                                              (0.198)   (0.061)
                        Bank FE                                 Yes        Yes
                        No. of obs.                           165,149   165,149
                        Adj. R2                                0.819     0.824
                        Adj. R2 within                         0.082      0.106




                                                   49
                               Table 5: The role of bank and bubble characteristics
Bubble estimates are based on the BSADF approach. Macro controls are a banking crisis dummy, GDP growth, interest rates,
inflation, and investment-to-GDP growth. Variable definitions are provided in Table C1. Standard errors are clustered at the
bank and time levels. ***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels. P-values are in parentheses.

                                               (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)
             Dependent variable:                                             ∆CoVaR
    Real estate boom                         0.16***   0.19***    0.19***    0.20***    0.15***     0.09**     0.11***
                                             (0.000)   (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.031)     (0.004)
    Real estate bust                          0.26**   0.46***    0.45***    0.42***     0.27**     0.25**      0.27**
                                             (0.021)   (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.019)    (0.036)     (0.018)
    Stock boom                               0.37***   0.29***    0.31***    0.33***    0.38***    0.34***     0.36***
                                             (0.000)   (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
    Stock bust                               0.35***   0.34***    0.35***    0.35***     0.37***    0.38***     0.38***
                                             (0.000)   (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
    log(Bank size)                           0.27***                                    0.27***    0.26***      0.25***
                                             (0.000)                                     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
    log(Bank size) · Real estate boom          -0.00                                       -0.01      -0.01      -0.01
                                             (0.898)                                     (0.533)    (0.490)     (0.492)
    log(Bank size) · Real estate bust        0.12***                                    0.14***    0.17***      0.16***
                                             (0.000)                                     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
    log(Bank size) · Stock boom                 0.00                                      0.05**   0.07***     0.06***
                                             (0.888)                                     (0.018)    (0.002)     (0.003)
    log(Bank size) · Stock bust              0.07***                                    0.11***    0.11***     0.11***
                                             (0.000)                                     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
    Loan growth                                        -2.77***                         -2.28***    -1.49**     -1.59**
                                                        (0.000)                          (0.001)    (0.020)     (0.014)
    Loan growth · Real estate boom                     2.75***                          2.51***     1.43**      1.58**
                                                        (0.001)                          (0.001)    (0.044)     (0.026)
    Loan growth · Real estate bust                     5.16***                           6.19***   4.47***      4.58***
                                                        (0.009)                          (0.000)    (0.003)     (0.002)
    Loan growth · Stock boom                           2.01***                            1.89**       0.86       1.03
                                                        (0.004)                          (0.011)    (0.202)     (0.140)
    Loan growth · Stock bust                            2.33**                           3.55***    2.81***     2.94***
                                                        (0.023)                          (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.001)
    Leverage                                                        0.00*                 0.00*       0.00*       0.00
                                                                   (0.058)               (0.061)    (0.097)     (0.107)
    Leverage · Real estate boom                                      0.00                0.01**     0.01**      0.01**
                                                                   (0.116)               (0.021)    (0.028)     (0.020)
    Leverage · Real estate bust                                      0.01                  -0.01      -0.01      -0.01
                                                                   (0.150)               (0.254)    (0.123)     (0.206)
    Leverage · Stock boom                                          -0.01**              -0.01***   -0.01***    -0.01***
                                                                   (0.021)               (0.001)    (0.002)     (0.001)
    Leverage · Stock bust                                            0.00               -0.02***   -0.02***    -0.02***
                                                                   (0.891)               (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
    Maturity mismatch                                                        -0.62***   -0.66***   -0.65***    -0.62***
                                                                              (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
    MM · Real estate boom                                                    0.26***    0.27***     0.21**       0.18*
                                                                              (0.009)    (0.004)    (0.024)     (0.051)
    MM · Real estate bust                                                      -0.40      0.40*        0.33      0.41*
                                                                              (0.129)    (0.072)    (0.122)     (0.063)
    MM · Stock boom                                                           0.48***    0.65***    0.38***    0.48***
                                                                              (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
    MM · Stock bust                                                            -0.01     0.40***     0.31**     0.43***
                                                                              (0.951)    (0.001)    (0.020)     (0.000)
    Real estate boom length                                                                           -0.00
                                                                                                    (0.224)
    Real estate boom size                                                                                       -0.00
                                                                                                               (0.937)
    Real estate bust length                                                                        -0.01***
                                                                                                    (0.000)
    Real estate bust size                                                                                      -0.03***
                                                                                                                (0.009)
    Stock boom length                                                                               0.01***
                                                                                                    (0.000)
    Stock boom size                                                                                            0.00***
                                                                                                               (0.000)
    Stock bust length                                                                              -0.03***
                                                                                                    (0.001)
    Stock bust size                                                                                             -0.01
                                                                                                               (0.112)
    Bank FE                                    Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes
    Macro Controls                             Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes
    No. of obs.                              165,149   165,149    165,149    165,149     165,149    165,149    165,149
    Adj. R2                                   0.826     0.819      0.820      0.820       0.827      0.831      0.830
    Adj. R2 within                            0.115     0.083      0.084      0.087       0.123      0.141      0.135
              Table 6: The role of bank and bubble characteristics: alternative bubble measures
Columns 1 and 2 restate our baseline regressions from Table 5, columns 6 and 7. Macro controls are a banking crisis dummy,
GDP growth, interest rates, inflation, and investment-to-GDP growth. Variable definitions are provided in Table C1. Standard
errors are clustered at the bank and time levels. ***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels. P-values are in
parentheses.

                                                        (1)        (2)           (3)         (4)      (5)         (6)
                 Dependent variable:                                                ∆CoVaR
                 Bubble estimation approach:                 BSADF          BSADF normalized         Trend deviations
        Real estate boom                              0.09**     0.11***      0.08**     0.08**       -0.04     -0.04
                                                      (0.031)     (0.004)    (0.027)     (0.037)    (0.474)    (0.383)
        Real estate bust                              0.25**       0.27**   0.20***       0.14**       0.14      0.13
                                                      (0.036)     (0.018)    (0.001)     (0.010)    (0.266)    (0.273)
        Stock boom                                    0.34***     0.36***    0.45***     0.46***    0.38***   0.38***
                                                      (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)
        Stock bust                                    0.38***     0.38***    0.50***     0.51***    0.40***   0.37***
                                                      (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)
        log(Bank size)                                0.26***     0.25***    0.26***     0.26***    0.29***   0.30***
                                                      (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)
        log(Bank size) · Real estate boom               -0.01       -0.01    -0.04**     -0.04**   -0.09*** -0.08***
                                                      (0.490)     (0.492)    (0.011)     (0.019)    (0.000)    (0.000)
        log(Bank size) · Real estate bust             0.17***    0.16***    0.09***      0.08***    0.15***   0.14***
                                                      (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.001)     (0.005)    (0.000)    (0.000)
        log(Bank size) · Stock boom                   0.07***    0.06***    0.09***      0.09***     0.05**   0.06***
                                                      (0.002)     (0.003)    (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.022)    (0.009)
        log(Bank size) · Stock bust                   0.11***    0.11***    0.16***      0.16***    0.08***   0.08***
                                                      (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.001)    (0.000)
        Loan growth                                   -1.49**     -1.59**      -0.52       -0.80     -1.15*     -1.12
                                                      (0.020)     (0.014)    (0.407)     (0.204)    (0.095)    (0.113)
        Loan growth · Real estate boom                1.43**      1.58**        0.44        0.76       0.82      0.85
                                                      (0.044)     (0.026)    (0.578)     (0.331)    (0.291)    (0.265)
        Loan growth · Real estate bust                4.47***     4.58***       1.22      2.36**       1.66      1.65
                                                      (0.003)     (0.002)    (0.275)     (0.034)    (0.155)    (0.152)
        Loan growth · Stock boom                         0.86        1.03     1.78**      2.25**      1.54*    1.74**
                                                      (0.202)     (0.140)    (0.041)     (0.016)    (0.067)    (0.041)
        Loan growth · Stock bust                      2.81***     2.94***   3.39***      3.70***    3.27***   3.15***
                                                      (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)
        Leverage                                        0.00*        0.00       0.00        0.00       0.00     0.00*
                                                      (0.097)     (0.107)    (0.481)     (0.459)    (0.103)    (0.098)
        Leverage · Real estate boom                   0.01**      0.01**    0.01***     0.01***    0.02***    0.02***
                                                      (0.028)     (0.020)    (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.000)    (0.000)
        Leverage · Real estate bust                     -0.01       -0.01       0.01        0.01      -0.01     -0.01
                                                      (0.123)     (0.206)    (0.279)     (0.254)    (0.112)    (0.114)
        Leverage · Stock boom                        -0.01*** -0.01***       -0.01**    -0.01***   -0.01*** -0.01***
                                                      (0.002)     (0.001)    (0.012)     (0.010)    (0.001)    (0.000)
        Leverage · Stock bust                        -0.02***    -0.02***   -0.03*** -0.03***      -0.01*** -0.01***
                                                      (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.005)    (0.007)
        Maturity mismatch                            -0.65*** -0.62***      -0.58***    -0.58***   -0.60*** -0.62***
                                                      (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)
        MM · Real estate boom                          0.21**      0.18*        0.12       0.11       0.00      -0.04
                                                      (0.024)     (0.051)    (0.213)     (0.225)    (0.977)    (0.729)
        MM · Real estate bust                            0.33      0.41*       -0.02       -0.02       0.12      0.14
                                                      (0.122)     (0.063)    (0.882)     (0.911)    (0.600)    (0.538)
        MM · Stock boom                               0.38***    0.48***    0.31***     0.36***     0.64***   0.64***
                                                      (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.007)     (0.002)    (0.000)    (0.000)
        MM · Stock bust                                0.31**     0.43***    0.47***     0.47***     0.33**   0.38***
                                                      (0.020)     (0.000)    (0.010)     (0.005)    (0.018)    (0.005)
        Real estate boom length                         -0.00                  -0.00                  -0.00
                                                      (0.224)                (0.103)                (0.258)
        Real estate boom size                                       -0.00                  -0.00                -0.00
                                                                  (0.937)                (0.259)               (0.228)
        Real estate bust length                      -0.01***                   0.00                  -0.00
                                                      (0.000)                (0.768)                (0.317)
        Real estate bust size                                    -0.03***                0.04***                -0.01
                                                                  (0.009)                (0.002)               (0.672)
        Stock boom length                            0.01***                0.01***                 0.02***
                                                      (0.000)                (0.000)                (0.000)
        Stock boom size                                           0.00***                0.01***              0.01***
                                                                  (0.000)                (0.000)               (0.000)
        Stock bust length                            -0.03***                  -0.02               -0.03***
                                                      (0.001)                (0.263)                (0.000)
        Stock bust size                                             -0.01                   0.00               -0.01**
                                                                  (0.112)                (0.975)               (0.027)
        Bank FE                                          Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes
        Macro Controls                                   Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes
        No. of obs.                                   165,149     165,149    165,134     165,134    144,771   144,771
        Adj. R2                                         0.831       0.830      0.829       0.829     0.823      0.822
        Adj. R2 within                                  0.141      0.135       0.131       0.132     0.160      0.156
          Table 7: The role of bank and bubble characteristics: alternative systemic risk measure
Bubble estimates are based on the BSADF approach. Macro controls are a banking crisis dummy, GDP growth, interest rates,
inflation, and investment-to-GDP growth. Columns 3 and 4 report regressions with all explanatory variables lagged by an
additional 6 months. Variable definitions are provided in Table C1. Standard errors are clustered at the bank and time levels.
***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels. P-values are in parentheses.

                                                                    (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)
                          Dependent variable:                                         MES
                 Real estate boom                                    0.04       0.06       0.05        0.05
                                                                   (0.421)    (0.249)    (0.353)     (0.352)
                 Real estate bust                                    0.01       0.03     0.47***     0.53***
                                                                   (0.910)    (0.757)    (0.000)     (0.000)
                 Stock boom                                         0.10*      0.11*      0.16**      0.16**
                                                                   (0.078)    (0.062)    (0.017)     (0.021)
                 Stock bust                                        0.25***    0.25***    0.21***     0.21***
                                                                   (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
                 log(Bank size)                                    0.66***   0.66***     0.76***     0.74***
                                                                   (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
                 log(Bank size) · Real estate boom                -0.20***   -0.20***   -0.17***    -0.17***
                                                                   (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
                 log(Bank size) · Real estate bust                  -0.01      -0.04      0.14**       0.11*
                                                                   (0.814)    (0.458)    (0.011)     (0.072)
                 log(Bank size) · Stock boom                        -0.00      -0.01       0.06*       0.06*
                                                                   (0.923)    (0.820)    (0.066)     (0.054)
                 log(Bank size) · Stock bust                       0.09***    0.09***    0.12***     0.12***
                                                                   (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.000)     (0.000)
                 Loan growth                                      -6.08***   -6.07***     -3.10*      -3.15*
                                                                   (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.078)     (0.071)
                 Loan growth · Real estate boom                      2.02       2.09       0.35        0.37
                                                                   (0.255)    (0.237)    (0.848)     (0.842)
                 Loan growth · Real estate bust                      2.52       2.98        2.99        4.38
                                                                   (0.418)    (0.360)    (0.370)     (0.210)
                 Loan growth · Stock boom                            0.76       0.81        1.36        1.31
                                                                   (0.671)    (0.656)    (0.461)     (0.471)
                 Loan growth · Stock bust                            3.19       3.08        2.15        2.17
                                                                   (0.208)    (0.229)    (0.351)     (0.346)
                 Leverage                                          -0.01**    -0.01**      -0.00       -0.00
                                                                   (0.048)    (0.045)    (0.784)     (0.712)
                 Leverage · Real estate boom                      0.03***    0.03***     0.02***    0.02***
                                                                   (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.005)     (0.002)
                 Leverage · Real estate bust                       0.02**     0.03***      -0.01       -0.00
                                                                   (0.015)    (0.006)    (0.467)     (0.754)
                 Leverage · Stock boom                               0.01       0.01        0.00        0.00
                                                                   (0.136)    (0.231)    (0.819)     (0.914)
                 Leverage · Stock bust                            -0.03***   -0.02***   -0.02***     -0.02**
                                                                   (0.000)    (0.001)    (0.009)     (0.017)
                 Maturity mismatch                                -0.86***   -0.85***   -1.10***    -1.05***
                                                                   (0.005)    (0.006)    (0.000)     (0.001)
                 MM · Real estate boom                               0.06      -0.01        0.21        0.08
                                                                   (0.789)    (0.972)    (0.365)     (0.723)
                 MM · Real estate bust                               0.32       0.44     1.19***     1.30***
                                                                   (0.368)    (0.219)    (0.003)     (0.001)
                 MM · Stock boom                                  -1.14***   -1.05***   -1.22***    -1.23***
                                                                   (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
                 MM · Stock bust                                  -0.73***    -0.60**   -0.84***    -0.73***
                                                                   (0.007)    (0.022)    (0.001)     (0.003)
                 Real estate boom length                            -0.00                  -0.00
                                                                   (0.131)               (0.110)
                 Real estate boom size                                         -0.00                  0.00
                                                                              (0.328)                (0.873)
                 Real estate bust length                          -0.02***              -0.03***
                                                                   (0.000)               (0.000)
                 Real estate bust size                                       -0.03***               -0.02**
                                                                              (0.000)               (0.040)
                 Stock boom length                                0.02***                0.01***
                                                                  (0.000)                (0.000)
                 Stock boom size                                             0.01***                0.00***
                                                                             (0.000)                (0.000)
                 Stock bust length                                -0.03***              -0.03***
                                                                   (0.000)               (0.000)
                 Stock bust size                                             -0.02***               -0.01***
                                                                              (0.000)                (0.006)
                 Bank FE                                            Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
                 Macro Controls                                     Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
                 No. of obs.                                      162,092    162,092     160,980    160,980
                 Adj. R2                                           0.472       0.470      0.454       0.452
                 Adj. R2 within                                    0.218       0.216      0.194       0.191
                            Table 8: Controlling for additional variation at the macro level
Bubble estimates are based on the BSADF approach. Macro controls are a banking crisis dummy, GDP growth, interest rates,
inflation, and investment-to-GDP growth. Columns 1 and 2 restate our baseline regressions from Table 5, columns 6 and 7. The
additional macroeconomic variables in columns 3 and 4 are the stock price returns and volatilities used during the estimation
of ∆CoVaR (see Appendix B). Column 5 estimates our baseline regression with country-time fixed effects. The estimation
strategy of the rolling ∆CoVaR is described in Section 6.1. Variable definitions are provided in Table C1. Standard errors are
clustered at the bank and time levels. ***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels. P-values are in parentheses.
                                                (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)           (6)       (7)
             Dependent variable:                                    ∆CoVaR                                Rolling ∆CoVaR
    Real estate boom                          0.09**     0.11***    0.13***      0.14***                 0.24***    0.24***
                                              (0.031)     (0.004)    (0.000)      (0.000)                (0.000)    (0.000)
    Real estate bust                          0.25**      0.27**     0.28***      0.29***                0.38***    0.36***
                                              (0.036)     (0.018)    (0.000)      (0.000)                (0.000)    (0.000)
    Stock boom                               0.34***     0.36***     0.18***     0.18***                 0.26***    0.28***
                                              (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)                (0.000)    (0.000)
    Stock bust                                0.38***     0.38***       0.08        0.07                 0.37***    0.37***
                                              (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.137)      (0.181)                (0.000)    (0.000)
    log(Bank size)                           0.26***     0.25***     0.10***     0.09***        0.01     0.26***   0.25***
                                              (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.001)    (0.812)     (0.000)    (0.000)
    log(Bank size) · Real estate boom           -0.01       -0.01      -0.02        -0.02      -0.04    -0.15*** -0.15***
                                              (0.490)     (0.492)    (0.373)      (0.336)    (0.108)     (0.000)    (0.000)
    log(Bank size) · Real estate bust        0.17***     0.16***     0.16***     0.16***     0.20***     0.13***     0.09*
                                              (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.007)    (0.056)
    log(Bank size) · Stock boom               0.07***    0.06***    0.07***      0.07***     0.07***      0.06**    0.05**
                                              (0.002)     (0.003)    (0.001)      (0.001)    (0.002)     (0.049)    (0.047)
    log(Bank size) · Stock bust               0.11***     0.11***    0.11***      0.12***    0.14***     0.17***    0.17***
                                              (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)
    Loan growth                               -1.49**     -1.59**   -1.77***     -1.79***   -2.02***    -4.79*** -4.95***
                                              (0.020)     (0.014)    (0.003)      (0.002)    (0.001)     (0.000)    (0.000)
    Loan growth · Real estate boom            1.43**       1.58**   2.25***      2.22***     2.23***        1.60      1.84
                                              (0.044)     (0.026)    (0.001)      (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.234)    (0.172)
    Loan growth · Real estate bust           4.47***     4.58***     4.24***     4.36***      3.18**        3.78      5.32
                                              (0.003)     (0.002)    (0.003)      (0.002)    (0.012)     (0.221)    (0.104)
    Loan growth · Stock boom                     0.86        1.03       0.90        0.93        0.70      3.41**    3.51**
                                              (0.202)     (0.140)    (0.142)      (0.139)    (0.193)     (0.017)    (0.013)
    Loan growth · Stock bust                  2.81***     2.94***      1.38*        1.24*      1.15*        3.68      3.49
                                              (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.068)      (0.100)    (0.075)     (0.102)    (0.136)
    Leverage                                   0.00*         0.00     0.00**       0.00**     0.00**     0.01***   0.01***
                                              (0.097)     (0.107)    (0.031)      (0.030)    (0.044)     (0.000)    (0.000)
    Leverage · Real estate boom               0.01**      0.01**     0.01**       0.01**    0.01***        0.01*     0.01*
                                              (0.028)     (0.020)    (0.011)      (0.010)    (0.000)     (0.086)    (0.056)
    Leverage · Real estate bust                 -0.01       -0.01    -0.01**       -0.01*   -0.01***        0.01      0.02
                                              (0.123)     (0.206)    (0.040)      (0.062)    (0.005)     (0.495)    (0.400)
    Leverage · Stock boom                    -0.01***    -0.01***   -0.01***     -0.01***   -0.01***        0.00     -0.00
                                              (0.002)     (0.001)    (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.003)     (0.879)    (0.907)
    Leverage · Stock bust                    -0.02***    -0.02***   -0.02***     -0.02***   -0.02***    -0.02***   -0.02***
                                              (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.002)    (0.004)
    Maturity mismatch                        -0.65***    -0.62***   -0.47***     -0.46***   -0.33***    -1.04*** -1.02***
                                              (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.006)     (0.000)    (0.000)
    MM · Real estate boom                     0.21**       0.18*     0.20**      0.20***     0.18**      0.40**      0.29*
                                              (0.024)     (0.051)    (0.014)      (0.010)    (0.025)     (0.025)    (0.089)
    MM · Real estate bust                        0.33      0.41*      0.42**      0.46**       -0.13     1.14***   1.24***
                                              (0.122)     (0.063)    (0.024)      (0.016)    (0.455)     (0.000)    (0.000)
    MM · Stock boom                          0.38***      0.48***    0.46***      0.48***       0.03        0.19      0.24
                                              (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.735)     (0.225)    (0.136)
    MM · Stock bust                            0.31**     0.43***     0.21**      0.27***      -0.02        0.19      0.30
                                              (0.020)     (0.000)    (0.023)      (0.005)    (0.790)     (0.364)    (0.147)
    Real estate boom length                     -0.00                 0.00*                             -0.00***
                                              (0.224)                (0.076)                             (0.007)
    Real estate boom size                                  -0.00                 0.00***                             -0.00
                                                          (0.937)                (0.006)                            (0.183)
    Real estate bust length                  -0.01***                -0.01***                           -0.02***
                                              (0.000)                 (0.001)                            (0.001)
    Real estate bust size                                -0.03***                -0.01**                             -0.01
                                                          (0.009)                (0.018)                            (0.359)
    Stock boom length                         0.01***                 0.00                               0.01***
                                              (0.000)                (0.141)                             (0.000)
    Stock boom size                                      0.00***                  0.00                              0.00***
                                                         (0.000)                 (0.258)                            (0.000)
    Stock bust length                        -0.03***                -0.01***                            -0.02**
                                              (0.001)                 (0.006)                            (0.016)
    Stock bust size                                       -0.01                  -0.01***                          -0.02***
                                                         (0.112)                  (0.001)                           (0.000)
    Bank FE                                     Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes       Yes
    Macro controls                              Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes       Yes
    CoVaR controls                              No         No          Yes          Yes        No            No        No
    Country-time FE                             No         No          No           No         Yes           No        No
    No. of obs.                               165,149    165,149     165,149     165,149     164,934     162,776   162,776
    Adj. R2                                    0.831      0.830       0.865        0.865      0.891        0.674     0.672
    Adj. R2 within                             0.141      0.135       0.313        0.313      0.044       0.161      0.156
                                            Table 9: Large and small banks
Bubble estimates are based on the BSADF approach. Columns 1 to 4 provide estimates of our baseline regressions for small
and large banks separately. We eliminate the US bias in the sample of small banks by excluding the smallest US banks. See
Table C2 for an overview of the number of banks and observations per country. Columns 5 and 6 provide estimates from
regressions with each bank’s observations weighted by their mean bank size relative to the size of their financial system (North
America, Europe, Japan, or Australia). Variable definitions are provided in Table C1. Standard errors are clustered at the
bank and time levels. ***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels. P-values are in parentheses.

                                                          (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)         (6)
                 Specification:                            Large banks             Small banks         Weighted by size
                 Dependent variable:                      log(∆CoVaR)             log(∆CoVaR)             log(∆CoVaR)
        Real estate boom                                0.01         0.03     0.04**      0.05***       -0.01        0.01
                                                      (0.470)      (0.101)    (0.044)      (0.008)    (0.645)     (0.578)
        Real estate bust                              0.15***      0.15***    0.13***     0.14***     0.13***    0.13***
                                                      (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
        Stock boom                                    0.17***      0.16***    0.11***     0.09***     0.15***    0.14***
                                                      (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
        Stock bust                                    0.22***      0.21***    0.17***     0.17***     0.19***    0.20***
                                                      (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
        log(Bank size)                                0.13***      0.13***    0.12***     0.11***     0.12***    0.11***
                                                      (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
        log(Bank size) · Real estate boom             -0.03**     -0.03***      -0.00        -0.00      -0.01       -0.01
                                                      (0.018)      (0.008)    (0.782)      (0.809)    (0.363)     (0.108)
        log(Bank size) · Real estate bust                0.02        0.01       -0.01        -0.01     0.04**      0.04**
                                                      (0.198)      (0.498)    (0.752)      (0.710)    (0.012)     (0.033)
        log(Bank size) · Stock boom                      0.01        0.02     0.06***     0.07***        0.01       0.01*
                                                      (0.337)      (0.157)    (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.188)     (0.071)
        log(Bank size) · Stock bust                     0.02*       0.02*        0.01         0.01       0.01      0.01*
                                                      (0.061)      (0.096)    (0.227)      (0.268)    (0.164)     (0.098)
        Loan growth                                  -1.73*** -1.80***         -0.53*       -0.60*   -1.43***    -1.49***
                                                      (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.089)      (0.055)    (0.003)     (0.002)
        Loan growth · Real estate boom                  0.72         0.80      0.74*       0.80**      1.03*      1.27**
                                                      (0.143)      (0.112)    (0.070)      (0.049)    (0.070)     (0.034)
        Loan growth · Real estate bust                3.84***      4.14***      1.42*        1.25*    3.12***    3.46***
                                                      (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.059)      (0.080)    (0.003)     (0.001)
        Loan growth · Stock boom                       0.77*         0.73        0.39         0.40       0.07        0.08
                                                      (0.096)      (0.113)    (0.446)      (0.445)    (0.878)     (0.871)
        Loan growth · Stock bust                        1.22*       1.47**       0.64         0.64       0.76        0.73
                                                      (0.072)      (0.024)    (0.328)      (0.358)    (0.274)     (0.300)
        Leverage                                       0.00**       0.00**       0.00         0.00      0.00*        0.00
                                                      (0.042)      (0.043)    (0.669)      (0.459)    (0.075)     (0.131)
        Leverage · Real estate boom                      0.00        0.00       -0.00        -0.00     0.00*      0.01**
                                                      (0.563)      (0.395)    (0.272)      (0.181)    (0.065)     (0.012)
        Leverage · Real estate bust                  -0.01***      -0.01**     0.01*         0.01*      -0.00       -0.00
                                                      (0.005)      (0.015)    (0.072)      (0.079)    (0.446)     (0.693)
        Leverage · Stock boom                         -0.00**     -0.00***      -0.00       -0.00*      -0.00     -0.00**
                                                      (0.023)      (0.004)    (0.151)      (0.061)    (0.122)     (0.022)
        Leverage · Stock bust                        -0.01***     -0.01***      -0.00        -0.00    -0.00**     -0.00**
                                                      (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.876)      (0.810)    (0.017)     (0.018)
        Maturity mismatch                               -0.16        -0.15   -0.22*** -0.23***        -0.18**     -0.21**
                                                      (0.106)      (0.120)    (0.003)      (0.002)    (0.034)     (0.017)
        MM · Real estate boom                            0.04        0.06     0.16***     0.17***       0.12        0.13
                                                      (0.604)      (0.424)    (0.009)      (0.004)    (0.265)     (0.194)
        MM · Real estate bust                            0.10        0.13        0.15       0.17*        0.06        0.09
                                                      (0.418)      (0.314)    (0.119)      (0.080)    (0.630)     (0.502)
        MM · Stock boom                                0.17*        0.20**     -0.14*        -0.11       0.14      0.14*
                                                      (0.070)      (0.041)    (0.096)      (0.205)    (0.137)     (0.094)
        MM · Stock bust                                  0.11        0.13*       0.02         0.04       0.08        0.12
                                                      (0.108)      (0.068)    (0.816)      (0.570)    (0.395)     (0.245)
        Real estate boom length                         -0.00                   0.00                 -0.00***
                                                      (0.655)                 (0.606)                 (0.006)
        Real estate boom size                                        0.00                     0.00                  -0.00
                                                                   (0.537)                 (0.118)                (0.160)
        Real estate bust length                      -0.00***                -0.00***                 -0.00**
                                                      (0.000)                 (0.003)                 (0.021)
        Real estate bust size                                     -0.01***                 -0.01**                -0.00**
                                                                   (0.000)                 (0.017)                (0.012)
        Stock boom length                            0.01***                 0.00***                  0.01***
                                                      (0.000)                 (0.000)                 (0.000)
        Stock boom size                                            0.00***                0.00***                 0.00***
                                                                   (0.000)                 (0.007)                (0.000)
        Stock bust length                             -0.01**                  -0.00*                   -0.01
                                                      (0.023)                 (0.082)                 (0.152)
        Stock bust size                                              -0.00                   -0.00                  -0.00
                                                                   (0.397)                 (1.000)                (0.719)
        Bank FE                                          Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes
        Macro controls                                   Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes
        No. of obs.                                    28,844       28,844     30,502      30,502     155,222    155,222
        Adj. R2                                        0.770         0.767      0.916        0.915     0.828        0.826
        Adj. R2 within                                 0.238        0.229      0.179        0.174      0.237       0.228
                                            Table 10: Choice of sample period
Columns 1 and 2 restate the baseline regression results from Table 5, columns 6 and 7. Columns 3 to 6 restrict the sample period
as indicated. Bubble estimates are based on the BSADF approach. Variable definitions are provided in Table C1. Standard
errors are clustered at the bank and time levels. ***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels. P-values are in
parentheses.
                                                        (1)        (2)           (3)          (4)     (5)            (6)
                 Specification:                           Full sample               >1995m1                 6=2008
                 Dependent variable:                                                ∆CoVaR
        Real estate boom                              0.09**     0.11***        0.03        0.06    0.12***     0.14***
                                                      (0.031)     (0.004)    (0.455)      (0.139)    (0.000)     (0.000)
        Real estate bust                              0.25**       0.27**     0.22*       0.25**     0.39***    0.40***
                                                      (0.036)     (0.018)    (0.084)      (0.045)    (0.000)     (0.000)
        Stock boom                                    0.34***     0.36***    0.30***      0.33***    0.30***     0.31***
                                                      (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
        Stock bust                                    0.38***     0.38***    0.36***      0.35***    0.43***     0.42***
                                                      (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
        log(Bank size)                                0.26***     0.25***    0.22***      0.22***    0.17***     0.16***
                                                      (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
        log(Bank size) · Real estate boom               -0.01       -0.01      -0.02        -0.02       0.01       0.01
                                                      (0.490)     (0.492)    (0.287)      (0.280)    (0.644)     (0.634)
        log(Bank size) · Real estate bust             0.17***     0.16***    0.17***      0.16***    0.13***     0.12***
                                                      (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
        log(Bank size) · Stock boom                   0.07***     0.06***     0.06**       0.05**    0.08***     0.07***
                                                      (0.002)     (0.003)    (0.012)      (0.021)    (0.000)     (0.000)
        log(Bank size) · Stock bust                   0.11***     0.11***    0.11***      0.11***    0.12***     0.12***
                                                      (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
        Loan growth                                   -1.49**     -1.59**     -1.24*      -1.34**   -1.67***    -1.83***
                                                      (0.020)     (0.014)    (0.066)      (0.049)    (0.000)     (0.000)
        Loan growth · Real estate boom                1.43**      1.58**      1.40*       1.55**        0.87      1.09*
                                                      (0.044)     (0.026)    (0.062)      (0.041)    (0.108)     (0.050)
        Loan growth · Real estate bust                4.47***     4.58***    4.79***      4.89***    5.25***     5.58***
                                                      (0.003)     (0.002)    (0.001)      (0.001)    (0.006)     (0.003)
        Loan growth · Stock boom                         0.86        1.03       0.78         0.93     1.29**     1.48**
                                                      (0.202)     (0.140)    (0.243)      (0.183)    (0.033)     (0.018)
        Loan growth · Stock bust                      2.81***     2.94***    2.45***      2.66***    2.98***     3.11***
                                                      (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.005)      (0.003)    (0.001)     (0.000)
        Leverage                                        0.00*        0.00       0.00         0.00      0.00*      0.00**
                                                      (0.097)     (0.107)    (0.147)      (0.166)    (0.054)     (0.047)
        Leverage · Real estate boom                   0.01**      0.01**    0.01***      0.01***      0.01*       0.01*
                                                      (0.028)     (0.020)    (0.010)      (0.007)    (0.075)     (0.063)
        Leverage · Real estate bust                     -0.01       -0.01      -0.01        -0.00      -0.01       -0.01
                                                      (0.123)     (0.206)    (0.431)      (0.644)    (0.134)     (0.190)
        Leverage · Stock boom                        -0.01***    -0.01***   -0.01*** -0.01***       -0.01***    -0.01***
                                                      (0.002)     (0.001)    (0.006)      (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.001)
        Leverage · Stock bust                        -0.02***    -0.02***   -0.02*** -0.02***       -0.02***    -0.02***
                                                      (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
        Maturity mismatch                            -0.65***    -0.62***   -0.55***     -0.52***   -0.55***    -0.55***
                                                      (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
        MM · Real estate boom                         0.21**       0.18*        0.11        0.07    0.22***      0.22**
                                                      (0.024)     (0.051)    (0.215)      (0.414)    (0.009)     (0.010)
        MM · Real estate bust                            0.33      0.41*        0.26         0.35     0.52**     0.58**
                                                      (0.122)     (0.063)    (0.245)      (0.122)    (0.017)     (0.011)
        MM · Stock boom                              0.38***     0.48***    0.32***      0.43***     0.35***    0.46***
                                                      (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.004)      (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
        MM · Stock bust                                0.31**     0.43***     0.29**      0.43***    0.34***     0.43***
                                                      (0.020)     (0.000)    (0.030)      (0.001)    (0.005)     (0.000)
        Real estate boom length                         -0.00                  -0.00                   -0.00
                                                      (0.224)                (0.318)                 (0.509)
        Real estate boom size                                     -0.00                      0.00                 0.00
                                                                 (0.937)                  (0.849)                (0.940)
        Real estate bust length                      -0.01***               -0.01***                -0.01**
                                                      (0.000)                (0.000)                (0.017)
        Real estate bust size                                    -0.03***                -0.03***                -0.01**
                                                                  (0.009)                 (0.004)                (0.036)
        Stock boom length                            0.01***                0.02***                 0.01***
                                                     (0.000)                 (0.000)                (0.000)
        Stock boom size                                          0.00***                  0.00***               0.00***
                                                                 (0.000)                  (0.000)               (0.000)
        Stock bust length                            -0.03***               -0.03***                -0.02***
                                                      (0.001)                (0.000)                 (0.003)
        Stock bust size                                           -0.01                    -0.01*                -0.01
                                                                 (0.112)                  (0.092)               (0.196)
        Bank FE                                        Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes      Yes         Yes
        Macro controls                                 Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes      Yes         Yes
        No. of obs.                                  165,149     165,149     157,910      157,910   156,468     156,468
        Adj. R2                                       0.831       0.830       0.834         0.833    0.884       0.883
        Adj. R2 within                                0.141       0.135       0.132        0.125     0.153       0.144
    Table 11: The role of bank and bubble characteristics: additionally controlling for business cycles
Columns 1 and 2 restate the baseline regression results from Table 5, columns 6 and 7. Columns 3 and 4 additionally include
a business cycle indicator. Bubble estimates are based on the BSADF approach. Macro controls are a banking crisis dummy,
GDP growth, interest rates, inflation, and investment-to-GDP growth. Variable definitions are provided in Table C1. Standard
errors are clustered at the bank and time levels. ***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels. P-values are in
parentheses.

                                                                  (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)
                                Dependent variable:                               ∆CoVaR
                    Real estate boom                            0.09**     0.11***     0.11***     0.13***
                                                                (0.031)     (0.004)    (0.003)     (0.000)
                    Real estate bust                            0.25**       0.27**      0.22*      0.25**
                                                                (0.036)     (0.018)    (0.069)     (0.037)
                    Stock boom                                  0.34***     0.36***    0.38***     0.40***
                                                                (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
                    Stock bust                                  0.38***     0.38***    0.29***     0.28***
                                                                (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.001)
                    log(Bank size)                              0.26***     0.25***    0.27***     0.27***
                                                                (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
                    log(Bank size) · Real estate boom             -0.01       -0.01      -0.01       -0.01
                                                                (0.490)     (0.492)    (0.494)     (0.465)
                    log(Bank size) · Real estate bust           0.17***     0.16***    0.18***     0.17***
                                                                (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
                    log(Bank size) · Stock boom                 0.07***     0.06***    0.06***     0.06***
                                                                (0.002)     (0.003)    (0.002)     (0.004)
                    log(Bank size) · Stock bust                 0.11***     0.11***    0.12***     0.12***
                                                                (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
                    Loan growth                                 -1.49**     -1.59**   -1.78***    -1.87***
                                                                (0.020)     (0.014)    (0.005)     (0.003)
                    Loan growth · Real estate boom              1.43**      1.58**    2.02***     2.12***
                                                                (0.044)     (0.026)    (0.005)     (0.003)
                    Loan growth · Real estate bust              4.47***     4.58***    4.61***     4.59***
                                                                (0.003)     (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.002)
                    Loan growth · Stock boom                       0.86        1.03       0.86        1.01
                                                                (0.202)     (0.140)    (0.206)     (0.155)
                    Loan growth · Stock bust                    2.81***     2.94***    2.74***     2.90***
                                                                (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.001)
                    Leverage                                      0.00*        0.00      0.00*       0.00*
                                                                (0.097)     (0.107)    (0.072)     (0.071)
                    Leverage · Real estate boom                  0.01**     0.01**     0.01**      0.01**
                                                                (0.028)     (0.020)    (0.030)     (0.028)
                    Leverage · Real estate bust                   -0.01       -0.01     -0.01*       -0.01
                                                                (0.123)     (0.206)    (0.083)     (0.135)
                    Leverage · Stock boom                      -0.01***    -0.01***   -0.01***    -0.01***
                                                                (0.002)     (0.001)    (0.003)     (0.001)
                    Leverage · Stock bust                      -0.02***    -0.02*** -0.02***      -0.02***
                                                                (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
                    Maturity mismatch                          -0.65***    -0.62***   -0.60***    -0.59***
                                                                (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
                    MM · Real estate boom                       0.21**       0.18*     0.19**      0.18**
                                                                (0.024)     (0.051)    (0.044)     (0.049)
                    MM · Real estate bust                          0.33       0.41*       0.26        0.34
                                                                (0.122)     (0.063)    (0.226)     (0.121)
                    MM · Stock boom                             0.38***     0.48***    0.39***     0.49***
                                                                (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
                    MM · Stock bust                              0.31**     0.43***       0.21      0.32**
                                                                (0.020)     (0.000)    (0.137)     (0.015)
                    Real estate boom length                       -0.00                  0.00
                                                                (0.224)                (0.922)
                    Real estate boom size                                     -0.00                 0.00
                                                                            (0.937)                (0.300)
                    Real estate bust length                    -0.01***               -0.01***
                                                                (0.000)                (0.000)
                    Real estate bust size                                  -0.03***               -0.03***
                                                                            (0.009)                (0.005)
                    Stock boom length                           0.01***               0.01***
                                                                (0.000)                (0.000)
                    Stock boom size                                         0.00***                0.00***
                                                                            (0.000)                (0.000)
                    Stock bust length                          -0.03***               -0.03***
                                                                (0.001)                (0.001)
                    Stock bust size                                           -0.01                 -0.01
                                                                            (0.112)                (0.120)
                    Bank FE                                       Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes
                    Macro Controls                                Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes
                    Business Cycle                                No            No        Yes        Yes
                    No. of obs.                                 165,149     165,149    165,149     165,149
                    Adj. R2                                      0.831        0.830      0.833      0.832
                    Adj. R2 within                               0.141       0.135      0.153       0.148
Appendix A            Estimation of bubble episodes

      The BSADF approach applies sequences of ADF tests to systematically changing fractions of

a sample to identify episodes of explosive processes in price data. We follow the estimation strategy

proposed by Phillips, Shi, and Yu (2015a). To fix notation, let r1 denote some starting fraction

of the sample and r2 some ending fraction, implying r1 < r2 . The fraction of the corresponding

subsample is given by rw = r2 −r1 . Furthermore, let r0 denote the fractional threshold that ensures

that any analyzed subsample is large enough for the test to be efficient. The threshold is chosen
                            √
according to r0 = 0.01 + 1.8 T , where T refers to the number of observations in the sample.

      The BSADF statistic (as opposed to the approach) for sample fraction r2 is given by the

supremum of all values of the test statistics of ADF tests performed while holding the ending

fraction of the sample fixed at r2 and varying the starting fraction from 0 to r2 − r0 . Figure A1

illustrates the idea. Formally, the BSADF statistic is thus given by


                              BSADFr2 (r0 ) =       sup           {BADFrr12 } .                   (A1)
                                                r1 ∈[0,r2 −r0 ]




                           Figure A1: Recursive nature of the BSADF test




                             Source: Phillips, Shi, and Yu (2015a, p. 1052)

      The identification of bubble episodes relies on a sequence of BSADF statistics resulting from

varying ending fraction r2 . Let the fraction of the sample at which the bubble starts be denoted

by re , the fraction of the sample at which it ends by rf , and the estimators of both by r̂e and r̂f ,

respectively. The starting fraction re is estimated by the earliest point in time for which the BSADF

test rejects the null hypothesis of no bubble existing. Similarly, the estimator for ending fraction rf


                                                  A1
is given by the earliest point in time after the emergence of the bubble and some minimum bubble

length δlog(T ) for which the BSADF test does not reject the null. Formally,


                            r̂e =      inf [r2 : BSADFr2 (r0 ) > scvrβ2 ]                         (A2)
                                    r2 ∈[r0 ,1]

                       and r̂f =             inf            [r2 : BSADFr2 (r0 ) < scvrβ2 ] ,      (A3)
                                    r2 ∈[r̂e +δlog(T ),1]


where T is the number of observations of the analyzed time series and scvrβ2 is the critical value of

the BSADF statistic based on bT r2 c observations and confidence level β. bT r2 c refers to the largest

integer smaller than or equal to T r2 . Critical values are obtained by Monte Carlo simulations based

on 2,000 repetitions. The parameter δ is to be chosen freely according to one’s beliefs about what

minimum duration should be required in order to call surging prices a bubble. The minimum length

requirement excludes short blips from being identified as bubbles and prevents estimating an overly

early termination date of bubbles taking off slowly. We choose δ such that the minimum length

of bubbles equals 6 months. The test identifies a few instances of bust-boom cycles that might

be interpreted as “negative bubbles.” Unfortunately, their number is too low to be included as a

separate category in the main analyses. As the dynamics during such bust-boom cycles are likely

to be quite different from those during customary bubble episodes, we disregard these bust-boom

episodes when constructing the bubble indicators.


Appendix B            Estimation of ∆CoVaR

      We obtain daily information on the number of outstanding shares, unpadded unadjusted

prices of common equity in national currency, and the corresponding market capitalization in US

Dollar from Thomson Reuters Datastream. To exclude public offerings, repurchases of shares and

similar activities from biasing the results, observations for which the number of outstanding shares

changed compared to the previous day are dropped. The daily observations are then collapsed to

weekly frequency.




                                                             A2
       We calculate the weekly return losses on equity (X) of institution i and those of the financial

system:

                                                    i Ni           i i
                                         i         Pt+1  t+1 − Pt Nt
                                        Xt+1 =−                        and                                    (B1)
                                                         Pti Nti
                                      system
                                                 X MV i
                                     Xt+1      =     P t i Xt+1  i
                                                                     ,                                        (B2)
                                                 i     i M V t


where Pti is the price of common equity of institution i at time t in national currency, N refers to the

number of outstanding shares and M V is the market value in US Dollar. We use national currencies

to compute the return losses in Equation (B1) to prevent exchange rate fluctuations from biasing

our results.26 When calculating market shares of each institution (the ratio in Equation (B2)),

we have to rely on a uniform currency, which is why we use the market values in US dollar there.

While exchange rate fluctuations introduce noise into the calculation of system return losses, they

do not bias the results.

       The return losses are merged with variables capturing general risk factors. Adrian and

Brunnermeier (2016) use the following state variables:


    • the change in the three-month yield calculated from the three-month T-Bill rate published

      with the Federal Reserve Board’s H.15 release;

    • the change in the slope of the yield curve as captured by the yield spread between the ten-year

      treasury rate (FRB H.15) and the three-month T-Bill rate;

    • the TED spread, measured as the difference between the three-month Libor rate (FRED

      database) and the three-month secondary market bill rate (FRB H.15);

    • the change in the credit spread between the bonds obtaining a Baa rating from Moody’s

      (FRB H.15) and the ten-year treasury rate;

    • the weekly market returns of the S&P 500;

  26
     To clarify the relevance of the currency, suppose return losses of Eurozone banks were calculated in US dollar.
Further suppose, the euro would depreciate vis-à-vis the US dollar. Then, all other things equal, all banks in the
Eurozone would simultaneously experience return losses which would lead to increases in ∆CoVaR.




                                                        A3
      • the equity volatility calculated as a 22-day rolling window standard deviation of the daily

        CRSP equity market return;

      • the difference between the weekly real estate sector return (companies with a SIC code be-

        tween 65 and 66) and the weekly financial system return (all financial companies in the

        sample).


As usual for the estimation of ∆CoVaR outside the US, we do not include the spread between the

real estate sector return and the financial system return.27 Since we estimate ∆CoVaR in a multi-

country setting, we assign each financial institution to one of the following four financial systems:

North America, Europe, Japan or Australia. The association with a system is based on the location

of an institution’s headquarter. We use a distinct set of state variables for each system. Table B1

provides an overview of the data used to construct the system-specific control variables.

        The estimation procedure starts by estimating the VaR and the relationship between institution-

specific losses and system losses as

                                      i   i
                               V[
                                aRq,t = X̂q,t = α̂qi + γ̂qi Mt−1 ,                                    (B3)
                               system|i
                            X̂q,t         = α̂qsystem|i + γ̂qsystem|i Mt−1 + β̂qsystem|i Xti .        (B4)


Mt−1 is a vector of the macroeconomic control variables. We apply a stress level of q = 98% in

all regressions. The conditional value at risk is calculated by combining estimates from the two

previous regressions:


                               i                                                            i
                         CoV aRq,t = α̂qsystem|i + γ̂qsystem|i Mt−1 + β̂qsystem|i V[
                                                                                   aRq,t .            (B5)


Following the definition provided in Equation (1), the time series of ∆CoVaR is calculated as


                                           i                          i           i
                                    ∆CoV aRq,t = β̂qsystem|i (V[
                                                               aRq,t − V[
                                                                        aR50,t ) .                    (B6)

 27
      See, e. g., López-Espinosa, Moreno, Rubia, and Valderrama (2012); Barth and Schnabel (2013).




                                                            A4
      We estimate ∆CoVaR at weekly frequency. To merge them with all other variables included

in our main analyses, we collapse the resulting estimates to monthly frequency by taking averages.


                                        Table B1: System-specific data
The 10-year government bond rates for Germany, Japan and Australia are only available at monthly fre-
quency. In these instances, we use cubic spline interpolations to obtain the weekly observations required for
the quantile regressions.

   Adrian and                                           Data used instead
  Brunnermeier
      2016            North America              Europe                  Japan                Australia

                           US 10Y              German 10Y            Japanese 10Y           Australian 10Y
 10Y treasury rate      treasury rate         govt. bond rate       govt. bond rate         govt. bond rate
                           (FRED)                (OECD)                (OECD)                  (OECD)

                           US 3M                German 3M             Japanese 3M           Australian 3M
  3M T-Bill rate         T-Bill rate          govt. bond rate       govt. bond rate        govt. bond rate
                          (FRED)            (Bloomberg, FRED)     (Bloomberg, FRED)      (Bloomberg, FRED)

                                               3M Fibor and        3M Japanese Libor        Australian 3M
                       3M Libor rate
   3M Libor rate                              3M Euribor rate            rate               interbank rate
                         (FRED)
                                               (Datastream)            (FRED)                (Datastream)

                        Moody’s Baa            Moody’s Baa            Moody’s Baa            Moody’s Baa
   Moody’s Baa
                        rated bonds            rated bonds            rated bonds            rated bonds
   rated bonds
                          (FRED)                 (FRED)                 (FRED)                 (FRED)

                         MSCI North
                                               MSCI Europe           MSCI Japan             MSCI Australia
      S&P500              America
                                               (Datastream)          (Datastream)            (Datastream)
                        (Datastream)

                         MSCI North
   CRSP equity                                 MSCI Europe           MSCI Japan             MSCI Australia
                          America
   market index                                (Datastream)          (Datastream)            (Datastream)
                        (Datastream)




                                                     A5
Appendix C           Additional figures and tables

                       Figure C1: Bubble episodes by country and asset class
                    BSADF approach with price-to-rent and price-to-dividend data
 Periods colored in blue represent the boom phase of an asset price bubble, periods in grey refer to
 the bust phase of a bubble. Bubble episodes are estimated based on the BSADF approach using
 price-to-dividend and price-to-rent data. For details on the estimation procedure see Section 3.2 and
 Appendix A.
 (a) Stock market bubble episodes




 (b) Real estate bubble episodes




                                                 A6
                       Figure C2: Bubble episodes by country and asset class
                                      Trend-deviation approach
Periods colored in blue represent the boom phase of an asset price bubble, periods in grey refer to the
bust phase of a bubble. Bubble episodes are estimated following the strategy in Jordà, Schularick, and
Taylor (2015b). For details on the estimation procedure see Section 3.2.
(a) Stock market bubble episodes




(b) Real estate bubble episodes




                                                 A7
                 Figure C3: Systemic risk during bubble episodes in dependence of bank and bubble characteristics
                                       Alternative bubble measure: BSADF approach with price-to-rent and price-to-dividend data
   The figure illustrates the distribution of the increase in systemic risk during bubble episodes in percent
   of the median of ∆CoVaR. The white horizontal line within each box refers to the increase at the median
   of all characteristics. The upper and lower end of the boxes refer to the increase at the 75th and 25th
   percentile of the distribution of the indicated bank or bubble characteristics. The upper and lower end of
   the lines refer to the 95th and 5th percentile. The results rely on the average of the estimated coefficients
   in Table 6, columns 3 and 4. The largest bank does not simultaneously exhibit the largest loan growth,
   leverage, and maturity mismatch, such that the range depending on all bank characteristics is smaller
   than the sum of the ranges of individual bank characteristics.

                                                    Real estate boom                                                         Real estate bust
                                  75




                                                                                                                        75
In % of the median of Delta-CoVaR




                                                                                      In % of the median of Delta-CoVaR
                            60




                                                                                                                  60
                     45




                                                                                                           45
              30




                                                                                                    30
       15




                                                                                             15
0




                                                                                      0
                 -15




                                                                                                       -15




                                                   Stock market boom                                                         Stock market bust
                                  75




                                                                                                                        75
In % of the median of Delta-CoVaR




                                                                                      In % of the median of Delta-CoVaR
                            60




                                                                                                                  60
                     45




                                                                                                           45
              30




                                                                                                    30
       15




                                                                                             15
0




                                                                                      0
                 -15




                                                                                                       -15




                                                                                 A8
                  Figure C4: Systemic risk during bubble episodes in dependence of bank and bubble characteristics
                                             Alternative bubble measure: trend-deviation approach
   The figure illustrates the distribution of the increase in systemic risk during bubble episodes in percent
   of the median of ∆CoVaR. The white horizontal line within each box refers to the increase at the median
   of all characteristics. The upper and lower end of the boxes refer to the increase at the 75th and 25th
   percentile of the distribution of the indicated bank or bubble characteristics. The upper and lower end of
   the lines refer to the 95th and 5th percentile. The results rely on the average of the estimated coefficients
   in Table 6, columns 5 and 6. The largest bank does not simultaneously exhibit the largest loan growth,
   leverage, and maturity mismatch, such that the range depending on all bank characteristics is smaller
   than the sum of the ranges of individual bank characteristics.

                                        Real estate boom                                                          Real estate bust
                  75




                                                                                            75
                                   60




                                                                                                             60
   In % of the median of Delta-CoVaR




                                                                             In % of the median of Delta-CoVaR
                             45




                                                                                                       45
                     30




                                                                                               30
               15




                                                                                         15
        0




                                                                                  0
-15




                                                                          -15




                                        Stock market boom                                                         Stock market bust
                  75




                                                                                            75
                                   60




                                                                                                             60
   In % of the median of Delta-CoVaR




                                                                             In % of the median of Delta-CoVaR
                             45




                                                                                                       45
                     30




                                                                                               30
               15




                                                                                         15
        0




                                                                                  0
-15




                                                                          -15




                                                                     A9
             Figure C5: Systemic risk during bubble episodes in dependence of bank and bubble characteristics
                                                 Alternative systemic risk measure
  The figure illustrates the distribution of the increase in systemic risk during bubble episodes in percent
  of the median of ∆MES. The white horizontal line within each box refers to the increase at the median
  of all characteristics. The upper and lower end of the boxes refer to the increase at the 75th and 25th
  percentile of the distribution of the indicated bank or bubble characteristics. The upper and lower end of
  the lines refer to the 95th and 5th percentile. The results rely on the average of the estimated coefficients
  in Table 7, columns 6 and 7. The largest bank does not simultaneously exhibit the largest loan growth,
  leverage, and maturity mismatch, such that the range depending on all bank characteristics is smaller
  than the sum of the ranges of individual bank characteristics.

                              Real estate boom                                                  Real estate bust
             400




                                                                               100
                        300




                                                                                           75
In % of the median of MES




                                                                   In % of the median of MES
               200




                                                                                   50
       100




                                                                           25
0




                                                                   0
             -100




                                                                               -25




                              Stock market boom                                                 Stock market bust
             100




                                                                               100
                        75




                                                                                           75
In % of the median of MES




                                                                   In % of the median of MES
                50




                                                                                   50
        25




                                                                           25
0




                                                                   0
             -25




                                                                               -25




                                                               A10
                Figure C6: Evolution of ∆CoVaR and rolling ∆CoVaR over time
The figure displays the unweighted means of ∆CoVaR and the rolling ∆CoVaR in weekly percentage
points for the four financial systems in our sample: North America, Europe, Japan, and Australia.
Details on the estimation procedure of ∆CoVaR are provided in Section 3.3 and Appendix B. The
estimation procedure of the rolling ∆CoVaR is described in Section 6.1.


                    North America                                   Europe
      8




                                                  8
      6




                                                  6
      4




                                                  4
      2




                                                  2
      0




                                                  0




       1985m1     1995m1      2005m1     2015m1     1985m1    1995m1      2005m1     2015m1


                        Japan                                      Australia
      8




                                                  8
      6




                                                  6
      4




                                                  4
      2




                                                  2
      0




                                                  0




       1985m1     1995m1      2005m1     2015m1     1985m1    1995m1      2005m1     2015m1




                                              A11
              Figure C7: Bubble episodes by country and asset class: business cycles
Periods colored in light blue and light grey represent the boom and bust phase of asset price bubbles.
Periods colored in dark blue and dark grey represent the boom and bust phase of the business cycle.
Bubble episodes are estimated based on the BSADF approach. For details on the estimation procedure
see Section 3.2 and Appendix A.
(a) Stock market bubble episodes and business cycles




(b) Real estate bubble episodes and business cycles




                                                A12
                            Table C1: Variable definitions and data sources
Detailed information on the variables’ construction is provided in Sections 3, Appendix A, and Appendix B.

 Variable name                Description
 Dependent variable
   ∆CoVaR                   Change in the conditional value at risk; estimation strategy provided in
                            Section 3.3 and Appendix B. Source of market equity data: Datastream.
                            Sources of control variables: see Table B1.
   MES                      Marginal expected shortfall; estimation strategy provided in Section 3.3
                            Source of market equity data: Datastream.
   Rolling ∆CoVaR           Rolling window version of ∆CoVaR (see above); estimation strategy pro-
                            vided in Section 6.1.
 System-specific CoVaR variables
   Equity market returns    Weekly market returns of system-specific MSCI indices. Data sources: see
                            Table B1.
   Equity market volatility 22-day rolling window standard deviation of the daily system-specific MSCI
                            indices. Data sources: see Table B1.
   Change in the 3M yield The change in three-month government bond rates. Data sources: see Ta-
                            ble B1.
   Change in the slope      The change in the yield spread between ten-year and three-month govern-
   of the yield curve       ment bond rates. Data sources: see Table B1.
   TED spread               The difference between three-month Libor rates and three-month govern-
                            ment bond rates. Data sources: see Table B1.
   Credit spread            The difference between Moody’s Baa rated bonds and ten-year government
                            bond rates. Data sources: see Table B1.
 Bubble indicators
   Real estate boom         Country-specific binary indicator; equals one during the boom phase of a
                            real estate bubble; estimated based on the BSADF approach or following
                            the strategy in Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2015b) (Section 3.2). Source
                            of real estate date: OECD.
   Real estate bust         Country-specific binary indicator; equals one during the bust phase of a
                            real estate bubble; estimated based on the BSADF approach or following
                            the strategy in Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2015b) (Section 3.2). Source
                            of real estate date: OECD.
   Stock market boom        Country-specific binary indicator; equals one during the boom phase of a
                            stock market bubble; estimated based on the BSADF approach or following
                            the strategy in Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2015b) (Section 3.2). Source
                            of stock market indeces: Datastream.
   Stock market bust        Country-specific binary indicator; equals one during the bust phase of a
                            stock market bubble; estimated based on the BSADF approach or following
                            the strategy in Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2015b) (Section 3.2). Source
                            of stock market indeces: Datastream.

                                                                           (table continued on next page)




                                                  A13
                                     Table C1 - continued


Variable name                Description
Bubble characteristics
  Length                     Four country-specific variables (length of real estate boom, real estate
                             bust, stock market boom, stock market bust); number of months since
                             the beginning or climax of the respective bubble phase and episode;
                             equals zero outside of the respective bubble phase and episode (Sec-
                             tion 3.2). Sources of the underlying data: OECD and Datastream.
  Size                       Four country-specific variables (size of real estate boom, real estate bust,
                             stock market boom, stock market bust); size of an emerging bubble or
                             size of its collapse; equals zero outside of bubble episodes (Section 3.2).
                             Sources of the underlying data: OECD and Datastream.
Bank characteristics
  Bank size                  log(total assets); winsorized at 1%/99%. Source: Bankscope.

  Loan growth                ∆log(total loans); monthly growth rate of total loans excluding inter-
                             bank lending; winsorized at 1%/99%. Source: Bankscope.
  Leverage                   Total assets/equity; winsorized at 1%/99%. Source: Bankscope.

  Maturity mismatch (MM)     (Total deposits, money market and short-term funding – loans and ad-
                             vances to banks – cash and due from banks)/total assets; winsorized at
                             1%/99%. Source: Bankscope.
Macroeconomic variables
 Banking crisis              Country-specific binary indicator; equals one during a banking crisis;
                             Source: Laeven and Valencia (2012), updated.

  GDP growth                 ∆log(real GDP); monthly growth rate. Source: OECD.

  Interest rate              log(10-year government bond rate); Source: OECD.

  Inflation                  ∆log(CPI); monthly rate. Source: OECD.

  Investment-to-GDP growth   ∆log(investment/GDP); monthly rate. Source: OECD.




                                              A14
                                      Table C2: Sample coverage
The choice of countries is entirely determined by data availability. See Section 6.2 for robustness checks
confirming that the results are not driven by a single country.

                              Full sample             Large banks                      Small banks
 Country             Banks      # Obs. % Obs.    Banks # Obs. % Obs.          Banks      # Obs. % Obs.
 Australia               16       2,732     2        9    1,605     6              7       1,127     1
 Belgium                  5         597     0        3      514     2              2          83     0
 Canada                  14       1,976     1        9    1,662     6              5         314     0
 Denmark                 19       2,981     2        3      440     2             16       2,541     2
 Finland                  4         696     0        2      114     0              2         582     0
 France                  48       6,515     4       10    1,776     6             38       4,739     3
 Germany                 24       3,581     2       15    1,960     7              9       1,621     1
 Italy                   36       5,917     4       22    2,498     9             14       3,419     3
 Japan                  112       6,210     4       66    3,652    13             46       2,558     2
 Netherlands              9       1,198     1        3      283     1              6         915     1
 Norway                  24       3,369     2        3      283     1             21       3,086     2
 Portugal                 7         969     1        3      341     1              4         628     0
 Spain                   14       2,724     2       10    1,588     6              4       1,136     1
 Sweden                   6       1,192     1        4    1,084     4              2         108     0
 Switzerland             23       3,609     2       10      786     3             13       2,823     2
 UK                      20       3,633     2       12    2,233     8              8       1,400     1
 US                     883     117,250    71       59    7,493    26            824     109,757    80
 Total                1,264     165,149   100      243   28,312   100          1,021     136,837   100




                                                  A15
                      Table C3: Baseline regression without boom-bust distinction
Re-esimate of the baseline regression from Table 5, column 5, but without the boom-bust distinction. Bubble
characteristics are left out as they were defined in dependence of the switch from boom to bust. Bubble
estimates are based on the BSADF approach. Macro controls are a banking crisis dummy, GDP growth,
interest rates, inflation, and investment-to-GDP growth. Variable definitions are provided in Table C1.
Standard errors are clustered at the bank and time levels. ***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5% and
10% levels. P-values are in parentheses.

                                                                        (1)      (2)
                            Dependent variable:                           ∆CoVaR
                    Real estate bubble                              0.17***   0.17***
                                                                     (0.001)  (0.002)
                    Stock market bubble                             0.37***   0.19***
                                                                     (0.000)  (0.000)
                    log(Bank size)                                  0.28***     0.05*
                                                                     (0.000)  (0.086)
                    log(Bank size) · Real estate bubble                0.02      0.01
                                                                     (0.244)  (0.645)
                    log(Bank size) · Stock market bubble            0.05***   0.06***
                                                                     (0.001)  (0.001)
                    Loan growth                                     -1.98*** -2.29***
                                                                     (0.004)  (0.000)
                    Loan growth · Real estate bubble                2.37***   2.62***
                                                                     (0.004)  (0.000)
                    Loan growth · Stock market bubble               2.29***    1.22**
                                                                     (0.002)  (0.033)
                    Leverage                                          0.00*    0.01**
                                                                     (0.076)  (0.010)
                    Leverage · Real estate bubble                      0.00      0.00
                                                                     (0.412)  (0.623)
                    Leverage · Stock market bubble                  -0.01*** -0.01***
                                                                     (0.000)  (0.000)
                    Maturity mismatch                               -0.67*** -0.57***
                                                                     (0.000)  (0.000)
                    MM · Real estate bubble                         0.28***    0.18**
                                                                     (0.003)  (0.029)
                    MM · Stock market bubble                         0.51***  0.54***
                                                                     (0.000)  (0.000)
                    Bank FE                                            Yes       Yes
                    Time FE                                             No       Yes
                    Macro Controls                                     Yes       Yes
                    No. of obs.                                      165,149  165,149
                    Adj. R2                                           0.824     0.873
                    Adj. R2 within                                    0.107     0.028




                                                    A16
               Table C4: The role of bank and bubble characteristics: use of interpolated data
Columns 1 and 2 restate our baseline regressions from Table 5, columns 6 and 7. In columns 3 and 4, we estimate these regressions
based on quarterly data to test the robustness of the results with regard to the interpolation of data. Bubble estimates are based
on the BSADF approach. Macro controls are a banking crisis dummy, GDP growth, interest rates, inflation, and investment-
to-GDP growth. Variable definitions are provided in Table C1. Standard errors are clustered at the bank and time levels. ***,
**, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels. P-values are in parentheses.

                                                                (1)          (2)        (3)         (4)
                                 Dependent variable:                            ∆CoVaR
                                 Frequency:                          Monthly               Quarterly
                        Real estate boom                       0.09**     0.11***   0.15***      0.17***
                                                              (0.031)     (0.004)    (0.001)     (0.000)
                        Real estate bust                       0.25**      0.27**   0.42***      0.44***
                                                              (0.036)     (0.018)    (0.000)     (0.000)
                        Stock boom                            0.34***     0.36***   0.27***      0.29***
                                                              (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
                        Stock bust                            0.38***     0.38***   0.50***      0.51***
                                                              (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
                        log(Bank size)                        0.26***     0.25***   0.21***      0.20***
                                                              (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
                        log(Bank size) · Real estate boom       -0.01       -0.01       0.00       0.00
                                                              (0.490)     (0.492)    (0.962)     (0.963)
                        log(Bank size) · Real estate bust     0.17***     0.16***   0.17***      0.15***
                                                              (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.001)     (0.002)
                        log(Bank size) · Stock boom           0.07***     0.06***      0.05*       0.04
                                                              (0.002)     (0.003)    (0.090)     (0.103)
                        log(Bank size) · Stock bust           0.11***     0.11***   0.14***      0.14***
                                                              (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.001)     (0.001)
                        Loan growth                           -1.49**     -1.59**   -1.84***    -1.99***
                                                              (0.020)     (0.014)    (0.009)     (0.005)
                        Loan growth · Real estate boom         1.43**      1.58**      1.72*      1.89**
                                                              (0.044)     (0.026)    (0.071)     (0.050)
                        Loan growth · Real estate bust        4.47***     4.58***     4.73**     5.12***
                                                              (0.003)     (0.002)    (0.010)     (0.005)
                        Loan growth · Stock boom                 0.86       1.03       1.34*      1.54*
                                                              (0.202)     (0.140)    (0.093)     (0.070)
                        Loan growth · Stock bust              2.81***     2.94***   3.58***      3.83***
                                                              (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.003)     (0.001)
                        Leverage                                0.00*        0.00      0.00*      0.00*
                                                              (0.097)     (0.107)    (0.063)     (0.065)
                        Leverage · Real estate boom            0.01**      0.01**       0.01        0.01
                                                              (0.028)     (0.020)    (0.163)     (0.131)
                        Leverage · Real estate bust             -0.01       -0.01      -0.01       -0.01
                                                              (0.123)     (0.206)    (0.136)     (0.199)
                        Leverage · Stock boom                -0.01*** -0.01***       -0.01**     -0.01**
                                                              (0.002)     (0.001)    (0.027)     (0.017)
                        Leverage · Stock bust                -0.02*** -0.02***      -0.02*** -0.02***
                                                              (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.001)     (0.002)
                        Maturity mismatch                    -0.65***    -0.62*** -0.60***      -0.58***
                                                              (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
                        MM · Real estate boom                 0.21**       0.18*      0.26**      0.24*
                                                              (0.024)     (0.051)    (0.042)     (0.050)
                        MM · Real estate bust                    0.33       0.41*      0.46*      0.52*
                                                              (0.122)     (0.063)    (0.096)     (0.078)
                        MM · Stock boom                       0.38***     0.48***   0.41***      0.48***
                                                              (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
                        MM · Stock bust                        0.31**     0.43***     0.51**     0.60***
                                                              (0.020)     (0.000)    (0.012)     (0.002)
                        Real estate boom length                 -0.00                  -0.00
                                                              (0.224)                (0.588)
                        Real estate boom size                               -0.00                  0.00
                                                                          (0.937)                (0.608)
                        Real estate bust length              -0.01***                -0.01**
                                                              (0.000)                (0.011)
                        Real estate bust size                            -0.03***                  -0.02
                                                                          (0.009)                (0.133)
                        Stock boom length                    0.01***                0.01***
                                                              (0.000)                (0.000)
                        Stock boom size                                   0.00***                0.00***
                                                                          (0.000)                (0.001)
                        Stock bust length                    -0.03***                  -0.02
                                                              (0.001)                (0.285)
                        Stock bust size                                     -0.01                  -0.00
                                                                          (0.112)                (0.766)
                        Bank FE                                  Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
                        Macro Controls                           Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
                        No. of obs.                           165,149     165,149     55,128      55,128
                        Adj. R2                                 0.831       0.830      0.851       0.850
                        Adj. R2 within                          0.141      0.135       0.151      0.144
   Table C5: The role of bank and bubble characteristics: excluding episodes due to correlated bubbles
Columns 1 and 2 restate our baseline regressions from Table 5, columns 6 and 7. Bubble estimates are based on the BSADF
approach. Macro controls are a banking crisis dummy, GDP growth, interest rates, inflation, and investment-to-GDP growth.
Variable definitions are provided in Table C1. Standard errors are clustered at the bank and time levels. ***, **, * indicate
significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels. P-values are in parentheses.

                                                               (1)              (2)     (3)      (4)          (5)             (6)
       Dependent variable:                                                                 ∆CoVaR
       Exclude if at least x % of the countries experience           Baseline               50%                       33%
 a stock market bubble
 Real estate boom                                             0.09**      0.11***       0.09*      0.08*      0.09*       0.09*
                                                              (0.031)      (0.004)     (0.069)    (0.060)    (0.054)     (0.053)
 Real estate bust                                             0.25**       0.27**       0.24*     0.26**      0.27*      0.30**
                                                              (0.036)      (0.018)     (0.062)    (0.037)    (0.060)     (0.027)
 Stock boom                                                   0.34***      0.36***     0.34***   0.33***    0.48***     0.41***
                                                              (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
 Stock bust                                                   0.38***      0.38***     0.36***    0.37***    0.30**      0.18***
                                                              (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.011)     (0.004)
 log(Bank size)                                              0.26***      0.25***     0.30***    0.28***    0.33***     0.30***
                                                              (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
 log(Bank size) · Real estate boom                             -0.01        -0.01        -0.03      -0.03      -0.03       -0.03
                                                              (0.490)      (0.492)     (0.130)    (0.119)    (0.149)     (0.116)
 log(Bank size) · Real estate bust                            0.17***      0.16***     0.17***   0.16***    0.18***     0.17***
                                                              (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
 log(Bank size) · Stock boom                                  0.07***      0.06***       -0.01      -0.00     -0.05*       -0.04
                                                              (0.002)      (0.003)     (0.889)    (0.897)    (0.059)     (0.110)
 log(Bank size) · Stock bust                                  0.11***      0.11***     0.11***    0.11***     0.10**      0.11**
                                                              (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.002)    (0.001)    (0.033)     (0.037)
 Loan growth                                                  -1.49**      -1.59**     -1.46**     -1.35*    -1.61**      -1.41*
                                                              (0.020)      (0.014)     (0.038)    (0.054)    (0.029)     (0.054)
 Loan growth · Real estate boom                               1.43**       1.58**       1.52*       1.25     1.89**         1.39
                                                              (0.044)      (0.026)     (0.067)    (0.116)    (0.040)     (0.113)
 Loan growth · Real estate bust                              4.47***      4.58***     4.95***    4.83***    5.83***     5.54***
                                                              (0.003)      (0.002)     (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.000)     (0.001)
 Loan growth · Stock boom                                       0.86         1.03         0.94       1.01       1.81        1.62
                                                              (0.202)      (0.140)     (0.364)    (0.337)    (0.140)     (0.179)
 Loan growth · Stock bust                                     2.81***      2.94***     3.68***    4.13***   3.73***      4.24***
                                                              (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
 Leverage                                                      0.00*         0.00         0.00       0.00       0.00        0.00
                                                              (0.097)      (0.107)     (0.409)    (0.543)    (0.489)     (0.638)
 Leverage · Real estate boom                                  0.01**       0.01**     0.01***    0.01***    0.01***     0.02***
                                                              (0.028)      (0.020)     (0.006)    (0.002)    (0.007)     (0.003)
 Leverage · Real estate bust                                   -0.01        -0.01        -0.01      -0.01     -0.01*       -0.01
                                                              (0.123)      (0.206)     (0.147)    (0.265)    (0.096)     (0.190)
 Leverage · Stock boom                                       -0.01***     -0.01***        0.00       0.00      0.01*     0.01**
                                                              (0.002)      (0.001)     (0.761)    (0.704)    (0.071)     (0.039)
 Leverage · Stock bust                                       -0.02***     -0.02***    -0.02***   -0.02***    -0.02**     -0.02**
                                                              (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.017)     (0.013)
 Maturity mismatch                                           -0.65***     -0.62***    -0.58***   -0.52***   -0.57***    -0.50***
                                                              (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.001)
 MM · Real estate boom                                        0.21**        0.18*        0.13       0.05       0.12         0.07
                                                              (0.024)      (0.051)     (0.239)    (0.611)    (0.313)     (0.562)
 MM · Real estate bust                                          0.33        0.41*         0.31       0.36       0.35      0.42*
                                                              (0.122)      (0.063)     (0.171)    (0.112)    (0.147)     (0.083)
 MM · Stock boom                                             0.38***      0.48***       0.28**    0.31**        0.11        0.14
                                                              (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.024)    (0.014)    (0.512)     (0.429)
 MM · Stock bust                                              0.31**       0.43***       0.28*   0.45***        0.22        0.13
                                                              (0.020)      (0.000)     (0.075)    (0.002)    (0.267)     (0.241)
 Real estate boom length                                       -0.00                     -0.00                 -0.00
                                                              (0.224)                  (0.267)               (0.664)
 Real estate boom size                                                      -0.00                 0.00                       0.00*
                                                                           (0.937)               (0.463)                    (0.089)
 Real estate bust length                                     -0.01***                 -0.01***              -0.01***
                                                              (0.000)                  (0.000)               (0.000)
 Real estate bust size                                                    -0.03***               -0.03***               -0.03***
                                                                           (0.009)                (0.004)                (0.001)
 Stock boom length                                           0.01***                  0.02***               0.02***
                                                             (0.000)                  (0.000)               (0.000)
 Stock boom size                                                          0.00***                0.01***                0.01***
                                                                          (0.000)                (0.000)                (0.000)
 Stock bust length                                           -0.03***                 -0.03***              -0.02**
                                                              (0.001)                  (0.002)              (0.013)
 Stock bust size                                                           -0.01                  -0.01                   0.01
                                                                          (0.112)                (0.148)                (0.653)
 Bank FE                                                       Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes
 Macro Controls                                                Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes
 No. of obs.                                                 165,149      165,149     143,877    143,877    129,193     129,193
 Adj. R2                                                      0.831        0.830       0.824      0.823      0.817       0.817
 Adj. R2 within                                               0.141        0.135       0.141      0.138      0.141       0.141
                                  Table C6: The share of non-interest rate income
Columns 1 and 2 restate the baseline regressions from Table 5, columns 6 and 7. Columns 3 to 6 consider the share of non-
interest rate income in various specifications. Bubble estimates are based on the BSADF approach. Macro controls are a
banking crisis dummy, GDP growth, interest rates, inflation, and investment-to-GDP growth. Variable definitions are provided
in Table C1. Standard errors are clustered at the bank and time levels. ***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5% and 10%
levels. P-values are in parentheses.

                                                              (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)
          Dependent variable:                                                          ∆CoVaR
 Real estate boom                                           0.09**     0.11***    0.20***  0.15***       0.08**     0.11***
                                                            (0.031)     (0.004)   (0.000)   (0.000)      (0.037)     (0.005)
 Real estate bust                                           0.25**      0.27**    0.45***   0.27**       0.25**      0.27**
                                                            (0.036)     (0.018)   (0.000)   (0.020)      (0.038)     (0.020)
 Stock boom                                                 0.34***    0.36***    0.30***  0.38***      0.34***     0.36***
                                                            (0.000)     (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)
 Stock bust                                                 0.38***     0.38***   0.34***   0.36***      0.38***     0.37***
                                                            (0.000)     (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)
 log(Bank size)                                             0.26***    0.25***              0.26***     0.26***     0.25***
                                                            (0.000)     (0.000)             (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)
 log(Bank size) · Real estate boom                           -0.01       -0.01                -0.01       -0.01        -0.01
                                                            (0.490)     (0.492)             (0.564)      (0.522)     (0.525)
 log(Bank size) · Real estate bust                          0.17***     0.16***             0.14***      0.17***    0.16***
                                                            (0.000)     (0.000)             (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)
 log(Bank size) · Stock boom                                0.07***     0.06***              0.05**      0.07***     0.06***
                                                            (0.002)     (0.003)             (0.016)      (0.001)     (0.002)
 log(Bank size) · Stock bust                                0.11***     0.11***             0.11***      0.11***     0.11***
                                                            (0.000)     (0.000)             (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)
 Loan growth                                                -1.49**     -1.59**            -2.29***      -1.50**     -1.59**
                                                            (0.020)     (0.014)             (0.001)      (0.022)     (0.016)
 Loan growth · Real estate boom                             1.43**      1.58**              2.50***       1.42*       1.56**
                                                            (0.044)     (0.026)             (0.001)      (0.051)     (0.031)
 Loan growth · Real estate bust                             4.47***     4.58***             6.29***      4.50***    4.66***
                                                            (0.003)     (0.002)             (0.000)      (0.003)     (0.002)
 Loan growth · Stock boom                                     0.86        1.03               1.88**        0.91         1.05
                                                            (0.202)     (0.140)             (0.011)      (0.175)     (0.130)
 Loan growth · Stock bust                                   2.81***     2.94***             3.40***      2.64***     2.75***
                                                            (0.001)     (0.001)             (0.001)      (0.002)     (0.002)
 Leverage                                                    0.00*        0.00                0.00*       0.00*         0.00
                                                            (0.097)     (0.107)             (0.063)      (0.100)     (0.109)
 Leverage · Real estate boom                                0.01**      0.01**              0.01**       0.01**      0.01**
                                                            (0.028)     (0.020)             (0.018)      (0.024)     (0.018)
 Leverage · Real estate bust                                 -0.01       -0.01                -0.01       -0.01        -0.01
                                                            (0.123)     (0.206)             (0.250)      (0.121)     (0.203)
 Leverage · Stock boom                                     -0.01***    -0.01***            -0.01***     -0.01***    -0.01***
                                                            (0.002)     (0.001)             (0.001)      (0.002)     (0.001)
 Leverage · Stock bust                                     -0.02***    -0.02***            -0.02***     -0.02***    -0.02***
                                                            (0.000)     (0.000)             (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)

                                                                                              (table continued on next page)




                                                            A19
                                            Table C6 - continued


                                                    (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)      (5)        (6)
       Dependent variable:                                                   ∆CoVaR
Maturity mismatch                                 -0.65***   -0.62***            -0.71***   -0.70***   -0.67***
                                                   (0.000)    (0.000)             (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)
MM · Real estate boom                               0.21**     0.18*              0.31***    0.25**     0.22**
                                                   (0.024)    (0.051)             (0.003)    (0.018)    (0.033)
MM · Real estate bust                                0.33      0.41*               0.39*        0.33     0.40*
                                                   (0.122)    (0.063)             (0.096)    (0.147)    (0.081)
MM · Stock boom                                    0.38***    0.48***             0.72***    0.42***    0.54***
                                                   (0.000)    (0.000)             (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)
MM · Stock bust                                     0.31**    0.43***             0.45***     0.36**    0.50***
                                                   (0.020)    (0.000)             (0.001)    (0.019)    (0.000)
Share of non-interest income                                              0.00     -0.00        0.00      0.00
                                                                        (0.253)   (0.989)    (0.737)    (0.856)
Share of non-interest income · Real estate boom                          -0.00      0.00       0.00       0.00
                                                                        (0.255)   (0.383)    (0.697)    (0.549)
Share of non-interest income · Real estate bust                          0.01       0.00       0.00       0.00
                                                                        (0.574)   (0.999)    (0.745)    (0.971)
Share of non-interest income · Stock boom                                -0.01      0.01       0.00       0.01
                                                                        (0.307)   (0.204)    (0.540)    (0.310)
Share of non-interest income · Stock bust                                 0.01      0.00        0.00      0.01
                                                                        (0.159)   (0.240)    (0.335)    (0.159)
Real estate boom length                            -0.00                                       -0.00
                                                  (0.224)                                    (0.228)
Real estate boom size                                         -0.00                                     -0.00
                                                             (0.937)                                   (0.926)
Real estate bust length                           -0.01***                                  -0.01***
                                                   (0.000)                                   (0.000)
Real estate bust size                                        -0.03***                                  -0.03***
                                                              (0.009)                                   (0.009)
Stock boom length                                 0.01***                                   0.01***
                                                  (0.000)                                   (0.000)
Stock boom size                                              0.00***                                   0.00***
                                                             (0.000)                                   (0.000)
Stock bust length                                 -0.03***                                  -0.03***
                                                   (0.001)                                   (0.001)
Stock bust size                                               -0.01                                     -0.01
                                                             (0.112)                                   (0.111)
Bank FE                                             Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes
Macro Controls                                      Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes
No. of obs.                                       165,149    165,149    164,840   164,840   164,840    164,840
Adj. R2                                            0.831      0.830      0.819     0.827     0.831      0.830
Adj. R2 within                                     0.141      0.135      0.082     0.124     0.141      0.135




                                                      A20
       Table C7: The role of bank and bubble characteristics: more pronounced lead-lag structures
Columns 1 and 2 restate our baseline regressions from Table 5, columns 6 and 7. Bubble estimates are based on the BSADF
approach. Macro controls are a banking crisis dummy, GDP growth, interest rates, inflation, and investment-to-GDP growth.
Variable definitions are provided in Table C1. Standard errors are clustered at the bank and time levels. ***, **, * indicate
significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels. P-values are in parentheses.

                                                             (1)        (2)          (3)         (4)      (5)         (6)
    Dependent variable:                                                                 ∆CoVaR
    Explanatory variables additionally lagged by                0 months                3 months               6 months
 Real estate boom                                          0.09**    0.11***     0.08***     0.08***    0.15***     0.15***
                                                           (0.031)    (0.004)     (0.006)     (0.005)    (0.000)     (0.000)
 Real estate bust                                          0.25**     0.27**      0.55***     0.55***   0.66***     0.67***
                                                           (0.036)    (0.018)     (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
 Stock boom                                                0.34***    0.36***     0.37***    0.38***    0.39***     0.39***
                                                           (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
 Stock bust                                                0.38***    0.38***     0.37***     0.38***    0.30***    0.31***
                                                           (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
 log(Bank size)                                           0.26***    0.25***     0.26***     0.24***    0.23***     0.21***
                                                           (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
 log(Bank size) · Real estate boom                          -0.01      -0.01        0.01        0.01     0.03**        0.02*
                                                           (0.490)    (0.492)     (0.377)     (0.353)    (0.045)     (0.062)
 log(Bank size) · Real estate bust                         0.17***    0.16***     0.25***    0.23***    0.25***     0.24***
                                                           (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
 log(Bank size) · Stock boom                               0.07***    0.06***     0.09***     0.09***    0.11***    0.11***
                                                           (0.002)    (0.003)     (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
 log(Bank size) · Stock bust                               0.11***    0.11***     0.13***     0.13***    0.08***    0.09***
                                                           (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.006)     (0.004)
 Loan growth                                               -1.49**    -1.59**     -1.16**     -1.33**      -0.84       -0.95
                                                           (0.020)    (0.014)     (0.048)     (0.019)    (0.185)     (0.122)
 Loan growth · Real estate boom                            1.43**     1.58**      1.46**      1.55**      1.30*        1.24*
                                                           (0.044)    (0.026)     (0.028)     (0.020)    (0.052)     (0.060)
 Loan growth · Real estate bust                           4.47***    4.58***        3.20      4.13**     3.97**       4.52**
                                                           (0.003)    (0.002)     (0.117)     (0.037)    (0.047)     (0.027)
 Loan growth · Stock boom                                    0.86       1.03        1.29*      1.40*     1.92**       1.95**
                                                           (0.202)    (0.140)     (0.089)     (0.060)    (0.023)     (0.019)
 Loan growth · Stock bust                                  2.81***    2.94***     2.68***     2.48***    3.03***    2.98***
                                                           (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.002)    (0.001)     (0.000)
 Leverage                                                   0.00*       0.00       0.00**      0.00*      0.01**      0.00**
                                                           (0.097)    (0.107)     (0.044)     (0.051)    (0.026)     (0.030)
 Leverage · Real estate boom                               0.01**     0.01**        0.00        0.01       0.00        0.00
                                                           (0.028)    (0.020)     (0.164)     (0.110)    (0.372)     (0.345)
 Leverage · Real estate bust                                -0.01      -0.01     -0.02*** -0.02***      -0.03*** -0.03***
                                                           (0.123)    (0.206)     (0.001)     (0.003)    (0.001)     (0.001)
 Leverage · Stock boom                                    -0.01*** -0.01***      -0.01***    -0.01***   -0.01*** -0.01***
                                                           (0.002)    (0.001)     (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
 Leverage · Stock bust                                    -0.02*** -0.02***      -0.02*** -0.02***      -0.01***     -0.01**
                                                           (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.010)     (0.013)
 Maturity mismatch                                        -0.65***   -0.62***    -0.57*** -0.54***      -0.52*** -0.49***
                                                           (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
 MM · Real estate boom                                     0.21**      0.18*        0.11        0.06       0.13         0.11
                                                           (0.024)    (0.051)     (0.260)     (0.538)    (0.172)     (0.246)
 MM · Real estate bust                                       0.33      0.41*      0.67**      0.72**      0.77**    0.81***
                                                           (0.122)    (0.063)     (0.019)     (0.013)    (0.010)     (0.008)
 MM · Stock boom                                          0.38***    0.48***      0.36***     0.41***   0.41***     0.44***
                                                           (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.001)     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
 MM · Stock bust                                           0.31**     0.43***     0.38***     0.48***    0.34***    0.47***
                                                           (0.020)    (0.000)     (0.002)     (0.000)    (0.006)     (0.000)
 Real estate boom length                                    -0.00                   -0.00                 0.00*
                                                           (0.224)                (0.911)                (0.087)
 Real estate boom size                                                 -0.00                  0.00**                0.00***
                                                                      (0.937)                 (0.026)                (0.002)
 Real estate bust length                                  -0.01***               -0.01***               -0.02***
                                                           (0.000)                (0.000)                (0.000)
 Real estate bust size                                               -0.03***                  -0.01                 -0.02**
                                                                      (0.009)                 (0.378)                (0.010)
 Stock boom length                                        0.01***                 0.01***                0.01***
                                                           (0.000)                (0.000)                (0.000)
 Stock boom size                                                      0.00***                 0.00***               0.00***
                                                                      (0.000)                 (0.000)                (0.000)
 Stock bust length                                        -0.03***                -0.02**               -0.02***
                                                           (0.001)                (0.027)                (0.000)
 Stock bust size                                                       -0.01                 -0.01***                -0.02**
                                                                      (0.112)                 (0.001)                (0.016)
 Bank FE                                                     Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes
 Macro Controls                                              Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes
 No. of obs.                                               165,149    165,149     164,467     164,467    163,436    163,436
 Adj. R2                                                    0.831      0.830       0.840       0.839      0.838        0.837
 Adj. R2 within                                             0.141      0.135       0.184       0.179      0.172        0.170
                       Table C8: Do systemic risk measures predict asset price bubbles?
Variable definitions are provided in Table C1. Standard errors are clustered at the bank and country-time level. ***, **, *
indicate significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level. P-values are in parentheses.

                                     (1)          (2)          (3)      (4)        (5)            (6)       (7)      (8)
   Dependent variable:                          Real estate bubble                           Stock market bubble
 ∆CoVaR                             0.05          0.03                            0.03           0.02
                                   (0.189)      (0.362)                          (0.222)      (0.516)
 MES                                                           0.01     -0.01                              0.02        0.00
                                                            (0.620)    (0.662)                           (0.425)    (0.990)
 log(Bank size)                       0.09       0.10*      0.12**     0.12**       -0.07       -0.06     -0.05       -0.05
                                    (0.154)     (0.095)     (0.015)    (0.016)    (0.101)     (0.160)    (0.145)    (0.159)
 Loan growth                          3.96        5.07         4.31      5.13       5.08*      5.83**     5.40*       5.99*
                                    (0.123)     (0.118)     (0.110)    (0.110)    (0.062)     (0.042)    (0.066)    (0.052)
 Leverage                            -0.01       -0.01        -0.01     -0.01      0.01**      0.01**     0.01*      0.01**
                                    (0.201)     (0.188)     (0.128)    (0.167)    (0.027)     (0.038)    (0.056)    (0.049)
 Maturity mismatch                   -0.35       -0.37        -0.34     -0.39       -0.43       -0.44     -0.41       -0.44
                                    (0.351)     (0.307)     (0.385)    (0.300)    (0.184)     (0.153)    (0.210)    (0.166)
 GDP growth                          -0.09        0.56        -0.13     0.24      3.86***     4.30***   3.93***     4.19***
                                    (0.952)     (0.674)     (0.933)    (0.873)    (0.006)     (0.004)    (0.008)    (0.008)
 log(Interest rate)                -0.19***    -0.15***    -0.19***   -0.15***       0.05      0.07**      0.05      0.07**
                                    (0.000)     (0.003)     (0.001)    (0.002)    (0.116)     (0.016)    (0.113)    (0.017)
 Inflation                         7.52***     7.21***     7.79***    7.45***    -7.55***    -7.76*** -7.38***     -7.63***
                                    (0.001)     (0.002)     (0.000)    (0.001)    (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.001)    (0.000)
 Investment-to-GDP growth             0.33        0.38         0.34     0.38        0.12        0.15       0.12        0.15
                                    (0.222)     (0.200)     (0.205)    (0.189)    (0.667)     (0.616)    (0.656)    (0.610)
 Banking crisis                     -0.21**                  -0.20*              -0.14***               -0.14***
                                    (0.049)                 (0.057)               (0.002)                (0.005)
 Country FE                           Yes         Yes          Yes      Yes          Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes
 No. of obs.                         4,400       4,400       4,397     4,397       4,400       4,400      4,397     4,397
 Adj. R2                             0.371       0.355       0.367     0.354       0.236       0.225      0.234     0.225
 Adj. R2 within                      0.178       0.156       0.171     0.155       0.183       0.171      0.181     0.171




                                           Table C9: Granger-causality tests
The granger causality tests follow the strategy in Dumitrescu and Hurlin (2012), who extend standard granger
causality models to panel data by allowing for heterogeneous coefficients in the cross-sectional dimension.
We use bootstrapping with 1,000 repetitions to compute p-values and allow for up to 36 lags to be included
in the models while leaving the lag order selection to AIC, BIC, and HQIC. To be conservative, we report
the lowest p-value resulting from the tests based on the three criteria. ***, **, * indicate significance at the
1%, 5% and 10% levels.
None of the tests rejects the null of a risk measure not granger causing one of our bubble measures. The
results thus support the findings from our linear probability models. Neither ∆CoVaR nor MES granger
causes real estate or stock market bubbles.

                                                                ∆CoVaR                        MES
                       Underlying statistic:                Z-bar Z-bar tilde        Z-bar     Z-bar tilde

                  Real estate bubble                         0.51         0.52        0.18         0.18
                  Stock market bubble                        0.44         0.45        0.57         0.58




                                                            A22
               Table C10: The role of bank and bubble characteristics: alternative clustering
Columns 3 and 4 restate our baseline regressions from Table 5, columns 6 and 7. Bubble estimates are based on the BSADF
approach. Macro controls are a banking crisis dummy, GDP growth, interest rates, inflation, and investment-to-GDP growth.
Variable definitions are provided in Table C1. Standard errors are clustered as indicated in the table. ***, **, * indicate
significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels. P-values are in parentheses.

                                                    (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)      (5)           (6)
                Dependent variable:                                             ∆CoVaR
                Clustering:                       bank & country-time          bank & time           bank &   quarter
       Real estate boom                             0.09**   0.11***      0.09**      0.11***      0.09*        0.11**
                                                   (0.018)   (0.002)      (0.031)      (0.004)    (0.078)       (0.020)
       Real estate bust                             0.25**    0.27**      0.25**       0.27**        0.25        0.27*
                                                   (0.027)   (0.012)      (0.036)      (0.018)    (0.104)       (0.066)
       Stock boom                                 0.34***    0.36***      0.34***      0.36***    0.34***       0.36***
                                                   (0.000)   (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.000)       (0.000)
       Stock bust                                  0.38***   0.38***      0.38***      0.38***    0.38***       0.38***
                                                   (0.000)   (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.000)       (0.000)
       log(Bank size)                             0.26***    0.25***      0.26***      0.25***    0.26***       0.25***
                                                   (0.000)   (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.001)       (0.002)
       log(Bank size) · Real estate boom             -0.01     -0.01        -0.01       -0.01       -0.01         -0.01
                                                   (0.454)   (0.458)      (0.490)      (0.492)    (0.642)       (0.645)
       log(Bank size) · Real estate bust           0.17***   0.16***      0.17***      0.16***   0.17***        0.16***
                                                   (0.000)   (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.000)       (0.000)
       log(Bank size) · Stock boom                 0.07***   0.06***      0.07***      0.06***     0.07**        0.06**
                                                   (0.001)   (0.001)      (0.002)      (0.003)    (0.018)       (0.023)
       log(Bank size) · Stock bust                 0.11***   0.11***      0.11***      0.11***   0.11***        0.11***
                                                   (0.000)   (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.000)       (0.000)
       Loan growth                                 -1.49**   -1.59**      -1.49**      -1.59**    -1.49**       -1.59**
                                                   (0.028)   (0.020)      (0.020)      (0.014)    (0.024)       (0.017)
       Loan growth · Real estate boom               1.43**    1.58**      1.43**       1.58**      1.43*         1.58*
                                                   (0.041)   (0.024)      (0.044)      (0.026)    (0.090)       (0.058)
       Loan growth · Real estate bust             4.47***    4.58***      4.47***      4.58***    4.47***      4.58***
                                                   (0.004)   (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.002)    (0.003)       (0.002)
       Loan growth · Stock boom                       0.86      1.03         0.86        1.03        0.86          1.03
                                                   (0.227)   (0.164)      (0.202)      (0.140)    (0.244)       (0.181)
       Loan growth · Stock bust                    2.81***   2.94***      2.81***      2.94***    2.81***       2.94***
                                                   (0.001)   (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)    (0.003)       (0.002)
       Leverage                                      0.00*      0.00       0.00*         0.00        0.00          0.00
                                                   (0.099)   (0.110)      (0.097)      (0.107)    (0.127)       (0.138)
       Leverage · Real estate boom                 0.01**    0.01**       0.01**       0.01**      0.01*         0.01*
                                                   (0.020)   (0.014)      (0.028)      (0.020)    (0.080)       (0.067)
       Leverage · Real estate bust                   -0.01     -0.01        -0.01       -0.01       -0.01         -0.01
                                                   (0.130)   (0.216)      (0.123)      (0.206)    (0.200)       (0.295)
       Leverage · Stock boom                      -0.01***  -0.01***     -0.01*** -0.01***        -0.01**      -0.01***
                                                   (0.002)   (0.001)      (0.002)      (0.001)    (0.013)       (0.006)
       Leverage · Stock bust                      -0.02***  -0.02***     -0.02*** -0.02***       -0.02***      -0.02***
                                                   (0.000)   (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.000)       (0.000)
       Maturity mismatch                          -0.65***  -0.62***     -0.65*** -0.62***       -0.65***      -0.62***
                                                   (0.000)   (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.000)       (0.000)
       MM · Real estate boom                       0.21**     0.18*       0.21**        0.18*     0.21**         0.18*
                                                   (0.025)   (0.056)      (0.024)      (0.051)    (0.044)       (0.083)
       MM · Real estate bust                          0.33     0.41*         0.33       0.41*        0.33        0.41*
                                                   (0.110)   (0.059)      (0.122)      (0.063)    (0.159)       (0.088)
       MM · Stock boom                             0.38***   0.48***     0.38***      0.48***    0.38***        0.48***
                                                   (0.001)   (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.001)       (0.000)
       MM · Stock bust                              0.31**   0.43***       0.31**      0.43***      0.31*       0.43***
                                                   (0.030)   (0.001)      (0.020)      (0.000)    (0.050)       (0.004)
       Real estate boom length                       -0.00                  -0.00                   -0.00
                                                   (0.183)                (0.224)                 (0.293)
       Real estate boom size                                   -0.00                    -0.00                   -0.00
                                                             (0.929)                   (0.937)                 (0.948)
       Real estate bust length                    -0.01***               -0.01***                -0.01***
                                                   (0.000)                (0.000)                 (0.006)
       Real estate bust size                                -0.03***                  -0.03***                 -0.03**
                                                             (0.001)                   (0.009)                 (0.050)
       Stock boom length                          0.01***                0.01***                 0.01***
                                                   (0.000)                (0.000)                (0.000)
       Stock boom size                                       0.00***                   0.00***                 0.00***
                                                             (0.000)                   (0.000)                 (0.000)
       Stock bust length                          -0.03***               -0.03***                -0.03**
                                                   (0.001)                (0.001)                (0.013)
       Stock bust size                                        -0.01*                    -0.01                   -0.01
                                                             (0.093)                   (0.112)                 (0.199)
       Bank FE                                        Yes       Yes          Yes         Yes       Yes           Yes
       Macro Controls                                 Yes       Yes          Yes         Yes       Yes           Yes
       No. of obs.                                 165,149   165,149      165,149      165,149   165,149       165,149
       Adj. R2                                       0.831     0.830       0.831        0.830     0.831         0.830
       Adj. R2 within                                0.141     0.135       0.141        0.135     0.141         0.135
                   Table C11: The role of bank and bubble characteristics: global time FEs
Columns 1 and 2 restate our baseline regressions from Table 5, columns 6 and 7. Bubble estimates are based on the BSADF
approach. Macro controls are a banking crisis dummy, GDP growth, interest rates, inflation, and investment-to-GDP growth.
Variable definitions are provided in Table C1. Standard errors are clustered at the bank and time levels. ***, **, * indicate
significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels. P-values are in parentheses.

                                                                    (1)           (2)         (3)        (4)
                          Dependent variable:                                        ∆CoVaR
                          Fixed effects:                                  bank               bank and time
                 Real estate boom                                 0.09**      0.11***     0.21***    0.22***
                                                                  (0.031)     (0.004)     (0.000)     (0.000)
                 Real estate bust                                  0.25**      0.27**       -0.07       -0.08
                                                                  (0.036)     (0.018)     (0.409)     (0.361)
                 Stock boom                                       0.34***     0.36***     0.27***    0.24***
                                                                  (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
                 Stock bust                                       0.38***     0.38***        0.06        0.01
                                                                  (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.352)     (0.860)
                 log(Bank size)                                   0.26***     0.25***        0.04        0.04
                                                                  (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.203)     (0.199)
                 log(Bank size) · Real estate boom                  -0.01       -0.01       -0.03       -0.03
                                                                  (0.490)     (0.492)     (0.130)     (0.130)
                 log(Bank size) · Real estate bust               0.17***      0.16***     0.19***    0.18***
                                                                  (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
                 log(Bank size) · Stock boom                      0.07***     0.06***     0.06***     0.06***
                                                                  (0.002)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.004)
                 log(Bank size) · Stock bust                      0.11***     0.11***     0.12***     0.12***
                                                                  (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
                 Loan growth                                      -1.49**     -1.59**    -2.17*** -2.19***
                                                                  (0.020)     (0.014)     (0.001)     (0.001)
                 Loan growth · Real estate boom                   1.43**       1.58**     2.04***    2.05***
                                                                  (0.044)     (0.026)     (0.004)     (0.004)
                 Loan growth · Real estate bust                   4.47***     4.58***     4.02***    4.23***
                                                                  (0.003)     (0.002)     (0.005)     (0.003)
                 Loan growth · Stock boom                            0.86        1.03        0.98      1.09*
                                                                  (0.202)     (0.140)     (0.103)     (0.074)
                 Loan growth · Stock bust                         2.81***     2.94***      1.74**      1.68**
                                                                  (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.018)     (0.024)
                 Leverage                                           0.00*        0.00      0.00**      0.00**
                                                                  (0.097)     (0.107)     (0.014)     (0.012)
                 Leverage · Real estate boom                      0.01**       0.01**     0.01**      0.01**
                                                                  (0.028)     (0.020)     (0.021)     (0.026)
                 Leverage · Real estate bust                        -0.01       -0.01      -0.01*       -0.01
                                                                  (0.123)     (0.206)     (0.078)     (0.112)
                 Leverage · Stock boom                           -0.01*** -0.01*** -0.02***          -0.02***
                                                                  (0.002)     (0.001)     (0.000)     (0.000)
                 Leverage · Stock bust                           -0.02*** -0.02***       -0.02*** -0.02***
                                                                  (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
                 Maturity mismatch                               -0.65*** -0.62***       -0.42*** -0.43***
                                                                  (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.001)     (0.001)
                 MM · Real estate boom                            0.21**        0.18*      0.20**     0.21**
                                                                  (0.024)     (0.051)     (0.021)     (0.013)
                 MM · Real estate bust                               0.33       0.41*        0.09        0.12
                                                                  (0.122)     (0.063)     (0.617)     (0.490)
                 MM · Stock boom                                  0.38***     0.48***     0.54***     0.58***
                                                                  (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
                 MM · Stock bust                                   0.31**     0.43***     0.40***     0.43***
                                                                  (0.020)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
                 Real estate boom length                            -0.00                  0.00*
                                                                  (0.224)                 (0.073)
                 Real estate boom size                                          -0.00                  0.00*
                                                                              (0.937)                 (0.063)
                 Real estate bust length                         -0.01***                -0.01***
                                                                  (0.000)                 (0.001)
                 Real estate bust size                                       -0.03***                 -0.01**
                                                                              (0.009)                 (0.026)
                 Stock boom length                                0.01***                 0.01***
                                                                  (0.000)                 (0.004)
                 Stock boom size                                              0.00***                    0.00
                                                                              (0.000)                 (0.165)
                 Stock bust length                               -0.03***                   -0.01
                                                                  (0.001)                 (0.271)
                 Stock bust size                                                -0.01                 -0.01**
                                                                              (0.112)                 (0.045)
                 Bank FE                                             Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
                 Macro Controls                                      Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
                 No. of obs.                                      165,149     165,149     165,149    165,149
                 Adj. R2                                            0.831       0.830       0.878       0.878
                 Adj. R2 within                                     0.141       0.135       0.063      0.061
           Table C12: Correlation between the business cycle indicator and bubble indicators
The business cycle indicator equals 1 during the boom phase of the business cycle and 0 otherwise. If business
cycles moved in line with financial cycles we would thus see a positive (negative) correlation between the
business cycle indicator and the bubble boom (bust) indicators. Hence, business cycles and financial cycles
do not significantly co-move in our sample.

                          Real estate boom     Real estate bust   Stock market boom      Stock market bust
 Business cycle boom            -0.14                0.16                -0.21                 0.27




                                                    A25
