NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WELFARE STATE, INEQUALITY, AND GLOBALIZATION:
ROLE OF INTERNATIONAL-CAPITAL-FLOW DIRECTION
Assaf Razin
Efraim Sadka
Working Paper 25772
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25772

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2019

We thank Elhanan Helpman, for insightful discussion, and to Alexander Schwemmer for
competent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.˛˛
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Assaf Razin and Efraim Sadka. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Welfare State, Inequality, and Globalization: Role of International-capital-flow Direction
Assaf Razin and Efraim Sadka
NBER Working Paper No. 25772
April 2019
JEL No. F2,H0
ABSTRACT
Globalization, in the form of financial flows, which is always advantageous on an aggregative
level, typically creates winners and losers, if left exclusively to market forces. The effects of
financial globalization on income inequality depends on whether the country exports its capital to
the rest of the world or imports capital from abroad. In the capital-exporting case, financial
globalization drives up return to savings and drives down wages. In the capital-importing case,
financial globalization tends to raise wages but lower return on savings. Therefore, the
distributive policies of the welfare state in its role of spreading the gains from financial
globalization to various income groups varies, depending on whether the country exports, or
imports capital. The paper demonstrates that typical welfare-state redistribution policies,
governed by a majority of the population, spreads the globalization’s gains from trade to all
income groups, even those who are low skilled and have small capital endowments. Therefore,
financial globalization of a welfare- state economy generates a Pareto improvement. At the same
time, globalization, through enhanced capital mobility and high-skill emigration diminishes the
generosity of the welfare state.

Assaf Razin
Eitan Berglas School of Economics
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv 69978
ISRAEL
and Cornell University and CEPR
and also NBER
ar256@cornell.edu
Efraim Sadka
Tel Aviv University
Eitan Berglas School of Economics
P.O.B. 39040
Ramat Aviv, Tel Aviv, 69978, ISRAEL
sadka@post.tau.ac.il

Welfare State, Inequality, and Globalization: Role of Internationalcapital-flow Direction1
by
Assaf Razin

and

Efraim Sadka

The Eitan Berglas School of Economics

the Eitan Berglas School of Economics

Tel Aviv University

Tel Aviv University

Tel Aviv, 69978, Israel

Tel Aviv, 69978, Israel

razin@post.tau.ac.il

sadka@post.tau.ac.il
May 1, 2019

Abstract
Globalization, in the form of financial flows, which is always advantageous on an aggregative
level, typically creates winners and losers, if left exclusively to market forces. The effects of
financial globalization on income inequality depends on whether the country exports its capital to
the rest of the world or imports capital from abroad. In the capital-exporting case, financial
globalization drives up return to savings and drives down wages. In the capital-importing case,

We thank Elhanan Helpman, for insightful discussion, and to Alexander Schwemmer for
competent research assistance.
1

1

financial globalization tends to raise wages but lower return on savings. Therefore, the distributive
policies of the welfare state in its role of spreading the gains from financial globalization to
various income groups varies, depending on whether the country exports, or imports capital.
The paper demonstrates that typical welfare-state redistribution policies, governed by a majority
of the population, spreads the globalization’s gains from trade to all income groups, even those
who are low skilled and have small capital endowments. Therefore, financial globalization of a
welfare- state economy generates a Pareto improvement. At the same time, globalization, through
enhanced capital mobility and high-skill emigration diminishes the generosity of the welfare state.

I.

Introduction

The Economist put it succinctly: “Globalization is a tax problem for three reasons. First, firms
have more freedom over where to locate. This will make it harder for a country to tax a business
much more heavily than its competitors will. Second, globalization makes it hard to decide where
a company should pay tax, regardless of where it is based. This gives them [the companies] plenty
of scope to reduce tax bills by shifting operations around or by creating transfer pricing. Third,
globalization nibbles away at the edges of taxes on Individuals. It is harder to tax personal income

2

because skilled professional workers are more mobile than they were two decades ago." (The
Economist, 31st May, 1997).
Financial globalization triggers a race-to-the-bottom tax competition. The consequent erosion in
the tax base, especially on capital, erodes fiscal finance. Reaping the benefits of trade and financial
integration, in advanced countries, is not automatic. It requires improved safety nets.

The paper focuses on the role of the welfare state in spreading the gains from financial
globalization to various income groups under different majority voters, who are sharply different
in their wealth and labor market skills.

The paper is organized as follows. Sections II-V provides some background discussion on
financial globalization, tax competition, and the size of the welfare state, which serves to motivate
the analysis. Section VI develops a stripped down model. Section VII presents the financialglobalization consequences, derived from the model for the welfare state and income inequality.
Section VIII elaborates on the role of the welfare state in compensating losers. Section IX analyzes
the effects on utility levels of changes in the ease of high-skilled emigration. Section X concludes.

II.

Financial Globalization
3

The recent wave of financial globalization in the world economy got started in earnest in the 1990s,
with rising cross-border financial flows among industrial economies and between industrial and
developing economies.2 This was spurred by liberalization of capital controls in many of these
countries. It is useful to begin with a standard financial globalization basic benchmark. Complete
international financial integration requires that in the long run, (when prices adjust to various
shocks and markets clear) the following arbitrage equation hold.

1

1

𝑟

1

𝑟

𝑞⁄
𝑞⁄

,
,

,

Where US serves as a benchmark, 𝑖 stands for a country, and q stands for the real exchange rate
Vis a Vis the US dollar3:

2

Globalization has a new face. China’s emergence as a great economic power has induced a
significant shift in the patterns of world trade, with major effects on income inequality in its trade
partners. Alongside the consumer benefits of expanded trade there are substantial adjustment costs
and distributional consequences for them. Import competition from China, which surged after
2000, was a major force behind both reductions in US manufacturing employment and—through
input-output linkages and other general equilibrium channels—weak overall job growth. However
that import competition from China did not have large aggregative effects in the United States, but
it had substantially different employment repercussions in different commuting zones. The relative
reductions of employment were regionally concentrated. The US rise in wage inequality that is,
the rise of the college wage premium, is only partly the result of trade globalization; more
important factors are technological progress (biased towards skilled labor) and the decline of the
power of labor unions that were behind strong industrial wages.
China is also a key player in world finance, affecting all other open capital-market economies.
Indeed, several indicators point to a strengthening of China's role as an investor country in recent
years. By 2017 China is one of the most important FDI source, and destination, among the
economically more advanced economies, such as the US, EU, Hong Kong, South Korea, Taiwan
and Singapore. Chinese inward FDI as percentage of GDP has been: 13.7 in 2014, 10.9 in 2015,
12.1 in 2016, and 12.6 in 2017. Chinese outward FDI as percentage of GDP has been: 2.4 in
2014, 9.8 in 2015, 12.1 in 2016, and 12.6 in 2017.
3

Recall that by the Fisher equation:
4

2

𝑞⁄

𝐸⁄

,

,

𝑃 ,
,
𝑃,

The symbol 𝐸 stands for the nominal exchange rate, Vis a Vis the US dollar; and 𝑃 stands for the
price level.

1

𝑟

1

𝑖

,
,

, That is, 1

5

𝑟

⁄

,
⁄

,

1

𝑖

,
,

⁄

,
⁄

,

.

To demonstrate trends in this indicator of recent financial globalization, Figure 1 plots the graphs
of the real-interest-rate, adjusted for real exchange rate changes, the yields on three-month
government bonds for Israel, Canada, Germany and the United Kingdom, and the yields on
three-month US government bonds. International financial integration generates more
synchronized country-specific yields. Time series are filtered to wash out short-run idiosyncratic
fluctuations.
Figure 1: Gross Real Interest Rate Adjusted for Real Exchange Rate Changes (US =1.00)

1.25
1.20
1.15

Israel
UK

1.10
1.05

0.95
0.90

Germany
Canada

USA
(real exchange rate)

1988
1989
1991
1992
1993
1995
1996
1997
1999
2000
2001
2003
2004
2005
2007
2008
2009
2011
2012
2013
2015

1.00

Note: Series are HP-filtered. Monthly data are shown in the background.

6

Source: Stats Bureau, FERD, World Bank, Real-exchange-rate adjusted, yields on three-month
government bonds for Israel, Canada, Germany and the United Kingdom, and the yields on
three-month US government bonds.

Figure 1 demonstrates vividly that in the late 1990s and early 2000s real interest rate, adjusted
for real exchange rate of Canada, Germany, Israel, and the United Kingdom converged towards
the US real interest rate; implying that their financial markets integrated significantly into the
world financial markets.
III. Tax Competition

Financial globalization triggers tax competition among countries, and the possibility of a “race
to the bottom”. As a result, the tax burden may shift from the highly mobile factors (e.g. capital
and top-skilled labor) to the weakly mobile factors (e.g. low-skill labor). This shift has first-order
implications for both the functional and the size distribution of income. A country that imposes
high tax rates may push mobile factors (especially capital) abroad where the country cannot
effectively tax them, eroding its own tax base and lowering domestic economic activity at the same
time. International tax competition and border tax adjustments of income tax have regained recent
public and scholarly attention since the legislation of the 2017 US Tax Bill, centered on corporate
tax cut and moving from corporate residence based in the direction of corporate source-based, and
curbing profit shifting.4 It

4

may significantly affect corporate financing and location decisions

Corporate Rate fell from 35 to 21. Some domestic investment qualified for an immediate deduction as an

expense. Multinational corporations faced a substantially modified treatment of their activities– in the
7

of both US, and European, multinational groups.5 In consequence, the enhanced competitive
pressure could result in an erosion of foreign countries’ tax bases and an associated loss in tax
revenue triggering a new wave of international tax competition. 6

direction of facilitating the repatriation of foreign profits; Changing US Tax Business tax system to sourcebased (territorial).
The 2017 large tax cut, mainly aimed at corporations and business owners. The real logic behind
corporate tax cuts is that they’re supposed to lead to higher investment. This investment, in turn, would
gradually increase the stock of capital, simultaneously driving down the pretax rate of return on
investment and pushing up wages, thanks to a long -term increase in domestic investment, mainly
financed by inflows of capital from abroad. The pre-reform US tax system was based on worldwide
(residence-based) taxation, under which income was taxed at an equal rate regardless of where profits
were earned. Since repatriation of foreign profits triggered high US taxation, US multinationals had an
incentive to refrain from bringing home their foreign earnings. In the light of substantial amounts of
“trapped earnings” abroad, tax holidays became a strategic tax planning tool of US multinationals. Along
with the transition to a territorial international tax system, the reform further provides for a one-time
deemed repatriation tax of deferred foreign corporate profits at a rate of 15.5% (cash assets) and 8%
(illiquid assets).
6
Michael Devereux, Rachel Griffith and Alexander Klemm (2002) analyze the development of taxes on
corporate income in EU and G7 countries over the 1980s and the 1990sthey establish that tax revenues on
profitable investments had fallen. In particular, taxes on income earned by multinational firms are subject
to tax competition forces. Additional evidence pertaining to international tax competition for
relatively mobile portfolio investments, so that a country with more mobility has lower capital
tax rates, is abundant. See empirical support for the hypothesis in Hines (1999), Sorensen
(2002), Besley, Griffith and Klemm (2001), Devereux and Griffith (2002), and Lassen and
Sorensen (2002), Razin, Sadka, and Nam (2004), and Krautheim and Schmidt-Eisenhor (2011).
5

8

Figure 2: Hall-Jorgenson Effective Tax Rates on Corporate Income: Selected EU Countries

Notes:
70%

60%

50%

Finland:
Sweden:

40%

Germany:
Austria:

%

UK:
Belgium

30%

Denmark:
France:
Italy:
Luxembourg:

20%

Spain:
Portugal:
Netherlands:
Ireland:

10%

0%
74

75

76

77

78

79

80

81

82

83

84

85

86

87

88
year

9

89

90

91

92

93

94

95

96

97

98

99

00

Notes: Hall and Jorgenson (1967. Assumptions: Equity finance, r = 4 %, inflation rate  = 4 %,
 = 20 %, Normal tax life = 10 years
2.countries (from top to bottom): Finland, Sweden, Germany, Austria, UK, Belgium Denmark,
France, Italy, Luxemburg, Spain, Portugal, Netherlands, Ireland. 7

One can clearly detect in Figure 2 a noticeable breakpoint pointing to a significant
corporate income tax cuts, at the end of the 1980s in the wake of the single market launch
in mid 1990s. Overall, the mean EU effective corporate tax rate went down from 42% in
1975 to 32% in 2000, and the standard deviation went down from 8% in 1975 to 5.8% in
2000.
IV. Welfare-State Generosity
The general rules of making the welfare state less generous are quite straightforward:
lower taxes on capital income, and highly mobile labor, and curtail benefits.

7

Calculations based on the well-known work of Hall and Jorgenson (1967), who introduced the user cost of capital
approach; applied to international data by King and Fullerton (1984). Figure 1 follows the formula for the effective tax
rate on corporate income (𝜏 ), as refined by Auerbach (1983):
𝜏

𝑟

𝛿 1 𝜏 𝑧
𝑟 𝛿 1 𝜏
𝛿 1 𝜏
𝑟 𝛿 1 𝜏 𝑧

where
− Real cost of funds (real rate of return the firm must earn after corporate taxes by the instruction of its
shareholders).
𝛿− physical rate of depreciation (assumed exponential)
𝜏 − statutory corporate tax rate
− Present value of depreciation allowances.

10

In recent years, at the same time that the financial integration of the world economy built
up, most of the large industrialized economies have embarked on a track of trimming the
generosity of their pension and other welfare-state programs. This is not a coincidence.
Financial integration lower the tax on the mobile factor, capital, and weakens the capital
income tax base. Caminada et al (2010) explored EU welfare-state indicators. Using a
variety of indicators of social protection: social expenditures, both at the macro and at
the program level, replacement rates of unemployment, and social assistance benefits and
poverty indicators.8 Together, these indicators may provide a relatively broad picture of
the evolution of social protection in the EU. Table 1 demonstrates that the initial level of
public social expenditure prior to the creation of the EU has a negative effect on the on
EU provision of public social services well after EU has been established. We conjecture
that these patterns may have to do, among other things with the globalization forces that
were unleashed by the integration of Europe.

Table 1. Convergence of Public Social Expenditures in EU‐15 Controlled for Cyclical and
Demographic Effects, 1985–2003

They linearly regress the annual growth rate of several social protection indicators on the initial level of
the social protection indicator at the beginning of the period. The coefficient for absolute β-convergence is
estimated using an ordinary least square regression model of cross-sectional data. If the coefficient β is
negative (positive), we say that there is absolute convergence (divergence) in social protection levels
across countries. The higher the value of β, the faster the social protection indicator in the poor region
converges toward the level of the rich one. The hypothesis to test is that coefficient β is negative.
8

11

Public Social Expenditures

Initial level public social expenditure 1985 (β)

−0.035**

(−3.67)

Unemployment rate

0.460*

(2.95)

Intercept

0.942**

(4.23)

adj. R

0.534

2

Source: Caminada, Goudswaard, and Van Vliet (2010).
Notes: OLS-regression; t-statistics in parentheses. **
0.05 level.

12

Significant at the 0.01 level;* significant at

V. Emigration of High Skilled
Another side of globalization is the international migration of skilled workers (the so‐called brain drain).
It deprives the origin country from its scarce resource—human capital. Migrants are not random
samples of their home countries’ populations; they are typically better educated. For example, the
demographer Feliciano (2005) who studies 32 U.S. immigrant groups find that nearly all immigrants are
more educated than those who remain in their home countries. 9

Using global bilateral migration databases, Kerr et al. (2016) observe that recently the number of
migrants with a tertiary degree rose by nearly 130 percent from 1990 to 2010, while low-skill
migrants increased by only 40 percent during that time. High-skilled migrants are departing from
a broader range of countries and heading to a narrower range of countries—in particular, to the
United States, the United Kingdom, Canada, and Australia.10

9

Docquier and Rapoport (2012) review the economics research on the brain drain, showing that high‐
skill migration is becoming a dominant pattern of international migration and a major aspect of
globalization. The fact that international migration from poor to rich countries is becoming more of the
brain drain type is a serious source of concern in developing countries and for the development
community. Through the brain drain, it would seem, globalization is making human capital scarcer
where it is already scarce and more abundant where it is already abundant, thereby contributing to
increasing inequality across countries, including among the richer ones.

10

The United States serves as a magnet for top scientific immigrants. Immigrants hold a
disproportionate share of jobs in science, technology, engineering, and math in the United States
(see Hanson and Slaughter (2016)). Top-talent drain from Israel is disproportionately high
among the highly educated immigrants. In general, the number of foreign scholars in America as
a percentage of scholars in the home country ranged from 1.3 percent in Spain to 4.3 percent in
the Netherlands. At 12.2 percent, Canada is an outlier, though this is much more of a two-way
street than in any of the other cases. While Canada is an outlier, Israeli scholars in America are in
a class by themselves. Israeli academics residing in the States in 2003–2004 represented 24.9
percent of the entire senior staff in Israel’s academic institutions that year—twice the Canadian
percentage and over five times the percentage in the other developed countries. Razin (2018a)
observes that Israel is ranked at the very top for college graduate émigrés to the United States per
10,000 residents, with number of about 41. Only Ireland with 49 is ranked above Israel. South
13

VI.

A Stripped-down Model

To put financial globalization, tax competition, high-skilled emigration, and the generosity of the
welfare state into a coherent analytical framework we develop here an international-taxcompetition model where the welfare state parameters (taxes and social benefits) are determined
through majority voting (Razin and Sadka 2018). We consider a two-period small open economy,
which responds to exogenously given world interest rate, taxes, an imperfect accessibility to
international capital markets and strong elements of source-based taxation. The welfare state
provides a uniform social benefit. This social benefit captures the various ingredients that the
welfare state accords, such as health services, education, in-kind transfers, and so on. Domestic
taxes on labor income and capital income are proportional.
We employ a stripped-down model, which includes the bare elements that will enable us to study
key implications of international capital flows and international tax competition on the welfare

Korea, also suffering from brain drain, has only about 25 college graduate émigrés per 10 000
residents. At the policy level, they compare the points-based skilled migration regimes, as
historically implemented by Canada and Australia, with the employment-based policies used in
the United States through visa-control mechanisms, like the H-1B visa program. Because of the
links of global migration flows to employment and higher education opportunities, firms and
universities also act as important conduits, making employment and admission decisions that
deeply affect the patterns of high-skilled mobility.

14

state. We assume a pure source-based (territorial) taxation. This means that the country does not
impose taxes on foreign-source income. 11
The representative producer equity-finance its activity, and all international capital flows are in
the form of equity securities.12 We consider a two-period small open economy, which responds to
exogenously given world interest rate, taxes, and an imperfect accessibility to international capital
markets. There is one all-purpose composite good (allowing us to abstract from trade issues) which
can serve for both consumption and capital investment.

There are two types of factors of production—capital (K) and labor (L). The workers have two
types of skills—low (l) and high (h).
The production function is Cobb-Douglas,
(3)

𝐹 𝐾, 𝐿

𝐴𝐾 𝐿

,

11

Under the source (territorial) principle of international taxation only income from domestic
sources are subject to a tax, whereas foreign‐source income is exempt. Under the residence
principle, in contrast, income is taxed on a world‐wide basis. Razin and Sadka (2017) illustrate
diagrammatically the efficiency dis‐advantage of the equilibrium under the source principle,
compared to the residence equilibrium. Because the consumption possibilities frontier shrinks
under the source principle, relative to the frontier under the residence principle, the latter is
more efficient. However, tax revenue collection is larger under the former, because of the
existence of tax havens and lack of sufficient international tax coordination.
Evidently, debt flows have a special tax treatment deserve a rigorous separate analysis; they
will not be considered here.

12

15

With constant returns to scale, where A

0 is a total productivity parameter, and 𝛼 and 1

𝛼 are,

respectively, the capital and labor shares.
Individuals live for two periods (1, and 2), so that there are essentially two consumption goods:
first-period consumption (𝑐 ) and second-period consumption (𝑐 ). Labor is internationally
immobile, whereas capital is mobile. Individuals can direct their savings at home and/or abroad.

Total size of the population is normalized to one. Labor supply (L) is measured in efficiency units.
We assume that there are 𝛾 high-skill individuals, each providing one efficiency unit of labor, and
1

𝛾 low-skill individuals, each providing 𝜌

1 efficiency units of labor. Thus, total labor supply

in efficiency units is given by
4

𝐿

𝛾

𝑚

1

𝛾 𝜌.

Where 𝑚 denotes the emigration of skilled individuals. Emigration depends on skilled utility
level:

𝑚

𝑚 𝑢∗

𝑢

Where 𝑢∗ is the (exogenously given) utility level attained by s-individuals who reside abroad.
Note that the number of emigrants depends positively on the foreign-domestic utility difference
(that is 𝑢∗

𝑢 .

The lower the skilled utility, 𝑢 , is, the higher is the rate of emigration, 𝑚 .

16

In the simulations we specify the emigration function as follows.
𝑚

𝑍 𝑢∗

𝑢

Where Z > 0 and 0 < z < 1 are parameters.
Capital is invested in the first period and output accrues in the second period. Factor remunerations
are also paid in the second period.
The wage per efficiency units and the domestic return to capital are given by the marginal
productivity conditions:
(5)

𝑤

1

𝛼 𝐾 ⁄𝐿

And,
(6)

1

𝑟

𝛼 𝐿 ⁄𝐾

,

Where the composite-good price is normalized to one. The specification in equation (4) assumes
that capital fully depreciates at the end of the production process.

17

The degree of globalization is captured by the ease of moving capital abroad. Capital flows
internationally, albeit at some cost- 𝛿 per unit.
thus gain 1

𝑡∗ 𝑟∗

1

13

A domestic individual who invests abroad can

𝛿 , where r* is the world rate of interest, and 𝑡 ∗ is the tax rate levied

abroad under a source-based taxation. In a small open economy context, the three variables, ( 𝑡 ∗
, 𝑟 ∗ 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝛿 ) play an equivalent role, where the only relevant variable is 1

𝑡∗ 𝑟∗

𝛿. Denoting

the domestic tax rate on capital by 𝑡 , capital-export arbitrage possibilities yield:

(7)

1

1

𝑡 𝑟

1

1

𝑡∗ 𝑟∗

𝛿.

For the sake of simplicity, we consider only the case where the equilibrium levels of saving abroad
is positive; that is there are capital outflows but not capital inflows.
With capital-import equilibrium, however, we should focus on the incentives of the foreign saver.
For simplicity, we assume that the cost of exporting capital applies symmetrically to foreign
investors, i.e. their return on investment in the studied country is given by 1

1

𝑡 𝑟

𝛿 ,

whereas investing abroad yields a return of 𝑅 ∗ .

The parameter 𝛿 captures (albeit in a mechanic way) a group of frictions, contractual and
informational. Such frictions, which affect the volume and the composition and the volatility of international
13

capital flows, cause deviations from the “law of one price”. As an example, foreign direct investors get more
efficient outcomes than foreign portfolio investors because the former have more direct control over management.
Thus, they are able to make a better-informed decision of how to run the business. However, the better information
mires FDI investors with the “lemons” problem: If the investors’ liquidity dries up, forcing the investors to sell off
foreign subsidiaries, market participants would not know whether the subsidiary is liquidated because of the
investors’ liquidity problems or because of bad inside information about the profitability of the subsidiary.
Consequently, the market will place a discount on assets sold by an FDI investor, who has the inside information,
unlike the FPI investor.

18

With homogenous capital goods, perfect information, and absent any uncertainty, in equilibrium
there can be either inflows or outflows of private capital, but never both. Denote by 𝑆 ∗ the foreigner
capital exports, it takes place if14

𝑆∗

𝑅∗

0 𝑖𝑓

𝛿

1

𝑟 1

𝑡 .

Therefore, in the case of capital-import equilibrium, arbitrage in the world capital market yields
an equality between the net of tax world return to saving, minus the capital import friction cost 𝛿
, with one plus the net of tax return to domestic savings.
1

1

𝑡 𝑟

𝛿

1

𝑡∗ 𝑟∗

1

That is, in the case of capital-importing country, capital-import arbitrage in the world capital
market yields an equality between the net of tax world return to saving, minus the capital import
friction cost 𝛿 , with one plus the net of tax return to domestic savings.
As before, the degree of globalization is captured by the ease of moving capital abroad.
Specifically, we assume that there is some cost, 𝛿, per unit of investment abroad. By raising the
cost parameter, we raise or lower the intensity of capital imports into the home country.

14

𝑆∗

0 implies that domestic saving abroad, 𝑆 ∗ is positive, and the capital‐export equilibrium will emerge.

19

Each high-skill individual is endowed with one unit of the composite good in the first period; a
low-skill individual is endowed only with 𝜃

1 units. Thus, an h-skill individual enjoys both

higher initial endowment (“wealth”), and higher labor market skill than the l-skill individual.
We assume Cobb-Douglas preferences for both types of individuals,

(8) 𝑢

𝑏 ,

𝑐 𝑐

Where, 0

𝜎

1.

The welfare state provides a uniform social benefit (b). This social benefit captures the various
ingredients that the welfare state accords, such as health services, education, in-kind transfers,
etc.15
These preferences yield the following consumption functions:
(9)

𝑐

(10)

𝑐

∗
∗

1

𝛽 𝜌𝑤 1

∗

∗

𝑡

1

𝑡∗ 𝑟∗

1

15

𝛿𝜃

We have done various simulations with different specification: (1) social benefit and private consumption are
perfect substitutes; (2) The social benefit sub‐utility enters the utility function multiplicatively. However,
qualitative results are similar for a variety of these specifications.

20

∗

(11)

𝑐

(12)

𝑐

∗

1

𝛽 𝑤 1

∗

∗

𝑡

1

1

𝑡∗ 𝑟∗

𝛿 .

The welfare state employs taxes on labor income (𝑡 ) and capital income ( 𝑡 ) in the second period
and provides the social benefit (b).
We denote by 𝑆 ∗ the aggregate domestic saving which is channeled abroad, so that the firstperiod resource constraint is:
(13)

𝐾

𝑆∗

𝛾𝑐

1

𝛾

𝑚 𝑐

𝛾

𝑚

1

𝑚 𝜃.

The second-period resource constraint is:
(14)

(1-𝑚

𝑏

𝛾 𝑚 𝑐

1

𝛾 𝑐

𝐹 𝐾, 𝐿

1

1

𝑡∗ 𝑟∗

𝛿 𝑆∗.

The government budget constraint is active only in the second period, and its budget constraint is
given by
(15) (1-𝑚

𝑏

𝑡

1

𝛾 𝜌

𝛾

𝑚

𝑤

𝑡 𝑟𝐾.

Note that by Walras’ Law, the government budget constraint is redundant. (Note also that with
source-based taxation, the return on 𝑆 ∗ is not taxed at home.)
The policy employed by the welfare state depends on which of the two groups of individuals (l
and h) form the majority. That is whether 𝛾 is greater or smaller than1

𝛾

𝑚 . The policy

variables are𝑡 , 𝑡 and b. When the low –skill group form the majority (that is,
21

𝛾

0.5), the

policy variables are chosen to maximize
individuals are in the majority (that is, 𝛾
𝑢

𝑢

𝑐 𝑐

𝑏 . In addition, when the high-skill

0.5), the policy variables are chosen so as to maximize

𝑏 .

𝑐 𝑐

Although taxes are levied, and social benefits are granted, only in the second period. Nevertheless,
these policy variables are determined, announced, and committed to, already in the first period by
the fully informed and dynamically consistent policy makers.

In the case of capital-import equilibrium, financial globalization will raise wages and lower return
on savings, raising income for both income groups even in the absence of welfare-state
redistribution policies.
We abstract from this case in the numerical simulations.
VII.

Characterizing the political-economy equilibrium: the case of capital-

exporting country

Our objective is to study how these policies respond to changes in the process of globalization,
driven by changes in the parameters 𝑡 ∗ , 𝑟 ∗ , and 𝛿. In particular, the response of b may be viewed
as the effect on the generosity of the welfare state, and the effect on 𝑡

captures the international

tax competition. We are also interested in the effects on the consumption-equivalent utility levels
to gauge the effects of globalization on income distribution, and the benefits from globalization.
For this purpose, and given the multitude forces at play, we resort to numerical simulations.
22

The degree of globalization measured by the cost parameter 𝛿. We study therefore the implications
of changing 𝛿 for the economy in general (e.g. the allocation of capital between domestic and
foreign uses), and for the tax burden, its composition, and the generosity of the welfare state, in
particular.16
As expected, Figures 3 and 4 show that financial globalization (i.e. lowering 𝛿
Shifts capital from home abroad. This is true no matter whether the high-skill or the low-skill form
the majority. Naturally, both capital invested at home and abroad, are higher when the high-skill
form the majority, than when the low-skill form the majority.

16

The parameter values employed in these simulations are as follows: 𝛽 = 0.6, 𝜃 0.5, 𝛼 0.33, 𝛾 0.5, 𝜌
0.6, 𝑟 ∗
2.4, 𝑡 ∗
0.4, 𝐴
1. The share in the population of high skill type in the population 𝜆 is either
0.6, when they are the majority, or 0.4, where they are in the minority.

23

High‐skilled majority

Low‐skilled majority

Figure 3: Capital Invested Domestically

24

High‐skilled majority

Low‐skilled majority

Figure 4: Capital Invested Abroad

Also, as domestic capital falls with financial globalization, the rate of return of domestic capital
rises and the wage rate falls.
Turning our attention to the welfare-state system, Figures 5 and 7 show that financial globalization
shifts the tax burden away from domestic capital income to labor income. It also lowers the total
tax burden, and consequently, the provision of the social benefit (b). These results obtain regardless
of which skill type form the majority. Naturally, the tax rates on capital and labor are higher when
a low-skill type form the majority, than when the high-skill type forms the majority.
25

Figure

5:

Tax

Rate

on

Domestic

Low‐skilled majority

High‐skilled majority

26

Capital

Income

Figure

6:

Tax

Rate

on

Labor

Low‐skilled majority

Low‐skilled majority

High‐skilled majority

Figure 7: Social Benefits

27

Income

High‐skilled majority

Low‐skilled majority

Comparing the levels of the social benefit under the two regimes, there are two forces at play. On
the one hand, the tax rate is higher under a low-skill majority. On the other hand, the economy is
less productive when the low-skill labor is the larger component of the labor force. This force
28

reduces the total tax revenues. In our simulations, the second effect dominates. As a result, the
social benefit (b) is lower under the low-skill regime.
Turning now to who is the winner and who is the loser from financial globalization, we note that
the issue is far from being a straightforward application of a gains-from-trade argument. For an
existence of Pareto improvement to work in a multi-consumer economy, it is an essential to have
a specific way for the redistribution policy, so as to compensate the losers by taxing the winners.
However, our model’s redistribution system is constrained by who is the majority, low-skilled or
high-skilled.

29

Figure

8:

Utility

Level

of

High‐skilled majority

Low‐skilled majority

30

High-Skill

Individuals

Figure

9:

Utility

Level

of

Low-Skill

Individuals

High‐skilled majority

Low‐skilled majority

Figures 8 and 9 indicate that thanks to the existence of the welfare state tax-transfer policies,
financial globalization leads to a Pareto improvement. Both skill types, regardless of who form the

31

majority, benefit from financial globalization.17 We can also demonstrate that both skill types
benefit. 18

17

Note that we assume perfect substitution between the two labor skill types and complementarity
between capital and labor. If there is complementarity‐ relation between all factors of production, our
result is still valid. Krusell et al (2000), who analyzed US data, decompose capital into equipment and
structures. They were able to track wage gap for the years 1960 to 1990 and show that capital
accumulation explains most of the rise in wage inequality. Note, however that capital which leaves the
domestic economy as a result of financial globalization (and escape tax under the source‐territorial tax
principle domestic taxes), with input‐substitutability between low‐skilled labor and capital, tends to
raise low‐skilled wages and raise the domestic return to capital that they own.

18

As utility is ordinal, we cannot just compare whose utility rises by more. Instead, we calculate
a sort of consumption equivalent to the utility. Specifically, we ask what a uniform percentage
increase in both present and future consumption generates the same increase in ordinal utility as
generated by the financial globalization (the change in 𝛿). Formally, denote this percentage
increase
by
𝑥 𝛿 ,i
l, h.
Define
consumption
equivalent
utility
by
𝑐̅ 1 𝑥 𝛿
𝑐̅
1 𝑥 𝛿
𝑏
𝑐̃
𝑐̃
𝑏 , where “-“refers
to the pre-change in 𝛿 , and “~” refers to the post- change in 𝛿. i = l, h. This yields: 1 𝑥 𝛿
.
32

VIII. Role of the welfare state
To highlight the role of the welfare state in safeguarding the globalization gains for all (the
unskilled-poor individuals and the skilled-rich individuals), we consider in this section the extreme
case where the welfare state does not exist (that is, 𝑡 , 𝑡 and b are all set equal to zero).

Figure 10: Financial Globalization without welfare state: utility of the high skill type

33

Figure 11: Financial Globalization without welfare state: utility of the low high skill type

Figure 12: Financial Globalization without welfare state: The Gini coefficient

34

Figures 10-12 demonstrate that without having the welfare state redistribution, the consequences
of the financial globalization are that the high skill-rich individual gain, while the low-skill poor
lose. Consequently, income inequality worsens. Thus, as shown in the previous section, the welfare
state tax and transfer features, although politically controlled by the self-interest majority, are key
to guarantee the spread of financial globalization gains to all.
IX. High-Skilled Emigration and Utility Levels

35

Emigration of high skill labor is directly affected by the globalized world economy and the
redistribution domestic policies. The mobility of high-skilled labour puts restrictions on how high
the rates of taxes can be raised in relation to the kinds of benefits and services that are provided..
The model predicts that the negative impact of brain drain on the utility levels of “those left
behind” depend on the ease in which high skill labor emigrates, which income group is the
majority, and sets domestic redistributive policies, and the friction cost associated with capital
moving abroad.
Recall that

𝑚

𝑚 𝑢∗

𝑢

= 𝑍 𝑢∗

𝑢

Where Z > 0, and z > 0 are parameters.
Where 𝑢∗ is the (exogenously given) utility level attained by s-individuals who reside abroad. Note
that the number of emigrants depends positively on the foreign-domestic utility difference (that is
𝑢∗

𝑢 . The lower the skilled utility, 𝑢 , is, the higher is the rate of emigration, 𝑚 .

When Z rises, emigration is facilitated by the relaxation of immigration constraints imposed by
the migration-destination country, or by better matching of skills between the migration-origin and
migration destination countries.

36

Naturally, as the ease-of-emigration parameter Z increases, emigration rises, as shown in Figure
13 (a); the welfare state generosity measure (b) falls as the ease of emigration rises, due to a
diminished labor income tax base (figure 13(b).

Figure 13: Ease of emigration of high skilled, Magnitude, and the generosity of the welfare state
(a) Emigration

(b) Generosity of the welfare state

37

Naturally, in the H-regime (𝛾
(𝛾

0.6 labor supply in effective units is larger than in the U-regime

0.4 .

X. Conclusion
Capital market globalization affects income distribution in a variety of ways: through its effects
on location and sectoral nature of investment and portfolio composition of savings, wages and
38

rents, etc. Furthermore, globalization introduces tax competition among countries, and a possibility
of a “race to the bottom”. As a result, the tax burden may shift from the mobile factors (e.g. capital
and top-skilled labor) to the weakly mobile factors (e.g. low skill labor). This shift has first-order
implications for both the functional and the size distribution of income. A country that imposes
high tax rates may push mobile factors (especially capital) abroad where the country cannot
effectively tax them, eroding its own tax base and lowering domestic economic activity at the same
time. A simple framework to study the issue of tax competition is with the aid of a stylized model
with a pure source-based (territorial) taxation. This means that the country does not impose taxes
on foreign-source income. 19
The creation of the single European market works like a “natural experiment” that helped testing
the effect of financial globalization on the welfare state. This event triggered a race-to-the bottom
tax competition which reduces capital income tax revenues. It generated cross-country reallocation of capital which had first-order effects on income inequality, by chipping away at the
domestic tax base. The easing a country access to the world capital markets typically induces also
political-economy grounded policy changes that impact income inequality. The downscaled
welfare state nevertheless is able to spread the gains from financial globalization among most
income groups, regardless of who the decisive voter is determining the tax-transfer policies.
Many large industrialized economies have embarked in recent years on a track of trimming the
generosity of their pension and other welfare-state programs. The general rules are quite

19

International tax competition and border tax adjustments of income tax have received increasing public

and scholarly attention since the introduction of the US 2017 US Tax Bill, which shifts corporate taxation
to the source (territorial) principle.

39

straightforward: raise retirement age and curtail benefits. Following the report of the Greenspan
Committee (January, 1983), the U.S. has gradually raised the retirement age to reach 67 in the
year 2027. Similarly, but much later France, in July 2003 decided to require public sector
workers (about one-fourth of the French workforce) to contribute to the state pension system for
40 years, instead of 37.5 years. Also, Germany, which already raised its retirement age from 63
to 65, is currently contemplating raising it further to 67 between 2011 and 2035. With respect to
curtailing benefits, this is usually accomplished by abandoning wage-indexation in favor of
price-indexation. Naturally, as real wages rise over time (due mostly to productivity increases),
price-indexation is less generous to pensioners than wage-indexation; see Cogan and Mitchell
(2003) for the U.S. and Thode (2003) for Europe. Financial globalization across various
economies is a universal phenomenon to reckon with today. Can the welfare state, financed
partly by high capital taxes survive international tax competition brought about by such
globalization? Evidently, the answer is in it can; and it seems to be crucial to spread the gains
from financial asset trade across various income groups. To demonstrate these points we apply a
political economy model where the pillars of the welfare state system are determined by the
majority group, poor-low skilled or rich-high skilled to assess the forces of globalization.
We have shown that the social benefits decline as financial globalization increases. What are the
gains are for the low-skilled workers that offset the reduction in benefits? It is essentially that
they are getting a higher rate of return on their savings due to greater access to world markets.
But in essence their well-being is subject to two conflicting forces that are at play: one hand the
return to their savings rises with the globalization; on the hand, wages and social benefits fall. If
their initial wealth is sufficiently low, and if the low-skilled have preferences that lead them to
save much less relative to their wealth than the high-skilled-rich, then the gains-to-all result

40

might not hold. However, even in this case they are better off having a welfare state system in
place rather than its absence, to compensate them from depressed wages and declining provision
of social benefits.20
Dovetailing on globalization is the ageing process in many advanced economies. One would
naturally expect that as the share of the elderly in the population rise when the population ages;
their political influence would strengthen the pro welfare-state coalition. Similarly, one would
expect this coalition to gain more political power as more low-skill migrants are naturalized.
Thus, aging and low-skilled migration seem to tilt the political power balance in the direction of
boosting the welfare state, imposing a growing burden on the existing workforce. However, this
political-balance force conflicts with the fiscal-burden force if aging comes together with lowskill migration, which increases the share of net recipients of the generous welfare state. Recall
that the old derive most of their income from capital because they retired from work. Therefore,
at first thought, it may seem that as the share of the old in an aging population rises, then an
attempt to rely more heavily on capital taxes would face a stiffer political resistance. However,
after a careful scrutiny of this hypothesis we come to an unconventional conclusion: Aging
plausibly tilts the political power balance in favor of larger capital-financed welfare state.
Literature cited provides also supportive empirical evidence from the EU for this conclusion. Is
the latter conclusion relevant? After all, aging is not the only process witnessed nowadays.
Immigration is a counter force to ageing because it typically skews towards young ages.
Immigration produces sizeable demographic changes over time that have first-order effect on

20

Swank and Betz (2003) find that net of the impacts of other political forces, the universal welfare state, as
measured by an index of coverage, generosity and active labor market programs, significantly depresses the votes
of the populistic new political right. Its political clout has increased in Europe by globalization forces (especially
volume of refugees and asylum seekers.

41

redistribution policy. Most advanced economies face a generational distribution problem that
migration might help with, but migration affects young and old, rich and poor, differently. The
welfare state of these advanced economies is also a magnet for migrants, especially the low-skill.
On the one hand, the native-born older population need young immigrants to support the welfare
state; on the other hand, these immigrants may increase the fiscal burden on the native-born young.
How these tensions are to be resolved in the political economy context Razin (2018), Razin, and
Sadka (2005, 2018) .address the impact on income inequality, and redistribution policy because of
a large wave of skilled immigrants.
Ottaviano and Peri (2012) calculate the effects of immigration on the wages of native US workers
of various skill levels in two steps. In the first step, they use labor demand functions to estimate
the elasticity of substitution across different groups of workers. In the second step, they use the
underlying production structure and the estimated elasticities to calculate the total wage effects of
immigration in the long run. In the data-preferred model, they find that there is a small but
significant degree of imperfect substitutability between natives and immigrants which, when
combined with the other estimated elasticities, implies that in the period from 1990 to 2006
immigration had a small effect on the wages of native workers with no high school degree (between
0.6% and +1.7%).21 It also had a small positive effect on average native wages (+0.6%) and a
substantial negative effect (−6.7%) on wages of previous immigrants in the long run.
Appendix

Ottaviano and Peri (2012) emphasize that a production function framework is needed to combine own-group
effects with cross-group effects in order to obtain the total wage effects for each native group. In order to obtain a
parsimonious representation of elasticities that can be estimated with available data, Authors adopt alternative
nested-CES models and let the data select the preferred specification. New to this paper is the estimate of the
substitutability between natives and immigrants of similar education and experience levels.
21

42

Globalization and income distribution has been studied mostly from the
paradigm perspective.

international- trade

Stolper and Samuelson (1941), early on, explained how increased

international trade with capital-intensive good and labor-intensive good, for labor–abundant and
capital-abundant countries, should reduce the relative wage in the capital-abundant country; hence,
increasing the income gaps between capital and labor. However, Krugman (2008) points that while
standard economic analysis predicts that increased U.S. trade with unskilled labor–abundant
countries should reduce the relative wages of U.S. unskilled labor, a slew of empirical studies in
the 1990s found only a modest effect. Yeaple (2005) demonstrates that a reduction in variable
trade costs prompts more firms to adopt the better technology in the differentiated product sector.
The most-able workers among those who operate the inferior technology switch employment to
firms who operate the more advanced technology, As a result, the least able workers among those
who operated the inferior technology switch employment to the traditional sector. Hence, the wage
gap between able and less able workers rises. Helpman (2018), however, with a comprehensive
review of the literature and evidence, concludes that the aggregative effects of trade-globalization
are modest.

43

References
Auerbach, Alan J. (1983). “Corporate Taxation in the United States." Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity 2: 451-513.
Besley, Tim, Rachel Griffith and Alexander Klemm (2001). “Empirical Evidence
44

on Fiscal Interdependence in OECD Countries." Institute for Fiscal Studies.
Caminada, Koen, Kees Goudswaard, and Olaf Van Vliet, (2010), “Patterns of Welfare State
Indicators in the EU: Is there Convergence?” Journal of Common Market Studies, Volume
48, Issue 3, , June 2010, Pages 529-556.
Devereux, Michael P., and Rachel Griffith (2002). “The Impact of Corporate
Taxation on the Location of Capital: A Review." Swedish Economic Policy Review.
Devereux, Michael P., and Rachel Griffith, and Alexander Klemm (2002), “

Corporate

income tax reforms and international tax competition,” Economic Policy, Volume
17, Issue 35, 1 October 2002, Pages 449—495.
Docquier, Frédéric and Hillel Rapoport (2012), “Globalization, Brain Drain, and Development,”
Journal of Economic Literature, 2012, 50(3), 681–730.

Feliciano, Cynthia (2005), “Educational selectivity in U.S. Immigration: How do
immigrants compare to those left behind?” Demography, February 2005, Volume 42,
Issue 1, pp 131—152.
Gordon, Roger (1986), Taxation of Investment and Savings in a World Economy,” American
Economic Review.
Hall, Robert E. and Dale W. Jorgenseon (1967). “Tax Policy and Investment
Behavior." American Economic Review 57: 391-414.
Helpman, Elhanan (2018), Globalization and Inequality, Harvard University Press.
Hanson, H. Gordon, and Matthew J. Slaughter. 2016. “High-Skilled Immigration and the Rise of
STEM Occupations in U.S. Employment.” NBER Working Paper 22623.
Hines, James R. (1999). “Lessons from Behavioral Responses to International
45

Taxation." National Tax Journal 52: 304-322.
Hines, James, and Lawrence Summers (2005), “How Globalization Affects Tax Design,” NBER
working paper 14669.
Ottaviano, Gianmarco, I.P., and Giovanni Peri (2012), "Rethinking the Effect of Immigration on
Wages," Journal of the European Economic Association, Volume 10, Issue 1, 1 February
2012, Pages 152–197.
Kerr, Sari Pekkala, William Kerr, Çaglar Özden, and Christopher Parsons. 2016. “Global Talent
Flows.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 30 (Fall): 3–30.
King, Mervyn A., and Don Fullerton (1984) “Comparisons of Effective Tax Rates,” in King,
Mervyn A., and Don Fullerton (eds.) The Taxation of Income from Capital: A Comparative
Study of the United States, the United Kingdom, Sweden, and Germany, University of
Chicago Press.
Krautheim, Sebastian, and Tim Schmidt-Eisenhor (2011), “Heterogeneous firms, ‘profit
shifting’ FDI and international tax competition,” Journal of Public Economics
Volume 95, Issues 1–2, February, Pages 122-133.
Krugman, Paul (2008), “Trade and Wages, Reconsidered,” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity Spring 2008, pp. 103-154.

Krussel, Per, Jose-Victor Rios-Rull, andGiovanni L. Violante (2000), “Capital-Skill
Complentarity and Inequality: A Macroeconomic Analysis,” Econometrica, 68, pp.
1029-33.

46

Lassen, David D. and Peter Birch Sorensen (2002). “Fnancing the NordicWelfare
States: The Challenge of Globalization to Taxation in Nordic Countries."
A Report prepared for the Nordic Council of Ministers, June.
Razin, Assaf (2018a), Israel and the World Economy: The Power of Globalization, MIT
Press.
Razin, Assaf (2018b), “Israel’s immigration story: Winners and Losers,” Israel Economic
Review Vol. 15, No. 1 (2018), 73-106.
Meltzer, Alan, H, and S F Richard (1981), “A Rational Theory of the Size of
Government”, Journal of Political Economy, 89 (5), 914—927.
Razin, Assaf and Efraim Sadka (1991), “International Tax Competition and Tax
Harmonization,” Economics Letters.
Razin, Assaf, and Efraim Sadka (2014), Migration States and Welfare States: Why is
America

Different from Europe? Pelgrave Pivot Series, Pelgrave-MacMillan.

Razin, Assaf and Efraim Sadka (2017), “International Tax Reforms with Flexible Prices,”
CEPR Vox.
Razin, Assaf, and Efraim Sadka (2018), “Migration-Induced Redistribution with and
without Migrants’ Voting,” FinanzArchiv / Public Finance Analysis (FA)
Volume 74, Number 1, March, special issue in honour of Hans Werner Sinn, pp.
158-172.

Razin, Assaf, Efraim Sadka, and Chang Woon Nam (2005), The Decline of the Welfare
State: Demography and Globalization, MIT Press.
Razin, Assaf and Efraim Sadka (2017) “International tax reforms with flexible prices,”
CEPR EU- Vox, 18 December 2017.

47

Sorensen, Peter Birch (2002). “The Case for International Tax Coordination
Reconsidered." Economic Policy 31: 429-472.

Razin, Assaf, Efraim Sadka, and Phillip Swagel (2002a), “The Aging Population and the
Size of the Welfare State”, Journal of Political Economy,110, pp.910-918.

Razin, Assaf, Efraim Sadka, and Phillip Swagel (2002b), “Tax burden and migration: a
political economy theory and evidence”, Journal of Public Economics, 85 (2), 167—
190.
Stolper, Wolfgang W., and Paul A. Samuelson (1941), ”Protection and Real Wages,”
Review of Economic Studies, 9, pp. 58-73.
Swank, Duane and Hans-George Betz (2003), “Globalization, the welfare state and rightwing populism in Western Europe,” Socio-Economic Review, 1, 215-255.
Yeaple, Stephen R. (2005), “A Simple Model of Firm Heterogeneity and International
Trade and Wages.” Journal of International Economics 65: 1—20.

UNCTAD (2018), Country Fact Sheets 2018,
http://unctad.org/sections/dite_dir/docs/wir2018/wir18_fs_cn_en.pdf

48

49

