NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHAT DOES AN ELECTRIC VEHICLE REPLACE?
Jianwei Xing
Benjamin Leard
Shanjun Li
Working Paper 25771
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25771

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2019

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Jianwei Xing, Benjamin Leard, and Shanjun Li. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

What Does an Electric Vehicle Replace?
Jianwei Xing, Benjamin Leard, and Shanjun Li
NBER Working Paper No. 25771
April 2019
JEL No. Q4,Q48,Q55
ABSTRACT
The emissions reductions from the adoption of a new transportation technology depend on the
emissions from the new technology relative to those from the displaced technology. We evaluate
the emissions reductions from electric vehicles (EVs) by identifying which vehicles would have
been purchased had EVs not been available. We do so by estimating a random coefficients
discrete choice model of new vehicle demand and simulating counterfactual sales with EVs no
longer subsidized or removed from the new vehicle market. Our results suggest that vehicles that
EVs replace are relatively fuel-efficient: EVs replace gasoline vehicles with an average fuel
economy of 4.2 mpg above the fleet-wide average and 12 percent of them replace hybrid
vehicles. Federal income tax credits resulted in a 29 percent increase in EV sales, but 70 percent
of the credits were obtained by households that would have bought an EV without the credits. By
simulating alternative subsidy designs, we demonstrate the distributional and efficiency outcomes
across different policy alternatives.
Jianwei Xing
National School of Development
Peking University
No.5 Yiheyuan Road
Beijing
China
jerryxing@nsd.pku.edu.cn
Benjamin Leard
Resources for the Future
1616 P St. NW
Washington, DC 20036
leard@rff.org

Shanjun Li
Cornell University
405 Warren Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
SL2448@cornell.edu

1

Introduction

The diffusion of electric vehicles (EVs), coupled with cleaner electricity generation, offers a
promising pathway to reduce air pollution from on-road vehicles and to strengthen energy
security. In contrast to conventional gasoline vehicles with internal combustion engines, EVs
use electricity stored in rechargeable batteries to power the motor. When operated in all-electric
mode, EVs consume no gasoline and produce zero tailpipe emissions. But the stored electricity
is generated from other sources such as power plants, which produce air pollution. Therefore,
the environmental impacts of EVs depend on two critical factors. First, the emissions created
from operating EVs depend on the fuel source of electricity generation. Second, the emissions
diverted from EVs depend on the difference in emissions intensity between EVs and the vehicles
that EVs replace. While prior literature has focused on the first factor (Archsmith et al., 2015;
Holland et al., 2016), few analyses explore the second factor. We fill this gap by examining what
EV buyers would have purchased had EVs been unavailable. This counterfactual serves as the
proper baseline to evaluate the emissions impacts of EV diffusion.
Since the introduction of the first mass-market models into the United States in late 2010, EVs
sales have grown rapidly, as shown in Table 1. To encourage adoption, the federal government
provides a federal income tax credit to new EV buyers based on each vehicle’s battery capacity
and the gross vehicle weight rating, with the amount ranging from $2,500 to $7,500. Several states
have established additional state-level incentives to further promote EV adoption, including tax
exemptions and rebates for EVs and non-monetary incentives such as high-occupancy vehicle
(HOV) lane access, toll reduction, and free parking.1
A potential concern associated with subsidy policies is that they may create “non-additional”
emissions reductions: some EV buyers would have purchased EVs even if there was no subsidy.2
Since early adopters may place a higher value for new technology and the environment, it is
likely that some buyers have received a windfall gain without changing their behavior.
Moreover, even if the tax credits increased EV sales, the emissions impact may be small if
EVs replace vehicles with low emissions ratings. The effect that EVs have on emissions depends
on how clean EVs are relative to the vehicles they are replacing. Many EV buyers could have
bought a low-emission gasoline vehicle had EVs or EV incentives not been available. This could
arise from consumer preference heterogeneity and sorting: consumers that value fuel efficiency or
1

In addition, federal, state, and local governments also provide funding to support charging station deployment.

2

Additionality is a key issue for many other subsidy policies such as carbon offset programs (Bento et al.,
2015) and subsidy programs for alternative-fuel vehicles (Beresteanu and Li, 2011; Huse, 2014).

1

environmentally friendly vehicles buy vehicles that are fuel-efficient or deemed environmentally
friendly, such as the Toyota Prius or the Toyota Prius Plug-In. For these buyers, opting to buy
the EV yields small or even negative emissions benefits.
To understand these issues, we use a stylized model to derive a simple expression relating
vehicle substitution patterns -represented by cross-price elasticities of demand- to emissions
changes. Our model shows that the greater the substitution a non-EV has with an EV, the
greater the impact the vehicle’s emissions have on the emissions effect of the EV. We then
estimate a random coefficient discrete choice model of vehicle demand by leveraging a rich
household survey of US new vehicle buyers and market-level sales data from 2010 to 2014. The
estimation takes advantage of the second-choice information from household survey data, which
greatly improves the precision of the random coefficient estimates and the resulting substitution
patterns. With the model, we simulate counterfactual market outcomes by removing the EVs
from the market to examine how consumers substitute between EVs and non-EVs. We then
conduct other counterfactual exercises to examine the cost-effectiveness of the income tax credits
policy in terms of reducing on-road emissions and compare it with alternative policy designs.
Our approach builds on the methodology used by Holland et al. (2016) to estimate EV
replacement vehicles. Their approach assigns a replacement vehicle based on stated preference
second choice survey data.3 Instead of using survey data solely to assign a substitute model
for each EV, we estimate a vehicle demand model incorporating both aggregate sales data and
second choice survey data. The estimated own- and cross-price elasticities can directly reflect
the substitution patterns between EVs and vehicles of other fuel types. The recovered consumer
preference parameters allow us to run simulations to quantify the difference in emissions between
the observed EV sales and the simulated replaced vehicles, as well as the impact of the subsidy
programs on increasing EV sales. Our structural approach also allows us to compute how much
EV subsidies lead to additional EV purchases, which allows us to evaluate the cost-effectiveness
of the subsidies.
With our estimated demand model, we run counterfactual simulations, which reveal three
3

Holland et al. (2016) create a composite substitute gasoline vehicle for each EV by taking the weighted average
of emissions of the top gasoline substitute vehicles reported in the survey. But they do not have substitute choice
data for certain EV models including the Honda Fit EV, Fiat 500 EV, and BYD e6. In addition, the approach in
Holland et al. (2016) assumes that sales of a specific EV model replace the same gasoline vehicle, which might be
strong. For example, because of heterogeneous consumer preferences, some Nissan LEAFs replace a Toyota Prius,
while other Nissan LEAFs might replace a Ford Fusion. We define theoretically the emissions of a composite
vehicle that accurately represent the emissions of all vehicles that replace an EV. This definition is a weighted
average of the emissions of all vehicles that are substitutes for an EV, where the weights are proportional to each
vehicle’s cross-price elasticity of demand with respect to the EV’s effective price.

2

key findings. First, electric vehicles appear to be replacing relatively fuel- efficient vehicles, as
households that generally prefer EVs also prefer conventional gasoline vehicles with better fuel
economy. Second, the availability of and support for EVs has not led to a significant reduction
in market share for hybrid vehicles. Hybrids had been supported by the federal government in
the 2000s and have seen a decline in market share since 2014, a time when EVs had started to
gain significant market share. But our results suggest that EVs have had a limited impact on
hybrid sales. Instead, the elimination of the federal subsidy for hybrids has caused a significant
reduction in hybrid sales. Third, the cost-effectiveness of the subsidy program is limited by the
fact that about 70 percent of consumers would have purchased EVs without the subsidy. We find
that this result is sensitive to the price elasticity of demand, where more elastic demand implies
a greater number of additional EV purchases. By comparing the current uniform subsidy with
an alternative policy design that removes the subsidy for high-income households and provides
additional subsidies to low-income households, our analysis shows that better targeting could
potentially increase the cost-effectiveness of the subsidy programs in terms of EV demand and
environmental benefits. Our simulation results contribute to the literature on the diffusion of lowemission technologies and the cost-effectiveness of subsidy programs promoting these technologies
(Allcott et al., 2015; Boomhower and Davis, 2014; Langer and Lemoine, 2018; Sallee, 2011).4
Our study adds to the literature on the demand for electric vehicles and the EV market.
Li et al. (2017) employ data on EV sales and charging stations at the city level to quantify
the interplay between the availability of charging infrastructure and the installed base of EVs.
Our structural approach allows us to address several key issues surrounding EV demand that
reduced-form methods are unable to quantify, including the identification of vehicles that are
being replaced by EVs and the welfare effects of EV policies. Springel (2016) estimates a
structural model of consumer vehicle choice and charging station entry in the Norwegian EV
market and compares the effectiveness of direct purchasing price subsidies with charging station
subsidies. Li (2016) examines the issues of compatibility in charging technology and finds that
mandating compatibility in charging standards would increase the sales of EVs. Muehlegger
and Rapson (2018) use the EV subsidy receipts data and vehicle transaction prices to estimate
the pass-through rate of the EV incentive program in California and find that 100 percent of
the subsidies were passed through to consumers and that a decrease of 10 percent in EV prices
increases EV demand by 65 percent. In contrast to these papers, our study focuses on identifying
the vehicles that EVs replace.
4

See Appendix A for a detailed review of this literature.

3

We organize the rest of the paper as follows. Section 2 briefly describes the industry and
policy background of the study and the data. In Section 3, we develop a simple analytical model
to show emissions impacts of vehicle substitution depend on key vehicle demand parameters
to help guide our empirical analysis. Section 4 presents the empirical model and estimation
strategy. Section 5 presents the estimation results of the substitution. In Section 6, we present
the counterfactual simulations to evaluate the environmental benefits of the introduction of EVs
and the impact of the EV subsidy. We also conduct simulations to examine the impact of EVs
on hybrid vehicle sales and whether an income-dependent subsidy design could improve the
cost-effectiveness of the subsidy. Section 7 concludes.

2

Industry and Policy Background and Data

In this section, we first present industry background focusing on the recent development of the
US EV market and discuss current government policies. We then present the data used in the
empirical analysis.

2.1

Industry Background

There are currently two types of EVs for sale in the United States: battery electric vehicles
(BEVs) which run exclusively on high-capacity batteries (e.g., Nissan LEAF), and plug-in hybrid
vehicles (PHEVs) which use batteries to power an electric motor and use another fuel (gasoline)
to power a combustion engine (e.g., Chevrolet Volt). The deployment of both types of EVs
currently faces significant financial barriers: EVs are more expensive than their conventional
gasoline vehicle counterparts. The manufacturer’s suggested retail price (MSRP) for the 2014
Honda Accord Hybrid is $29,945, while the 2014 Honda Accord Plug-In Hybrid is listed at
$40,570, which is over a $10,000 difference. A key reason behind the cost differential is the cost
of the battery. Battery market analysts predict that as battery technology improves, the cost
should come down.
Governments have recently provided generous monetary and non-monetary incentives for
EVs.5 The US federal government provides income tax credits for new qualified EVs in the
range of $2,500 and $7,500 based on each vehicle’s battery capacity and the gross vehicle weight
rating. Several states add state-level incentives to further promote EV adoption. For example,
5

Several cities in China such as Beijing implement a license restriction policy for the registration of new vehicles
and some PEV models are exempt from this restriction.

4

through the California Clean Vehicle Rebate Project (CVRP), California residents can receive a
rebate of $ 2,500 for purchasing or leasing a BEV and $1,500 for a PHEV, and the rebate amount
increases to $4,500 and $3,500, respectively, for lower-income consumers.
There are at least two challenges that could undermine the effectiveness of the subsidy policy.
First, the uniform subsidy to EV buyers may not always result in additional EV sales in the sense
that many of the buyers who claim the subsidy may still purchase EVs even if there were no
subsidy policy. Since early adopters of EVs are those who favor the newest technology, have the
strongest environmental awareness, and usually have higher income, it is more likely that the
effect of a uniform subsidy policy, such as the current federal EV income tax credit, on boosting
additional EV sales is limited.6
The second challenge has to do with the type of vehicles that are replaced by electric vehicles.
A potential efficiency loss could arise if the subsidy does not induce people to switch from a gas
guzzler to an EV, but from another fuel-efficient gasoline vehicle, or another hybrid vehicle to
an EV, making little net gain of environmental benefits. Holland et al. (2016) evaluate the
heterogenous environmental benefits of EVs by comparing the externalities of EVs with their
gasoline counterparts. However, the relative environmental benefits would be smaller if a higher
fuel-efficient vehicle such as a hybrid vehicle is compared. At the national average fuel mix, BEVs
and PHEVs do not have an advantage over hybrid vehicles in emissions reduction, and PHEVs
even generate more emissions than hybrid vehicles (Appendix Table D.1). With the expiration
of the tax credits for hybrid vehicles, the income tax credits for EVs are likely to encourage
consumers who would otherwise purchase hybrid vehicles to purchase EVs. Table 1 shows that
as the market share of EVs increases in most recent years, the market share of hybrids starts
to decline. Chandra et al. (2010) find that the rebate programs in Canada primarily subsidize
people who would have bought hybrid vehicles or fuel-efficient cars in any case and may not be
the most effective way to encourage people to switch away from fuel-inefficient vehicles like large
SUVs or luxury sport passenger cars, at least in the short or medium run.
One of the justifications for EV subsidies is to reduce the emissions from the transportation
sector by replacing fuel-inefficient vehicles with EVs. When life-cycle emissions are accounted
for, however, substantial heterogeneity in environmental benefits could exist. For example,
6

The CVRP used to offer incentives of $1,500 for PHEVs and $2,500 for BEVs, but the majority of the rebates
went to high-income households. To direct the rebates toward households that value the rebates most, CVRP
has been redesigned such that lower-income households will be able to claim a larger rebate. Households with
income less than 300 percent of the federal poverty level will be able to get $3,000 for PHEVs and $4,000 for
BEVs, and households with gross annual income above certain thresholds -$250,000 for single filers, $340,000 for
head-of-household filers, and $500,000 for joint filers- are no longer eligible for the rebates.

5

EVs may not have an advantage over conventional vehicles in locations where the electricity is
generated through fossil fuels. Thus, even if the EV subsidy results in additional EV purchases,
the reduction of overall emissions would be limited. By incorporating spatial heterogeneity
of damages and pollution export across jurisdictions, Holland et al. (2016) find considerable
heterogeneity in environmental benefits of EV adoption depending on the location and argue
for regionally differentiated EV policy. They find that the environmental benefits of EVs are
the largest in California because of large damages from gasoline vehicles and a relatively clean
electric grid, but the benefits are negative in places such as North Dakota where the conditions
are reversed.

2.2

Data

We use three data sets to estimate the model of vehicle demand. The primary data source is
household-level survey data from the US New Vehicle Customer Study by MaritzCX Research.
It is a monthly survey of households that purchased or leased new vehicles. The data provide
detailed information of demographic characteristics of households that purchased each vehicle,
and the alternative vehicles they considered while making the purchase decisions. We use survey
data for five model-years: model year (MY) 2010 through MY 2014, where each model year is
defined as September of the previous calendar year to August of the current calendar year. (For
example, MY 2011 is defined as September 2010-August 2011.) For computational purposes, we
draw a sample of 11,628 transactions from the data after removing observations with missing
observed consumer attributes or information on the purchased and seriously considered models,
and end up having 1,509, 1,860, 2,287, 2,899, and 3,073 transactions for MY 2010-MY 2014,
respectively. As the market share of EVs is tiny, so that would include enough EV observations
to have sufficient variation in consumer demographic attributes for EV buyers to identify the
preference for EVs among different demographics, we use non-random sampling by including
all EV observations from the survey sample and randomly drawing observations for the other
fuel types. To adjust for non-random sampling, we then follow Manski and Lerman (1977) to
include a weighted exogenous sample maximum likelihood by re-weighting each observation in
the likelihood. The weight is defined by the actual market share in the population divided by
the within-sample market share.
Table 2 summarizes the demographic information for the households that made those purchase
transactions. The average household income for the survey respondents in the sample is $140,448,
which is higher than the average household income of $117,795 for married couples in the United
6

States7 . This feature of the data is caused by oversampling consumers who purchased EVs and
hybrid vehicles. The average household size is 2.66 people, and 63.9 percent of the heads of
household have earned a college degree. Of the respondents, 66.1 percent of the respondents are
from an urban or suburban area, with an average commuting of 25.6 minutes and average gasoline
price of $3.48 during the survey time. About 50 percent of the sampled households selected a light
truck, and the average price of the vehicles that the sampled households purchased is $33,451.
The average fuel economy of the purchased vehicles is 34.8 mpg.8 Appendix Table D.2 provides
further descriptive statistics for new vehicle buyers by fuel type. EV buyers have a much higher
income and a larger percentage of them graduated with a college degree.
The household survey data also include alternative vehicle choices that consumers considered
while purchasing vehicles, providing a valuable source for identifying unobserved preference
heterogeneity.

Table 3 summarizes the top alternative vehicle choices reported by survey

respondents for EV models. The data reflect that EV buyers have a strong preference for
alternative fuel technologies, since most of them still consider PHEVs or hybrid vehicles as their
second choices. This strong correlation of the fuel economy between the purchased vehicle and the
alternative choices greatly facilitates estimating the random coefficients for vehicle fuel economy.
For luxury EV models, such as Tesla Model S, customers might also consider luxury gasoline
models such as Audi A7 as their alternative choices. The proximity in price, size, and some other
observed vehicle attributes would help in identifying consumer heterogenous preference for those
attributes.
Figure 1 summarizes consumers’ second choices by fuel type based on the survey data and
reflects the heterogeneous preference of fuel type among different groups of consumers. Among
gasoline buyers, 96.9 percent would consider another gasoline vehicle as a second choice, 2.9%
percent would consider a hybrid vehicle model as an alternative, and only about 0.2 percent
would consider either BEVs or PHEVs as substitutes. Gasoline vehicle buyers, who are the
majority of new vehicle purchasers, are generally less interested in the EV technology. Hybrid
vehicle buyers demonstrate a stronger preference of fuel economy, and 39.7 percent of them would
consider another hybrid vehicle as an alternative choice. However, only 3 percent would consider
EVs as second choices. Those consumers who purchase hybrid vehicles enjoy vehicles that save
fuel cost but do not favor the plug-in feature of EVs. Both PHEV and BEV buyers show a strong
7

Data source: IRS Statistics of Income, 2014.

8

This average is significantly higher than the average fuel economy of all purchased vehicles during the sample
period because of the oversampling of EV and hybrid buyers.

7

interest into EVs: many of them are considering another EV as their second choices. However,
34.5 percent of PHEV buyers consider a hybrid vehicle as an alternative, and only 16.5 percent
consider a BEV model. PHEV buyers are more willing to adopt the EV technology but are less
interested in all-electric vehicles, probably because of the limited range of BEVs. BEV buyers are
most into the EV technology, and 41.3 percent of them pick another BEV model as their second
choice, 25.3 percent consider PHEVs, and only 18.6 percent consider another gasoline vehicle as
substitute. BEV adopters are those who care most about the feature of electrification and those
who are most into the newest technologies. The general pattern of this figure reveals the strong
correlation between alternative choices and the purchased vehicles and reflects the critical role
that the substitution pattern plays in reflecting the heterogenous preference of consumers.
We merge vehicle characteristics data from Wards Automotive, which provide detailed
attributes of each vehicle model in each model year, including horsepower, size, curb weight,
wheelbase, and fuel economy.9 The data set is further complemented by aggregate vehicle sales
data, which provide market-level information on vehicle demand, obtained from registration data
compiled by IHS Automotive. The IHS data record the quarterly number of registrations for each
vehicle model, broken down by fuel type, which are aggregated to model-year level to construct
the market share for each vehicle model in each model year. All the above data sets are matched
at the make-model-fuel type level, for example, Ford-Focus-gasoline, and the vehicle attributes
are assigned using the base model. The total number of vehicle models that are defined in the
model-year choice sets are 424, 404, 418, 441, and 459 for MY 2010- MY 2014, respectively. Table
2 summarizes the basic attributes of those vehicle choices and the composition of the choice sets
by fuel type.
We assign average vehicle prices based on respondent-reported price information in the
MaritzCX survey data. Respondents are asked to report the sales or lease prices of their vehicles,
within a few months after purchase. These values reflect the price that households paid on average
for each vehicle and may be different from the traditionally used MSRP because of negotiations or
temporary promotions. These prices exclude any credits received from trade-ins and include sales
taxes. We compute market by model by fuel type prices as the unweighted average transaction
price for all purchases and leases in the raw survey data. We do not adjust these prices for
tax credits or rebates because we do not observe whether households claimed these incentives.
Since many of the household observations lease plug-in electric or fully electric vehicles, credits
9

The Wards Automotive data have a fine level of vehicle identification detail. We merge base model year by
make, model and fuel type to the MaritzCX survey data, where the base model is defined as the trim with the
lowest MSRP among all trims by make, model, and fuel type identification within the same model year.

8

or rebates for these vehicles go to the leasing company, which then likely passes through the
incentive as a lower purchase price.10 We collect data of monthly average gasoline prices by
region from the Energy Information Administration (EIA).11 We convert all prices, including
average transaction prices and fuel costs, to real 2014$ using the Bureau of Labor Statistics
(BLS) Consumer Price Index.
We obtain detailed information on locations and open dates of all charging stations from the
Department of Energy’s Alternative Fuels Data Center (AFDC). By matching the zip code of
each charging station with the zip codes reported in the survey data, we assign the total number
of charging stations available in the city to each observed survey respondent.

3

Theory of Substitution

To motivate our empirical analysis, we lay out a stylized model of vehicle substitution to illustrate
how substitution between vehicles from a policy or non-policy change affects emissions. Consider
a new vehicle market where there are J unique models for sale, where each model is indexed by j.
Model j has lifetime emissions equal to ej and has aggregate demand qj = qj (p1 , p2 , ..., pJ ), where
pj represents the sales price net of subsidies for vehicle j. Total lifetime emissions of vehicles
sold are
E=

J
X

ej qj (p1 , p2 , ..., pJ ).

(1)

j=1

Without loss of generality, we assume that j = 1 is an EV and j = 2, 3., ..., J are gasoline or
hybrid models. We assume that the EV’s price is subsidized by an amount s, so that the EV’s
price is p1 = p01 − s, where p01 is the EV’s price without a subsidy. Differentiating total lifetime
emissions with respect to the EV subsidy yields
J

dE
dq1 X dqj
= −e1
−
ej
.
ds
dp1 j=2 dp1

(2)

10

Our treatment of the purchase price for plug-ins and electric vehicles adds measurement error to the price
variable for households that are able to claim the monetary incentives. We address this concern with how we
estimate the price sensitivity parameters. We estimate price elasticities based on all the models in the choice
sets, where a large majority of models are conventional gasoline vehicles that do not have tax credits or rebates.
Since plug-ins and electric vehicles comprise only a tiny share of the choice sets, mismeasuring their prices will
have a minimal effect on our estimated price elasticities. Furthermore, we instrument for price in the demand
estimation, which further reduces concerns about price measurement error.
11

EIA reports monthly gasoline prices by region, defined by the Petroleum Administration for Defense Districts
(PADDs). We assign gasoline prices to each sampled household based on its PADD region and the month of
vehicle purchase.

9

Normalizing the change in the subsidy by the EV’s price (so that

dE
ds0

=

dE
p)
ds 1

and defining the

own-price and cross-price elasticity of demand with respect to the EV price as 1 =
j =

dqj p1
,
dp1 qj

dq1 p1
dp1 q1

and

respectively, we can express equation (2) as
J

X
dE
=
−e
q

−
ej qj j .
1
1
1
ds0
j=2

(3)

Equation (3) reveals that the effect of the subsidy on lifetime emissions is proportional to the
own-price elasticity of demand for the EV and the cross-price elasticity of demands for all other
vehicles. The cross-price elasticities j represent the substitution pattern between the EV and
the non-EV models. The larger the value of this derivative, the greater the substitution and the
more of an impact the non-EV model has on the emissions impact of the subsidy. Consider the
simple example where j = 0 for j = 3, 4, ..., J. Then equation (3) becomes
dE
= −e1 q1 1 − e2 q2 2 .
ds0

(4)

If the demand responses offset one another so that there is no change in total new vehicle sales,
then the change in emissions depends on the relative difference between the lifetime emissions of
the EV and the non-EV j = 2:
dE
= (e2 − e1 )q1 1 .
ds0

(5)

This simplified equation is conceptually the same approach taken by prior studies to quantify
the emissions impacts of EVs.

3.1

Defining a Composite Substitute

This approach above is an accurate representation of the full impact if (1) the only substitution
that takes place is between the EV and a single vehicle, (2) the single vehicle is the correct
substitute, or (3) the j = 2 model’s emissions accurately reflect the emissions of all the vehicles
that are substitutes for the EV. In most cases, an EV will have more than one vehicle as a
substitute. Here we derive a simple formula defining the emissions of a composite vehicle that
satisfies the third condition when more than one vehicle substitute for the EV. We begin by
J
P
dqj
dq1
=
. Denote
assuming that a change in the subsidy does not change total vehicle sales: − dp
dp1
1
j=2

the emissions of the composite vehicle by ec . We want to find an ec that solves

10

dE
ds0

= (ec − e1 )q1 1 .

Substituting this expression into equation (3) yields
J

X
dE
=
−e
q

−
ej qj j = (ec − e1 )q1 1 .
1
1
1
ds0
j=2

(6)

Making cancellations and isolating ec yields
ec = −

J
X

ej

j=2

qj j
.
q1 1

(7)

Emissions for the composite vehicle equal to the product of emissions and the ratio of the
cross-price elasticity of demand are scaled by sales of vehicle j, and the own-price elasticity of
demand is scaled by sales of the EV. In our empirical demand model, we are able to identify
composite vehicle emissions based on estimated own-price and cross-price demand elasticities.
Equation (7) can be further simplified to

ec = −

J
X
j=2

ej

dqj
.
dq1

(8)

This general expression can be used to accurately evaluate hypothetical settings where electric
vehicles are added or removed from the market. This expression suggests that evaluating the
impact of EV subsidy on reducing emissions depends on the estimation of the substitution pattern
between EVs and all the other vehicle models in the market.

3.2

Additionality

In this section, we derive an equation that shows how the non-additionality of a subsidy is affected
by demand parameters. We define non-additionality as the proportion of EVs that would have
been bought without the subsidy to the total EV sales with the subsidy. A higher ratio implies
more non-additional purchases and more subsidy dollars going to households that would have
bought an EV without the subsidy. The proportion is equal to
N=

q1 (p01 )
.
q1 (p1 )

(9)

Differentiating N with respect to s0 and substituting the price elasticity of demand for the

11

EV yields
dN
q1 (p01 )
1
=
ds0
q1 (p1 )

(10)

Evaluating equation (10) at the price where the subsidy is equal to zero (p01 = p1 ) yields
dN
= 1
ds0

(11)

This equation shows that non-additional purchases are proportional to the EV own-price
elasticity of demand. More elastic demand (more negative 1 ) implies relatively fewer nonadditional purchases and a greater number of purchases that are created by the subsidy. In
contrast to the results we derived for the emissions impacts of the subsidy, the additionality of
the subsidy depends on the own-price elasticity of demand only.

4

Empirical Model and Estimation

In this section, we discuss our empirical model and estimation strategy. We estimate vehicle
demand preference parameters using a random coefficient discrete choice model in the spirit of
Berry et al. (1995, 2004), Petrin (2002), and Train and Winston (2007). Our model most closely
follows the structure of Train and Winston (2007), as we exploit household demographics and
second choice data to identify the model parameters.

4.1

Vehicle Demand

The household survey data are not representative of the entire population since they include
only buyers of new vehicles. Therefore, we model new vehicle preferences conditional on the
decision of buying a new vehicle. Our approach will not be able to capture the substitution
between the new vehicle models and the outside option: buying a used car, continuing using
the household’s old vehicle, or relying on public transportation. Instead, our model represents
how consumers choose among new vehicles and how changes in new vehicle attributes or the
selection of new vehicles available for purchase affects new vehicle sales. Two factors suggest
that our model could reasonably capture the substitution that consumers make when deciding
between an EV and another vehicle option. First, EVs represent a new segment of the light-duty
vehicle market, where few used vehicle options represent plausible substitutes. Second, EVs are
generally expensive options relative to most new or used vehicles. If consumers substitute among

12

similarly priced vehicles, the EV substitutes are likely to be expensive new vehicles.
We define household i’s utility from purchasing vehicle model j as:

uij =

K
X

lnpj
+
xjk β¯k − α1 lnpj + ξj + α2
Yi
k=1
{z
} |
|
δj

X

o
xjk zir βkr
+

kr

X

xjk vik βku +εij ,

k

{z

µij

(12)

}

where δj is the mean utility of vehicle model j which is constant across consumers in the same
market. xjk stands for the kth vehicle attribute for model j. We include horsepower, weight,
gallons per mile, and some vehicle segment dummy variables as the observed vehicle attributes.
Price pj is the average transaction price observed from the survey data, which is constant for the
same model by fuel type for all households buying a vehicle in the same market.
The second component, µij , captures heterogeneous utility driven by both observed and
unobserved consumer characteristics. Yi is household i’s income in the corresponding year, and
we assume consumer price sensitivity to be inversely related to income. One would expect α2 to
be negative, as higher-income households would be less sensitive to a price increase because of
the diminishing marginal utility of money. zir denotes consumer i’s other demographic variablesincluding family size, education level, whether living in an urban area, the average gasoline
price, and the number of charging stations in the area- which are interacted with certain vehicle
attributes to capture variation in consumer preference due to observed heterogeneity.
The unobserved consumer taste vik is assumed to have a standard normal distribution. The
coefficient βku can be interpreted as the standard deviation in the unobserved preference for
o
the vehicle attribute k conditional on the consumer’s observed attributes. Let θ = {βkr
, βku },

denoting the “nonlinear” parameters, and it is understood that the vector δ = {δ1 , ..., δj } is
estimated conditional on a given θ1 . The last component, εij , is the idiosyncratic preference
of household i for vehicle model j, and it is assumed to have an i.i.d. type one extreme value
distribution.
A useful feature of the MaritzCX data is that they include vehicle models that consumers
seriously considered other than the purchased model. This allows for a ranking of both the
first and second vehicle choices.12 We exploit the second choice data as a source of variation to
identify unobserved heterogeneous preferences conditional on observed household characteristics.
12

We use survey response data from multiple questions to assign a second choice. The first question is “When
shopping for your new vehicle, did you consider any other cars or trucks?” Respondents answering yes to this
question were then asked to provide make, model, model year, fuel type, and other vehicle information for the
model that they most seriously considered but did not purchase.

13

For example, if the second choices of an EV model include only EV models, this would suggest
that EV buyers have a very strong preference for this particular fuel type. If, on the other hand,
the second choices include many non-EV counterparts of the EV models within the same make,
this would suggest a less strong preference for EV type, but preference for the same make is an
important factor. Similarly, the comparison between the chosen model and the second choice in
other dimensions of vehicle attributes such as vehicle size or fuel economy can also inform us
about consumer preference heterogeneity for these vehicle attributes.
To use the second choice information, we form the likelihood function based on the joint
probability of household i choosing j as the first choice and considering h as the second choice:
Z
Pijh =

exp[δj (θ) + µij (θ)]
exp[δh (θ) + µih (θ)]
P
· P
f (v)dv.
exp[δg (θ) + µig (θ)]
1 + exp[δg (θ) + µig (θ)]
g

(13)

g6=j

The probability of observing household i choosing model j is conditional on the household’s
vi vector, and the probability is calculated by integrating over the distribution of v. Instead of
constructing moments exploiting the exogeneity assumption that unobserved product attributes
are uncorrelated with observed attributes, we use the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE)
method with a nested contraction mapping to estimate θ and δ (Train and Winston, 2007;
Langer, 2012; Goolsbee and Petrin, 2004; Whitefoot et al., 2013; Murry and Zhou, 2017). Let
lnRi = lnPijh , denoting the individual log-likelihood of household i choosing the observed
purchased model j and considering the observed alternative choice h. The log-likelihood function
of the entire sample for a single market is therefore:

lnL =

N
X

lnRi .

(14)

i=1

The nonlinear parameters θ are estimated by maximizing the likelihood function.13 Given
the larger number of mean utilities δ, we follow the two-step procedure in Berry et al. (1995),
which shows that under certain regularity conditions, for each θ, there exists a unique δ that
matches the predicted market shares with observed ones. The market demand is the sum of
individual consumers’ demand, and the predicted market share is calculated by calculating Pij
o
with parameters θ = {βkr
, βku } and δ = δ1 , ..., δj and averaging over the N consumers in the
13

In Appendix B, we lay out more details of the likelihood function and the gradient for estimation.

14

survey sample. Following this strategy, we back out the mean utility vector δ for any given θ
using the contraction mapping technique:
δjt (θ, S) = δjt−1 (θ, S) + ln(Sj ) − ln(Sˆj (θ, δ t−1 (θ, S))).

(15)

Once θ and δ are estimated using the MLE method, we then recover the parameters in mean
utility:
δj = −α1 lnpj +

K
X

xjk β¯k + ξj ,

k=1

where ξj denotes the unobserved vehicle attributes of model j. To control for the correlation
of price with the unobserved product attributes, following Train and Winston (2007), we use
BLP-style instruments that measure the sum of distance and squared distance in attribute space
between own product and other products in the same firm and from other firms.

4.2

Identification

Consumer utility is composed of three parts:

mean utility, observed heterogeneity, and

unobserved heterogeneity. The linear parameters in the mean utility β̄ and α1 are identified
through the variation in market shares corresponding to variation in price and other observed
vehicle attributes. Because of the potential correlation between price and the unobserved vehicle
attributes ξj , functions of attributes of other competing products that capture the intensity of
competition are used as instruments to provide exogenous variation in prices. The maintained
exogeneity assumption is that unobserved product attributes are not correlated with observed
product attributes.
o
The nonlinear parameters βkr
and α2 in the observed individual heterogeneity component

are identified from the correlation between household demographics and vehicle attributes.
For example, if we observe that households with a high level of education disproportionately
purchased more electric vehicles, we would expect a positive coefficient for the interaction between
household education level and the EV dummy. If higher-income groups tend to be less sensitive
to vehicle prices and disproportionately buy more expensive vehicle models, we would expect a
negative sign for α2 , which captures the impact of income on consumers’ price sensitivity.
The unobserved consumer heterogeneity parameters βku are primarily identified by the
correlation between first and second choice vehicle attributes. For example, if consumers who
15

purchase high fuel-economy vehicles tend to state that they would have purchased a high fueleconomy vehicle if their first choice was not available, we would expect a large coefficient for the
parameter associated with fuel costs (i.e., the standard deviation of the preference for the fuel
cost). Berry et al. (2004) note that having micro-level second-choice data helps the estimation of
random coefficients when they have observations for only one market year, and Train and Winston
(2007) also mention that including alternative choice data significantly improves the precision
of the random coefficient estimates. In contrast to these studies, however, the unobserved
heterogeneity parameters in our model are also identified by changes in choice sets over time.
We leverage the feature of our sample, which includes periods where no electric vehicles were
available (2010 and 2011), followed by periods of availability (2012-2014) and an expansion of
available options (see Table 1). The variation in the choice sets over time provides an additional
source of identification for the random coefficients.

5

Estimation Results

We first report parameter estimates for the random-coefficient model and then use the estimates
to calculate price elasticities to show implied substitution patterns.

5.1

Parameter Estimates

Table 4 reports the estimation results of the demand model. The mean utility δ represents
the average preference consumers have for each vehicle model and is estimated by equating
the predicted market shares to the observed market shares. The mean preference coefficients
for price and each observed vehicle attribute are recovered from instrumental variables (IV)
estimation with the instruments accounting for the endogeneity of price. Both ordinary least
squares (0LS) and IV results are reported in panel (a) of Table 4 and reflect the preferences for
vehicle attributes that are generally expected. Consumers have a negative preference for price
and the price coefficient in the IV specification is more negative, suggesting OLS underestimates
the price sensitivity. Consumers have a positive preference for acceleration, measured by the
ratio of horsepower to weight, and also prefer heavier vehicles. The coefficient for gallons/mile
is positive but statistically insignificant. Consumers in general dislike AFVs and EVs, probably
because of range anxiety concerns. Conditional on other vehicle attributes, consumers do not
have a significantly different preference for pickup trucks relative to passenger cars. The positive
signs for MY 2011-MY 2014 dummies suggest that consumers prefer vehicles in later model years
16

relative to MY 2010, controlling for other vehicle attributes. This is consistent with broad sales
patterns during this time period, when total sales had been recovering from the recession.
Turning to the consumer heterogeneity parameters, with the aid from the individual
transaction data, the interaction terms of consumer demographics with vehicle attributes are
estimated precisely with intuitive signs. The coefficient of log(price) divided by income captures
the extent to which a consumer’s price sensitivity varies with income. The negative sign of
the estimate suggests that households with lower income react more negatively to a vehicle’s
price than households with higher income. The elasticities implied from the price preference are
further discussed below. Households of a larger family size prefer larger vehicles that are heavier.
Compared with households that live in suburban and rural areas, households that live in urban
areas are less likely to adopt pickups, probably because of less towing utility and limited parking
space, but are more interested in EVs because of both more frequent city driving needs and
better refueling infrastructure provided in urban areas. The interaction of the household-specific
gasoline price with gallons/mile, which measures the operating cost per mile of the vehicle,
has a negative sign, suggesting that consumers have a negative preference for fuel costs. The
estimation results also suggest that consumers who have more education and live in cities with
more charging stations are more likely to adopt EVs.
We include four random coefficients, which represent unobserved consumer preferences for
fuel economy (gallons/mile), acceleration (horsepower/weight), light trucks, and AFVs. Based
on the standard normal distribution of the random taste variable vik , the coefficient βku can be
interpreted as the standard deviation in the unobserved preference for the vehicle attribute
k.

To reduce simulation noise and bias, following Train and Winston (2007), we use 150

Halton draws to approximate the distribution for the unobserved consumer taste v.14 All four
coefficients are statistically significant, indicating that consumers have heterogenous preferences
for those vehicle attributes conditional on the observed consumer characteristics. Those precisely
estimated random coefficient parameters help alleviate the well-known problem of independence
of irrelevant alternatives experienced in traditional logit models and play a critical role in defining
the substitution patterns.
To illustrate the importance of estimating the model parameters with the second-choice
data, we re-estimate the first-stage parameters (the observed and unobserved interaction terms)
without these data. Recall that we estimate the model parameters with five years of data where
14

Halton draws are a type of low-discrepancy sequence. The demand results are similar when the number of
Halton draws is increased to 200.

17

for each household observation we observe a second choice. The unobserved heterogeneity is
identified from both changes in choice sets and vehicle attributes over time and the correlation
between first- and second-choice vehicle attributes. Therefore, removing the second-choice data
allows us to test the importance of including these data relative to exploiting panel variation
that is traditionally used to identify unobserved heterogeneity (Berry et al., 1995). Our model
also has household demographics interacted with vehicle characteristics, and we include these
as well to isolate the impact of leveraging the second choice data. Petrin (2002) finds that
including household demographic by vehicle characteristics interactions is crucial for obtaining
precise estimates of the unobserved heterogeneity terms. Therefore, we keep them in the model
for each set of estimates.
The first-stage parameter estimates without the second-choice data are shown in panel (b)
of Table 4 under “(2) No 2nd Choice.” Overall, the signs and magnitudes of the observed
heterogeneity terms are consistent with the estimated parameters with the second-choice
data included. These terms also maintain a high level of statistical significance, suggesting
that incorporating the second-choice data is not necessary for precise estimation of observed
heterogeneity. This is intuitive because the observed heterogeneity terms are identified from
correlations between observed household demographics and vehicle characteristics, which are not
dependent on the second-choice data.
Comparing the estimates of the standard deviations of preference parameters reveals striking
differences between the two models. Without the second-choice data, all but one of the standard
deviations becomes insignificant, and the magnitudes are much different from the parameters
estimated with the second-choice data.

This reveals that we are unable to obtain precise

measures of unobserved heterogeneity without including the second-choice data, even with panel
variation from five years of rapidly changing vehicle attributes and choice sets. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first illustration of the value of exploiting repeated choice data to
identify unobserved heterogeneity parameters relative to the value of using panel variation to
identify these parameters. The lesson from this comparison is clear: the second-choice data
greatly improve the statistical precision of the unobserved heterogeneity parameters relative to
a model estimated using the standard panel variation approach.

5.2

Elasticities and Substitution Patterns

The demand system implies sensible price elasticities. All of the implied own-price elasticities
are greater than one, ranging from -3.97 to -2.37 with the average being -2.67 and the standard
18

deviation being 0.21. The sales-weighted average elasticity among all 2,146 products in five
model years is -2.75. The magnitude of the own-price elasticities is close to the one obtained by
Durrmeyer and Samano (2017) and slightly smaller than those obtained by Berry et al. (1995),
Petrin (2002), Beresteanu and Li (2011), and Li (2012), since our demand estimation is based on
consumers who purchase new vehicles (excluding outside option). Our estimate is close to that
of Train and Winston (2007), who also estimate the demand focusing on new vehicle buyers and
find an average own-price elasticity of -2.32. Appendix Figure D.1 plots the own-price elasticities
against price and demonstrates that more expensive models tend to have less elastic demand.
Table 5 shows the cross-price elasticities for a selected group of models. One obvious pattern
is that the demand for less expensive models tends to be more price sensitive. More expensive
models such as Tesla Model S have lower own-price elasticities in magnitude. Compared with
other conventional gasoline vehicles, electric vehicles such as the Nissan LEAF and the Chevrolet
Volt have larger cross-price elasticities with hybrid vehicles such as Toyota Prius. Battery electric
vehicles such as the Nissan LEAF and the Tesla Model S do not have large cross-price elasticities
with plug-in hybrid vehicles such as the Chevrolet Volt. BEVs can only run on electricity and
many of them have limited range. PHEVs, on the other hand, rely on gasoline mode to boost
the range, since the electric range is only around 30-40 miles. These two different kinds of plugin vehicles are likely to attract consumers with different driving needs as consumers with more
frequent long-distance travels are more likely to adopt PHEVs. Therefore, it makes sense that
no strong substitution exists between PHEVs and BEVs, especially when there were only a few
models during the early deployment stage. Ford F-150, the only pickup truck in the selected
sample, does not have much substitution with the other small and mid-size sedans, and it has
almost zero substitution with EV models. The substitution pattern indicates that consumers
who purchase EVs generally favor mid-size sedans that are relatively fuel-efficient rather than
large vehicles.
Table 6 summarizes the elasticity estimates by fuel type. Across different fuel types, the
sale-weighted own-price elasticities are similar since all fuel types include vehicle models with a
large price range. Each cell in the matrix represents the average sales change of a vehicle model
in that fuel type from a price change of a vehicle model of other fuel types. For example, a
10 percent increase in the price of hybrid vehicle model will increase the sales of a BEV model
by 0.37 percent on average, and a 10 percent increase in the price of another BEV model will
increase the sales of a BEV model by 0.13 percent. Both BEVs and PHEVs have a larger crossprice elasticity with respect to hybrid vehicle models relative to the cross-price elasticity with

19

respect to gasoline, diesel, and flexible-fuel vehicle (FFV) models, suggesting that EV buyers
prefer vehicles with better fuel economy. Because of the large selection of model choices, gasoline
vehicles are a major substitute for vehicles of all fuel types. Since our data mostly cover the first
few years after the introduction of EVs, the within-segment substitution for BEVs and PHEVs
is relatively small, considering that we do not have enough between-segment variation to identify
a strong substitution between EV models.

6

Counterfactual Analysis

In this section, we conduct simulations to examine the counterfactual vehicle fleet where we
remove all EV models from the choice sets and where the EV subsidy were removed. The
magnitude of the resulting sales changes of the other fuel types could suggest what types of
vehicles were replaced by EVs. The estimated substitution patterns are then translated into
emissions reductions to assess the environmental benefits of EVs and EV subsidies.

6.1

The Environmental Benefits of EVs

The introduction of EVs could lead consumers who would originally choose gasoline or hybrid
vehicles to purchase EVs, and the substitution pattern critically determines the environmental
benefits of promoting EVs. To examine the substitution pattern of EVs with other fuel types, we
conduct a counterfactual exercise where all EVs are removed from the choice set. The resulting
changes in sales of other fuel types will reveal what types of vehicles EVs replace. Since we do not
allow consumers to choose an outside option, as the demand estimation is conditional on buying
a new vehicle, consumers who purchased EVs would switch to another non-EV model. In 2014,
109,449 EVs were sold in the US vehicle market. The simulation results suggest that 78.7 percent
of EVs replaced conventional gasoline vehicles, 12 percent of EVs replaced hybrid vehicles, 2.4
percent replaced diesel vehicles, and the remaining 6.9 percent replaced FFVs (Table 7). The
average fuel economy of the vehicles that were replaced by EVs is 28.9 mpg. This number can be
interpreted as the fuel economy level of the composite substitute of EVs, as defined in Section 3.
Among gasoline vehicles replaced by EVs, 74 percent of them have fuel economy above 25 mpg.
The vehicle models that were replaced by EVs most are: Honda Accord, Toyota Prius, Toyota
Camry, Honda Civic, Toyota Corolla, Nissan Altima, and Chevrolet Cruze. This substitution
pattern suggests that EVs mainly attracted consumers who were originally choosing mid-size and
fuel-efficient gasoline or hybrid vehicles, rather than gas-guzzlers such as large SUVs or trucks.
20

To evaluate the environmental impact of the introduction of EVs, we evaluate the total
gasoline saved and CO2 emissions reductions from EVs by comparing the gasoline consumption
of the actual vehicle fleet with the counterfactual fleet without EVs. The existence of EVs helps
save lifetime gasoline consumption of 0.51 billion gallons, resulting in a CO2 emissions reduction
up to 9.94 millions pounds, assuming the lifetime VMT for all vehicle is 195,264.15 If we do not
estimate the substitution pattern but assume each EV replaces a conventional gasoline vehicle
with fuel economy of 23 mpg, the total lifetime gasoline saved would become 0.65 billion gallons,
with an emissions reduction of 12.8 billion pounds of CO2 . Simply assuming EVs replace a
gasoline vehicle of an average mpg would overestimate the environmental benefits of EVs by
27 percent. The overestimated portion would be larger if EVs replace a greater number of
fuel-efficient vehicles such as hybrid vehicles.
If EVs were removed from the market, consumers who value the EV technology will suffer
from a welfare loss. We find that the removal of EVs from the choice set leads to a total consumer
welfare loss of $670.3 million in 2014.16 Panel (b) of Table 7 summaries the impact of the removal
of EVs on consumer surplus by income quintile. The results reveal a greater impact on wealthier
households, since they are more interested in the EV technology and thus benefit more from the
introduction of EVs.

6.2

Impacts of Income Tax Credits

The federal government has adopted several policies to support the EV industry including
providing federal income tax credits for EV purchases, R& D support for battery development,
and funding for expanding charging infrastructure.

Congressional Budget Office

(CBO)

estimates that the total budgetary cost for those policies will be about $7.5 billion through
2017. The tax credits for EV buyers account for about one-fourth of the budgetary cost and are
likely to have the greatest impact on vehicle sales. Under the tax credits policy, EVs purchased
in or after 2010 are eligible for a federal income tax credit up to $7,500. Most popular EV models
on the market are eligible for the full amount. The credit will expire once 200,000 qualified EVs
have been sold by each manufacturer. In 2014, the federal government spent $725.7 million on
income tax credits for EV buyers. To examine the effectiveness of the income tax credit policy
15

In reality, EVs might have a larger VMT than gasoline cars because of lower fuel cost or a lower VMT because
of limited range and inconvenience of charging.
16

The average welfare loss per household is estimated as the change in consumer surplus as shown by Small
and Rosen (1981). Total welfare loss is calculated as average consumer surplus loss multiplied by the market size
of new vehicles.

21

in terms of stimulating EV sales, we use our parameter estimates to simulate the counterfactual
sales of EVs that would arise in the absence of the tax credits to EV buyers in 2014. The
counterfactual sales could help us identify the percentage of “non-additional” EV sales and also
evaluate the environmental benefits of the policy. The resulting sales increase in gasoline and
hybrid vehicles could help us evaluate the environmental benefits of the “additional” EV sales.
The short-run benefits could be small if the additional sales simply come from people who were
considering buying other fuel-efficient vehicles.
The simulation results of the federal EV subsidy are summarized in Table 8. Our estimates
imply that removing the federal income tax credits reduces EV sales by 28.8 percent in 2014,
with BEVs experiencing a sales reduction of 32.6 percent and PHEV sales falling by 24.5 percent.
The results suggest that about 70 percent of the EV buyers would still purchase EVs without
income tax credits. Since the EV subsidy lowers the effective price of purchasing EVs, consumers
would enjoy a welfare increase due to the subsidy, especially for those who purchase EVs. Our
estimation results suggest that the EV subsidy program leads to a total increase in consumer
surplus of $165.2 million. The average increase of consumer surplus per household due to policy
may not be large, since most households do not purchase EVs. Panel (b) of Table 8 summarizes
the incidence of the federal EV subsidy. The distribution impacts imply that the EV subsidy
program is regressive, as higher-income households benefit more from the subsidy because they
are more likely to purchase EVs and thus claim the subsidy.
If there were no federal-level EV subsidy, 78.9 percent of the “additional” EV buyers
would switch to gasoline vehicles with an average fuel economy of 27.2 mpg, and 11.8 percent
would switch to hybrid vehicles with an average fuel economy of 45 mpg, with the remaining
switching to diesel and flex-fuel vehicles. Using the miles per gallon gasoline equivalent (MPGe)
introduced by the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)

17

, we can then translate those

substitution patterns to energy consumption reduction from the increased sales of EVs. By
inducing consumers to switch to more fuel-efficient EVs, the income tax credit policy leads to a
lifetime gasoline consumption of 0.15 billion gallons and CO2 emissions reduction of 2.91 billion
pounds, which is equivalent to reducing 1,750 gasoline vehicles of an average fuel economy of 23
mpg. If we assume each EV replaced an conventional gasoline vehicle with a fuel economy of 23
mpg, the gasoline consumption saved would become 0.19 billion gallons and the CO2 emissions
would become 3.74 billion pounds, equivalent to removing 2,250 gasoline cars from the road. Not
17

The MPGe metric was introduced in November 2010 by EPA. The ratings are based on EPA’s formula, in
which 33.7 kilowatt-hour of electricity is equivalent to 1 gallon of gasoline.

22

taking account of the actual substitution pattern would overestimate the environmental benefits
by 27 percent (Table 9).
Appendix Table D.3 summarizes the environmental benefits of EV income tax credits by
evaluating the external cost savings from emissions reduction of various pollutants. In 2014,
the EV subsidy results in total environmental benefits of $73.8 million from a more fuel-efficient
vehicle fleet, by taking account of the reduction of CO2 , VOC, NOx , PM2.5 , and SO2 .
The environmental benefits and increase in consumer welfare are much lower than the total
spending of $725.7 million, since the majority of the subsidies are non-additional and the
additional portion mainly induces consumers who would purchase fuel-efficient vehicles anyway
to switch. The current subsidy policy offers equal tax credit amounts to all buyers of the same
electric model. Alternatively, more credits could be given to lower-income households, with no
tax credits given to the highest-income households. This policy design would mimic the policy
reform of California’s CVRP, which intends to direct the incentives toward households that are
likely to value the rebates the most. The subsidy could also target first-time buyers, who may
not have a good sense of vehicle fuel consumption but are more sensitive to upfront costs.
A discussion of a number of caveats regarding our environmental analysis is in order. First,
the estimates of the environmental benefits are relatively crude, as they do not incorporate
spatial heterogeneity of the upstream emissions from electricity generation. As Holland et al.
(2016) show, great spatial heterogeneity exists regarding the environmental benefits promoting
EVs, and in some locations where electricity generation relies much on fossil fuels, EVs should be
taxed rather than being subsidized. The focus of our study is to demonstrate that the substitution
pattern is also an important factor in determining the environmental benefits, which matters even
if we focus on a specific location where the grid fuel mix is fixed. Nevertheless, different markets
might reflect different substitution patterns, which leads to different environmental benefits of
promoting EVs. Therefore, incorporating spatial heterogeneity and estimating location-specific
substitution patterns would help us determine the location-specific environmental benefits of
EVs, but it would require more detailed and representative location-specific sales and consumer
survey data. However, our analysis provides empirical evidence of EV substitution at the national
level and will provide guidance for the federal government to evaluate the effectiveness of federal
EV subsidies. The findings of the paper would be policy-relevant since most markets worldwide
subsidize EVs at the national level.
Second, when estimating the environmental benefits of replacing gasoline vehicles with EVs,
we assume that VMT is fixed and is the same for both EVs and gasoline vehicles. However,

23

consumer mileage heterogeneity plays a critical role in evaluating the effectiveness of tax and
subsidy policies (Grigolon et al., 2018). In addition, when consumers switch to fuel-efficient
vehicles with a lower marginal cost of driving, they might drive more, resulting in a rebound
effect that undermines some environmental benefits of EVs. Nevertheless, when consumers
switch to smaller and lower-performance vehicles, the marginal benefits of driving per mile
could be reduced. Thus, the rebound effect could be weakened by shrinking vehicle size and
the net response of miles could be zero or negative (Anderson and Sallee, 2016; West et al.,
2017). Moreover, because of the limited range of EVs and the inconvenience of charging in
some locations, it is less likely that consumers would increase miles traveled once adopting EVs.
Assuming that EVs and gasoline vehicles have the same VMT would mostly likely provide a
lower-bound estimate of the environmental benefits of EVs in the section above.
Third, our demand estimation is conditional on consumers choosing a new vehicle without
considering the outside option, which includes used car markets or public transportation.
Therefore, when we estimate the benefits of the EV subsidies, we exclude the possibility that
the subsidy could induce households that were considering public transportation or used cars
to purchases new EVs. To fully evaluate the benefits of EVs, incorporating the outside options
would require us to model consumer demand of public transportation and used cars, which
is beyond the scope of the paper. However, considering that EV adopters favor the newest
technologies and have a disproportionately high leasing rate (44 percent, Appendix Table D.2)
and most of the EV survey respondents report another new vehicle models as their alternative
choices, we believe that it is reasonable to assume that they would still choose a new vehicle even
when the subsidy was removed. Thus, ignoring the outside option unlikely produce large bias in
our analysis.

6.3

The Effect of Electric Vehicles on Hybrid Sales

One possible concern with promoting electric vehicles is that the policy may have reduced demand
for alternative clean vehicles such as hybrids. Before the introduction of electric vehicles, hybrid
technology was anticipated to provide a pathway to dramatically reducing emissions from light
duty vehicles. Since we have shown that hybrids are relatively close substitutes for electric
vehicles, the introduction of electric vehicles has reduced hybrid market share and may explain
why the market share of hybrids has not continued to grow as it did during the 2000s.
To quantify the impact of electric vehicles on hybrid sales, we conduct several counterfactual
exercises. In scenario 1, we remove all the EV models from the choice sets, and then predict
24

the counterfactual market shares of the remaining fuel types for MY 2010-MY 2014. In scenario
2, we remove the federal income tax credits for EVs, which vary across EV models, and then
predict the market shares of all fuel types. In panel (a) of Figure 2, we plot the observed and
simulated market shares of hybrid vehicles. The dashed lines represent out-of-sample shares that
we obtained from Wards Automotive. The observed market share of hybrids grew substantially
from 2000 to 2010, then eventually leveled off by 2015, around the time that EVs began to
gain a non-trivial market share. As shown in the figure, the simulated market share for hybrids
within our sample shows little difference from the observed hybrid market share. We conclude,
therefore, that the introduction of EVs has had only a small impact on the sales of hybrids during
our sample period.
The federal government provided income tax credits of up to $3,400 for hybrid vehicles
purchased after December 31, 2005. All the hybrid vehicles purchased after December 31, 2010,
were not eligible for this credit. The termination of federal support for hybrid vehicles could have
discouraged the sales of hybrid vehicles. To investigate this impact, we conduct simulations to
estimate the counterfactual sales of hybrids if the federal government had continued subsidizing
hybrid vehicles.
We assume that all the hybrid vehicle models that were once subsidized by the government
continue being subsidized with the original subsidy amounts. We run three counterfactual
scenarios (panel (b) of Figure 2). In scenario 1, we assume the government continues subsidizing
hybrid vehicles during MY 2010-MY 2014 while also maintaining its subsidy for EVs. In scenario
2, the government continues subsidizing hybrids during MY 2010-MY 2014 but does not provide
any subsidy for EVs. In scenario 3, the government continues subsidizing hybrids, but EVs were
removed from the market. As implied by the results, the removal of the subsidy for hybrids
played a larger role in reducing the sales of hybrid vehicles, than did the competition from EVs.
Beresteanu and Li (2011) find that the federal income tax credit program for hybrids contributes
to 20 percent of the total sales of hybrid vehicles. This suggests that although the introduction
of EVs has slightly reduced the market share of hybrids, the elimination of the income tax credit
is the major factor in the decline of hybrid vehicle sales in recent years.

6.4

Alternative Subsidy Designs

As with other energy subsidy programs, the cost-effectiveness of EV incentives could be
undermined if the subsidies are poorly-targeted and are mainly taken up by wealthier consumers
who would buy EVs without subsidies. To further investigate the “additionality” of the current
25

federal income tax credits for EVs and whether better targeting could improve the effectiveness of
the program in terms of boosting EV demand, we conduct two policy simulations to compare the
current uniform subsidy with alternative subsidy designs that incorporate an income-dependent
structure.
Through CVRP program, California has been providing state-level subsidies to EV buyers
since 2010. The standard rebate amounts are $2,500 for BEVs and $1,500 for PHEVs. On March
29, 2016, CVRP started to implement income eligibility requirements such that households with
income levels above certain thresholds are no longer eligible for the EV rebate, while lowerincome households can claim an additional rebate of $2,000 on top of the standard rate. The
income caps for high-income households are set at $150,000 for single filers and $300,000 for joint
filers. The households whose income levels are less than or equal to 300 percent of the federal
poverty level are categorized as the lower-income consumers. The motivation for switching from
a uniform subsidy to an income-dependent subsidy is to make EVs more accessible to a larger
number of drivers, especially those in lower-income households and communities that are more
affected by air pollution. Since higher-income households are less sensitive to prices and have
a stronger preference for newest technologies, they are more likely to adopt EVs without the
subsidy. Therefore, providing more generous subsidies to lower-income households that are more
price-sensitive could potentially reduce the policy cost of increasing EV sales.
The current federal-level EV subsidy is not designed to favor low-income households. To
investigate whether an income-dependent structure could be more effective in terms of inducing
additional EV sales, we conduct two counterfactual exercises that compare the current federal EV
subsidy with alternative subsidy policies that mimic the design of CVRP. We remove the subsidy
for households with income levels above the defined thresholds in both alternative policies, and
we provide lower-income households with an additional subsidy of $2,000 in alternative policy 1
and $4,000 in alternative policy 2. The income cap and low-income groups are defined the same
way as in the CVRP.18
The simulation results are summarized in Table 10. Under the current uniform subsidy,
the government spent $0.73 billion in 2014 in subsidizing EVs, and a total number of 109,850
EVs were sold in the market, leading to an average spending of $6,630 per EV. With the
removal of the subsidy to the high-income group and increased subsidy of $2,000 to low-income
18

The income cap is $150,000 for single filers and $300,000 for joint filers. Low-income households are defined
as those with income less than or equal to 300 percent of the 2018 federal poverty level. For households with one
to eight persons, the combined household income must be less than $36,420, $49,380. $62,340, $75,300, $88,260,
$101,220, $114,180, and $127,140 respectively (https://cleanvehiclerebate.org/eng/income-eligibility).

26

households, EV sales would decrease by 701, a 0.6 percent decrease. However, the total subsidy
spending decreases from $0.73 billion to $0.64 billion, a 12.3 percent decrease. As a result, the
income-dependent subsidy reduces the average spending per EV from $6,630 to $5,870, which is
equivalent to a saving of $760 (11.4 percent) per EV. When high-income households are no longer
eligible for the federal subsidy with the amount up to $7,500, the total reduction of EV sales is
modest since the majority of wealthy consumers would still purchase EVs because of their low
price sensitivity. The increased EV sales from low-income consumers due to the increased rebate
of $2,000 also compensates part of the sales loss from high-income groups. Since the alternative
subsidy eliminates the spending on the “non-additional” portion of EV sales from high-income
households, the average spending of subsidizing each EV is reduced.
In the second alternative policy design, an additional subsidy of $4,000 is provided to lowincome households, and high-income groups whose incomes are above the thresholds are still not
eligible for the subsidy. The total EV sales under alternative policy 2 increase by 1,232 (1.12
percent) compared with the existing policy. Even though an additional subsidy of $4,000 is given
to low-income households, the total spending is $0.66 billion, which is 9.6 percent lower than the
total spending of the current subsidy. The average spending per EV is $5,970 for alternative 2,
leading to a saving of $660 (10 percent) per subsidized EV. The savings are still mainly from the
removal of the subsidies given to households with higher income, which would purchase EVs in
the absence of the subsidy. By inducing additional EV sales, all the subsidy designs result in a
reduction of CO2 emissions by replacing vehicles that are less fuel-efficient with EVs.
The current subsidy policy reduces the total CO2 emissions from the new vehicle fleet by
1.32 metric tons, and alternative policies 1 and 2 achieve a total CO2 emissions reduction of 1.29
and 1.37, respectively. The average cost of CO2 reduction is then estimated to be $552, $489,
and $484, respectively. Both of the alternative policies are less costly than the existing policy
in terms of reducing emissions. Although alternative policy 2 has a higher average subsidy cost
per EV than alternative 1, it achieves a lower cost per CO2 reduction by inducing more sales
of BEVs, which are more fuel-efficient. By providing more generous subsidies to low-income
households, small and mid-size BEVs become more affordable to those consumers who prefer
smaller vehicles. The BEV models that experience the highest sales increases in alternative 2 are
Nissan LEAF, Smart ForTwo EV, and Fiat 500e. Beresteanu and Li (2011) estimate the cost of
CO2 reduction to be $177 per ton from the income tax credits for hybrid vehicles. Our estimates
of the cost of CO2 reduction of EV subsides are larger, since the federal subsidy for EVs is more
than twice the amount of the hybrid subsidy. Our estimates also suggest that subsidizing EVs

27

is a relatively costly way to achieve the emissions reduction goals.
Panel (b) of Table 10 compares the distributional impacts of the three subsidy designs. The
current uniform subsidy is regressive, since it benefits higher-income households more, as they are
more likely to purchase EVs and claim the subsidy. Both alternative policies are less regressive
than the existing policy, since they eliminate the subsidy for households whose income levels
are above the threshold. Alternative policy 2 benefits the bottom income group the most, as
it gives the most generous subsidy to low-income households. In summary, compared with the
current uniform subsidy, the income-dependent subsidy designs are more effective in stimulating
EV demand and reducing emissions, and they could also be better justified on distributional
grounds.

7

Conclusions

Promoting electric vehicles is considered an effective way to increase fleet fuel economy and
reduce emissions from on-road transportation. The environmental benefits of subsidizing EVs
critically hinge on the fuel efficiency of the substitute vehicles. Encouraging consumers who would
otherwise purchase another fuel-efficient vehicle to switch to EVs would not lead to significant
emissions reductions.
The paper provides a theoretical and empirical analysis on how substitution patterns between
vehicles of different fuel types affect the emissions impacts of electric vehicle policies. The
styled theoretical model shows that the emissions impacts crucially depend on own-price and
cross-price elasticities of demand, where the emissions of non-EVs with a larger cross-price
elasticity have a bigger impact on the emissions impacts of EVs. To characterize the price
elasticities and the substitution pattern, we estimate a flexible discrete choice model of new
vehicle demand that incorporate rich consumer heterogeneity. A key differentiating feature of
our demand model is that we identify random preference heterogeneity by leveraging the secondchoice information from household survey data, which greatly improve the precision of estimated
preference heterogeneity and implied substitution patterns. Our simulation results suggest that
79 percent of EVs replace gasoline vehicles with an average fuel economy of 27.2 mpg, and 12
percent of EVs replace hybrid vehicles with an average fuel economy of 45 mpg. If we had
simply assumed that each EV replaces an average gasoline vehicle of 23 mpg, we would have
overestimated the environmental benefits of EVs by 27 percent.
Our estimates imply that in 2014, the federal income tax credit for EVs led to a 28.8%

28

increase in EV sales, the majority of which replaced vehicles that are relatively fuel-efficient.
The increased EV sales translate to $73.8 million of environmental benefits due to reduced
emissions of major air pollutants. The cost-effectiveness of the policy is hindered by the fact
that about 70 percent of consumers would purchase EVs in the absence of the subsidy, and the
subsidy mainly attracted consumers who would otherwise have purchased fuel-efficient gasoline
or hybrid vehicles. By comparing the current uniform subsidy with alternative policy designs that
limit eligibility and provide additional subsidies to low-income households, we find the incomedependent subsidies could potentially increase the cost-effectiveness of the subsidy program and
are less regressive. Policies intended to promote EV technology and reduce emissions would
be more effective by better targeting marginal buyers and encouraging consumers who would
otherwise purchase gas-guzzlers such as large SUVs to adopt EVs.

29

Table 1: Sales Shares and Available Models of Hybrids and EVs, 2000-2017

Years
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017

Hybrid EV
Share Share
0.05
0.00
0.12
0.00
0.21
0.00
0.29
0.00
0.49
0.00
1.23
0.00
1.52
0.00
2.15
0.00
2.37
0.00
2.77
0.00
2.37
0.00
2.09
0.14
3.01
0.37
3.19
0.63
2.75
0.72
2.21
0.66
1.99
0.90
2.13
1.14

Hybrid and EV
Share
0.05
0.12
0.21
0.29
0.49
1.23
1.52
2.15
2.37
2.77
2.38
2.23
3.38
3.82
3.47
2.87
2.89
3.27

No. of hybrid
Models Offered
2
2
3
3
4
8
10
15
17
21
30
33
44
50
50
51
52
45

No. of EV
models offered
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
4
11
17
22
28
33
41

Notes: The statistics presented are derived from Wards Automotive new vehicle sales data,
which provide annual estimates of sales by make, model, and fuel type. Shares are defined
as annual sales of the vehicle type divided by total annual sales. To compute statistics for
EVs, we define EV models that are identified in the Wards data as either plug-in electric
or battery electric vehicles.

30

Table 2: Household and Vehicle Summary Statistics

31

Variables
Household income (1,000$)
Household size
With a college degree
Living in an urban area
Average commuting time (min.)
Average gasoline price ($)
Average vehicle price (1,000$)
Average mpg of the vehicle
Purchasing a light truck
Household observations

2010
Mean
S.D.
146.78 107.92
2.62
1.21
0.62
0.49
0.65
0.48
25.78
5.81
2.75
0.16
31.17
11.39
23.38
5.57
0.49
0.50
1,509

2011
Mean
S.D.
160.10 134.60
2.67
1.20
0.62
0.49
0.64
0.48
25.57
5.84
3.42
0.42
32.00
11.49
28.51
18.65
0.49
0.50
1,860

2012
Mean
S.D.
130.65 104.49
2.71
1.23
0.63
0.48
0.66
0.47
25.48
5.78
3.65
0.27
33.16
11.28
36.80
27.87
0.41
0.49
2,287

2013
Mean
S.D.
136.78 115.16
2.66
1.21
0.65
0.48
0.66
0.47
25.72
5.75
3.67
0.22
34.19
12.84
39.78
27.05
0.36
0.48
2,899

2014
Mean
S.D.
136.21 107.96
2.65
1.21
0.65
0.48
0.68
0.47
25.52
5.67
3.57
0.23
34.98
14.00
38.06
25.56
0.41
0.49
3,073

All Years
Mean
S.D.
140.45 114.16
2.66
1.21
0.64
0.48
0.66
0.47
25.60
5.76
3.48
0.40
33.46
12.54
34.81
24.50
0.42
0.49
11,628

Horsepower/weight (hp/lb)
Wheelbase*width (in2 )
% of ICE models
% of hybrid models
% of EV models
Vehicle choice set size

0.06
8,399
92.92
7.08
0.00
424

0.06
8,339
91.58
7.67
0.74
404

0.06
8,313
89.71
8.85
1.43
418

0.07
8,289
88.44
8.62
2.95
441

0.06
8,314
88.24
8.28
3.49
459

0.42
8,330
90.12
8.11
1.77
2146

0.02
1,165

0.02
1,173

0.02
1,193

0.02
1,167

0.02
1,172

0.49
1,173

Notes: The household-level data represent a sample (11,628 observations) drawn from the MaritzCX household survey data. Data of vehicle
attributes are obtained from Wards Automotive. Household income is converted to 2014 $ using the BLS calculator. Household size is the number
of individuals living in the respondent’s household. Gasoline prices are quarterly average national prices from the EIA. Average mpg of the vehicle
represents the average miles per gallon of the vehicles bought by the household sample. Horsepower/weight measures a vehicle’s acceleration, and
wheelbase*width measures a vehicle’s footprint. ICE (internal combustion engine) models include gasoline, diesel, and FFV models.

Table 3: Summary of second choices for EV buyers
Make
Honda
Ford
Ford
Toyota
Chevrolet
Fiat
Mercedes-Benz
Ford
Nissan
Tesla
Toyota
Chevrolet
Smart
Mitsubishi
BMW

Model
Accord Plug In Hybrid
C-Max Energi
Fusion Plug In Hybrid
Prius Plug-in
Volt
500 Electric
B Class Electric
Focus Electric
LEAF
Model S
RAV4 EV
Spark Electric
fortwo electric
i-MiEV
i3

Fuel type Top 1 second choice Top 2 second choice
PHEV
Tesla Model S
Toyota Prius
PHEV
Toyota Prius
Chevrolet Volt
PHEV
Chevrolet Volt
Toyota Prius Plug In
PHEV
Chevrolet Volt
Nissan LEAF
PHEV
Toyota Prius
Nissan LEAF
BEV
Nissan LEAF
Mini Cooper
BEV
Nissan LEAF
Ford Fusion Hybrid
BEV
Nissan LEAF
Chevrolet Volt
BEV
Chevrolet Volt
Toyota Prius
BEV
Nissan LEAF
Audi A7
BEV
Nissan LEAF
Tesla Model S
BEV
Nissan LEAF
Chevrolet Volt
BEV
Nissan LEAF
Chevrolet Volt
BEV
Nissan LEAF
Ford Focus Electric
BEV
Nissan LEAF
Tesla Model S

Notes: The data summary is based on the sample of 2018 EV buyers from the MaritzCX household survey data.
The table summarizes the most popular alternative vehicle choices for the households that purchased different EV
models. Top 1 second choice indicates the most frequently reported alternative choices among the buyers of a
specific EV model. Top 2 second choice reports the second most reported alternative choices for each EV model.

32

Table 4: Demand Estimation Results
Panel (a): Mean Utility Parameters

constant
log(price)
horsepower/weight
weight
gallons/mile
AFV dummy
EV dummy
pickup dummy
model year 11 dummy
model year 12 dummy
model year 13 dummy
model year 14 dummy

(1) OLS
(2) IV
Coefficient S.E. Coefficient S.E.
-2.4560
0.1028
-2.4728
0.1113
-1.3497
0.2572
-1.7375
0.8164
1.9525
0.3211
2.2664
0.6870
1.3393
0.2505
1.2943
0.2606
0.1805
0.1283
0.1327
0.1529
-3.6229
0.5823
-3.6632
0.5942
-2.9321
0.2652
-2.8913
0.2791
0.4192
0.2863
0.7285
0.6828
0.2743
0.1143
0.2763
0.1144
0.3127
0.1075
0.3321
0.1153
0.0559
0.1063
0.0687
0.1098
0.1741
0.0920
0.1768
0.0929

Panel (b): Heterogeneous Utility Parameters

(1) 2nd Choice
Coefficient S.E.

(2) No 2nd choice
Coefficient S.E.

Observed Heterogeneity
log(price)/income
family size*vehicle weight
urban*pickups
urban*EV
gasoline price*gallons/mile
education*EV
stations*EV

-9.0659
0.0892
-0.6678
0.2305
-0.3078
0.8309
0.6728

0.4839
0.0207
0.0561
0.0482
0.0234
0.0808
0.1022

-15.9223
0.2207
-0.7232
0.3636
-0.6481
1.1437
0.7164

0.8972
0.0315
0.0705
0.0583
0.0410
0.0939
0.1190

Random coefficients
gallons/mile
horsepower/weight
light trucks
AFVs

1.9291
1.0865
0.2823
0.9493

0.0565
0.0396
0.0254
0.0886

1.5953
0.1136
0.7164
0.4692

0.9018
0.2129
0.1099
0.3074

Average own-price Elasticity

-2.67

Notes: The number of households is 11,628. The value of the simulated log-likelihood at
convergence is -144,129.4 based on 150 Halton draws per household. The instrumental
variables used to estimate the linear parameters are the difference and squared difference
in characteristics (fuel economy, horsepower, and weight) with other vehicles sold by the
same manufacturer and the squared difference in characteristics of vehicles sold by other
manufacturers. Specification (1) includes consumers’ second choices in the likelihood function
while specification (2) only incorporates consumers’ purchased choices in constructing the
likelihood.

33

Table 5: A sample of own- and cross-price elasticities

34

Nissan
Products
Sentra
-3.01
Nissan Sentra (gas)
Chevrolet Cruze (gas)
0.07
Honda Civic (gas)
0.12
Ford Focus (gas)
0.07
Nissan LEAF (BEV)
0.01
Tesla Model S (BEV)
0.00
Chevrolet Volt (PHEV) 0.01
Toyota Prius (HEV)
0.04
Honda Accord (HEV)
0.12
Ford F-150 (gas)
0.02

Chevrolet
Cruze
0.06
-2.95
0.11
0.06
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.04
0.12
0.02

Honda
Civic
0.06
0.07
-2.91
0.06
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.03
0.12
0.02

Ford
Focus
0.06
0.07
0.11
-2.97
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.03
0.12
0.02

Nissan
Leaf
0.05
0.06
0.10
0.05
-2.83
0.01
0.02
0.10
0.10
0.02

Tesla
Chevrolet
Model S Volt
0.03
0.04
0.04
0.05
0.07
0.08
0.04
0.05
0.02
0.03
-2.37
0.01
0.01
-2.66
0.07
0.09
0.09
0.10
0.02
0.02

Toyota
Prius
0.05
0.06
0.09
0.05
0.03
0.01
0.01
-2.68
0.10
0.02

Honda
Accord
0.05
0.06
0.09
0.05
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.03
-2.67
0.02

Ford
F-150
0.02
0.02
0.03
0.02
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.04
-2.53

Price
in 2014
13,351
19,243
20,106
20,026
29,799
74,935
35,203
24,027
24,436
29,806

Notes: The table reports a sample of own- and cross-price elasticities which are calculated based on the parameter estimates reported in Table 4 with
the IV specification of the mean utility parameters and second choice specification of the heterogeneous utility parameters. The elasticity estimates are
calculated with the same individual weights and Halton draws used in the demand estimation. More details are provided in Appendix C. The last column
in the table gives the average transaction price in 2014 for those selected vehicle models. The sales-weighted average elasticity among all 2,146 products
in five model years is -2.75.

Table 6: Own and Cross-Price Elasticity of Demand Estimates by Fuel Type
BEV

PHEV

Hybrid

Gasoline

Diesel

FFV

BEV
PHEV
Hybrid
Gasoline
Diesel
FFV

0.013
0.012
0.037
0.028
0.003
0.012

0.018
0.011
0.036
0.027
0.004
0.012

0.015
0.009
0.029
0.028
0.004
0.013

0.004
0.002
0.009
0.029
0.006
0.021

0.003
0.002
0.007
0.026
0.007
0.024

0.002
0.002
0.006
0.027
0.007
0.024

Own Price Elasticity

-2.751

-2.649

-2.705

-2.761

-2.606

-2.680

Notes: The table summarizes the sales-weighted average own- and cross-price elasticity
estimates by fuel type. The elasticity estimates are based on the parameter estimates
reported in Table 4. BEV stands for battery electric vehicle, which represents vehicles that
operate only with electricity, including a Tesla Model S. PHEV stands for plug-in hybrid
vehicle, which represents vehicles that are able to operate with either electricity or gasoline,
including a Honda Accord plug-in hybrid. FFV stands for flex-fuel vehicle, which represents
vehicles that are able to operate on E85 fuel. On average, a 1 percent increase in a BEV
model will increase the sales of other BEV models by 0.013 percent.

35

Table 7: Sales and Incidence Impacts of Removing EVs
Panel (a): Sales Impact

Fuel types
Gasoline
Hybrid
Diesel
FFV
All non-EVs

Sales change
86114
13167
2594
7574
109449

Percentage
78.7%
12.0%
2.4%
6.9%
100%

Among gasoline vehicles
Sales change
low mpg (<19)
1,972
medium mpg (>19 & < 25)
20,409
high mpg (> 25)
63,733

Percentage
2.3%
23.7%
74.0%

Average MPG
27.2
45.1
27.4
22
28.9

Panel (b): Welfare Impact

Average welfare loss per household ($)

(1)
-33.41

Total welfare loss (million $)

Income quintile
(2)
(3)
(4)
-42.38 -50.35 -58.8

(5)
-73.51

-670.3

Notes: The table summarizes the sales impact of removing all EVs from the choice set in
MY 2014 on other vehicles of different fuel types and its welfare impact on consumers. The
percentage column in panel (a) reports the percentage of the total sales increase from non-EV
models that each fuel type contributes to. Average mpg represents the average miles per gallon
of the vehicles that experience sales increases as a result of the removal of EVs. In panel (b),
the average welfare loss per household is calculated as the change in consumer surplus as shown
by Small and Rosen (1981). Total welfare loss is calculated as average consumer surplus loss
multiplied by the market size of new vehicles.

36

Table 8: Sales and Incidence Impacts of Removing EV Subsidies
Panel (a): Sales Impact

Fuel types
EV
BEV
PHEV
Other fuel types
Gasoline
Hybrid
Diesel
FFV
All non-EVs

Sales change Percentage change
-31501
-28.8%
-18861
-32.6%
-12640
-24.5%
Sales change Percentage Change
24867
0.23%
3728
0.92%
741
0.17%
2165
0.15%
31501
0.24%

Percentage of EV sales reduction
78.9%
11.8%
2.4%
6.9%
100%

Average MPG
27.2
45
27.5
22
28.9

37

Panel (b): Welfare Impact

Average welfare loss per household ($)
Total welfare loss (million $)

(1)
-9.38

Income quintile
(2)
(3)
(4)
-10.81 -12.30 -13.93

(5)
-16.75

-165.2

Notes: The table summarizes the market and consumer welfare impact of removing the federallevel income tax credit for EVs in the year of 2014. In panel (a), the percentage of EV sales
reduction represents the percentage of the original EV purchasers that switch to a specific nonEV fuel type if the federal subsidy were removed. Average mpg represents the average miles per
gallon of the vehicles that experience sales increase due to the removal of federal EV subsidy. In
panel (b), the average welfare loss per household is calculated as the change in consumer surplus
as shown by Small and Rosen (1981). Total welfare loss is calculated as average consumer surplus
loss multiplied by the market size of new vehicles.

Table 9: Environmental Benefits and Substitution
Actual benefits
Gasoline consumption saved (billion gal.)
CO2 emissions saved (billion lb.)
Equivalent reduction of gasoline cars

0.15
2.91
1,750

Counterfactual benefits if replacing a 23-mpg gasoline car
Gasoline consumption saved (billion gal.)
CO2 emissions saved (billion lb.)
Equivalent reduction of gasoline cars

0.19
3.74
2,250

Notes: The table reports the estimated lifetime emissions reduction achieved
by the federal-level income tax credit for EVs in 2014, by comparing the actual
fleet with the counterfactual fleet when the federal subsidy is removed. The
estimation of the energy reduction from the increased EVs due to subsidy
is based on the miles per gallon gasoline equivalent (MPGe) provided by
EPA. Equivalent reduction of gasoline cars represents the equivalent number
of gasoline cars with a fuel economy of 23 mpg (2014 average level) that can
be reduced by the increased EVs due to subsidy, in terms of emissions.

38

Table 10: Comparison of Current Subsidy with Alternative Designs
Panel (a): Sales and Environmental Impact

Current subsidy Alternative 1 Alternative 2
0.73
0.64
0.66
Total spending (billion $)
Total EV sales
109,853
109,152
111,085
Total BEV sales
57,791
57,554
58,900
Total PHEV sales
52,062
51,598
52,185
Average spending per EV ($)
6,630
5,870
5,970
Total CO2 reduction (mil. metric tons) 1.32
1.29
1.37
Cost of CO2 reduction ($/metric ton)
552
498
484
Panel (b): Welfare Impact

39

Income Quintile
1
2
3
4
5
Total welfare change

Welfare change per household ($)
Current subsidy Alternative subsidy 1 Alternative subsidy 2
9.38
11.73
14.73
10.81
11.07
11.40
12.30
12.30
12.30
13.93
13.29
13.29
16.75
8.99
8.99
165.2 million
154.4 million
163.9 million

Notes: The current subsidy policy provides uniform tax credits to all EV buyers. Both alternatives 1
and 2 set an income cap such that the highest income group is not eligible to claim the subsidy. Further,
Alternatives 1 and 2 provide an additional $2,000 and $4,000, respectively, to lower-income households,
compared with the current policy. In panel (b), the income groups are defined the same way as for the
income eligibility implemented in the CVRP in California. The welfare change per household is calculated
as the change in consumer surplus as shown by Small and Rosen (1981). Total welfare change is calculated
as average consumer surplus change multiplied by the market size of new vehicles.

Figure 1: Consumer Second Choices by Fuel Type

(b) Hybrid vehicle buyers

(c) PHEV buyers

(d) BEV buyers

40

(a) Gasoline vehicle buyers

Notes: The figure plots the frequency of alternative vehicle choices by fuel type for different groups of consumers based on the survey responses of
the 11,628 households in the sample. The number of observations for the buyers of gasoline vehicles, hybrid vehicles, PHEVs and BEVs is 9,295,
315, 1,246, and 772, respectively.

Figure 2: The Effect of Electric Vehicles on Hybrid Sales
Panel (a) No subsidy for hybrids

Panel (b) With subsidy for hybrids

Notes: the figure plots the impact of the introduction of EVs and EV subsidy on
the market shares of hybrid vehicles. The dashed lines represent out-of-sample shares
obtained from Wards Automotive. In Panel (a), Scenario 1 removes EV models from
the market. Scenario 2 removes the federal income tax credits for EVs. In Panel (b), we
assume that the government continues subsidizing hybrid vehicles between 2010-14 with
their original subsidy amount in all the three scenarios. Scenario 1 keeps the current EV
subsidy. Scenario 2 removes EV subsidy and Scenario 3 removes EVs from the market.

41

References
Allcott, Hunt, Christopher Knittel, and Dmitry Taubinsky, “Tagging and Targeting of
Energy Efficiency Subsidies,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 2015, 105
(5), 187–191.
Anderson, Soren and James Sallee, “Designing Policies to Make Cars Greener: A Review
of the Literature,” Annual Review of Resource Economics, 2016, 8, 157–80.
Archsmith, James, Alissa Kendall, and David Rapson, “From Cradle to Junkyard:
Assessing the Life Cycle Greenhouse Gas Benefits of Electric Vehicles,” Research in
Transportation Economics, 2015, 52, 72–90.
Bento, Antonio, Ravi Kanbur, and Benjamin Leard, “Designing efficient markets for
carbon offsets with ditributional constraints,” Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management, 2015, 70, 51–71.
Beresteanu, Arie and Shanjun Li, “Gasoline Prices, Government Support, and the Demand
for Hybrid Vehicles,” International Economic Review, 2011, 52 (1), 161–182.
Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes, “Automobile Prices in Market
Equilibrium,” Econometrica, 1995, 63 (4), 841–890.
,

, and

, “Differentiated Products Demand Systems from a Combination of Micro and

Macro Data: The New Vehicle Market,” Journal of Political Economy, 2004, 112 (1), 68–104.
Boomhower, Judson and Lucas W. Davis, “A Credible Approach for Measuring
Inframarginal Participation in Energy Efficiency Programs,” Journal of Public Economics,
2014, 113, 67–79.
Chandra, Ambarish, Sumeet Gulati, and Milind Kandlikar, “Green drivers of free riders?
An analysis of tax rebates for hybrid vehicles,” Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management, 2010, 60, 78–93.
Congressional Budget Office (CBO), “Effects of Federal Tax Credits for the Purchase of
Electric Vehicles,” 2012.
Diamond, David, “The Impact of Government Incentives for Hybrid-electric Vehicles: Evidence
from US States,” Energy Policy, 2009, 37 (3), 972–983.
Durrmeyer, Isis and Mario Samano, “To Rebate or Not to Rebate: Fuel Economy Standards

42

vs. Feebates,” 2017. Forthcoming in Economic Journal.
EPA, “Average Annual Emissions and Fuel Consumption for Gasoline-Fueled Passenger Cars
and Light Trucks,” 2008.
Fowlie, Meredith, Michael Greenstore, and Catherine Wolfram, “Are the Non-Monetary
Costs of Energy Efficiency Investments Large? Understanding Low Take-up pf a Free Energy
Efficiency Program,” American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (5), 201–04.
Gallagher, K. and E. Muehlegger, “Giving Green to get Green? The Effect of Incentives
and Ideology on Hybrid Vehicle Adoption,” 2007. Working Paper.
Goolsbee, A. and A. Petrin, “The Consumer Gains from Direct Broadcast Satellites and the
Competition with Cable TV,” Econometrica, 2004, 72 (2), 351–381.
Grigolon, Laura, Mathias Reynaert, and Frank Verboven, “Consumer Valuation of Fuel
Costs and Tax Policy: Evidence from the European Car Market,” American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy, 2018, 10 (3), 193–225.
Heutel, Garth and Erich Muehlegger, “Consumer Learning and Hybrid Vehicle Adoption,”
Environmental and Resource Economics, 2015, 62 (1), 125–161.
Holland, Stephen, Erin Mansur, Nicholas Muller, and Andrew Yates, “Are There
Environmental Benefits from Driving Electric Vehicles? The Importance of Local Factors,”
American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (12), 3700–3729.
Huse, Cristian, “The Market Impact and the Cost of Environmental Policy: Evidence from
the Swedish Green Car Rebate,” The Economic Journal, 2014, 124, F393–F419.
Ito, Koichiro, “Asymmetric Incentives in Subsidies: Evidence from a Large-Scale Electricity
Rebate Program,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2015, 7 (3), 209–37.
Kahn, Matthew, “Do greens drive Hummers or hybrids?

Environmental ideology as a

determinant of consumer choice,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Managment, 2007,
54 (2), 129–145.
and Ryan Vaughn, “Green Market Geography: The Spatial Clustering of Hybrid Vehicles
and LEED Registered Buildings,” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy, 2009,
9 (2), 1935–1682.
Langer, Ashley, “(Dis)Incentives for Demographic Price Discrimination in the New Vehicle

43

Market,” 2012. Working Paper.
and Derek Lemoine, “Designing Dynamic Subsidies to Spur Adoption of New
Technologies,” 2018. working paper.
Li, Jing, “Compatibility and Investment in the U.S. Electric Vehicle Market,” 2016.
Li, Shanjun, “Traffic Safety and Vehicle Choice: Quantifying the Effects of the ‘Arms Race’ on
American Roads,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 2012, 27, 34–62.
, Lang Tong, Jianwei Xing, and Yiyi Zhou, “The Market for Electric Vehicles: Indirect
Network Effects and Policy Impacts,” Journal of the Association of Environmental and
Resources Economists, 2017, 4 (1), 89–133.
Manski, Charles F. and Setven R. Lerman, “The Estimation of Choice Probabilities from
Choice Based Samples,” Econometrica, 1977, 45 (8), 1977–1988.
Muehlegger, Erich and David S. Rapson, “Estimating Demand for Electric Vehicles in
Low-and Middle-income Households,” 2018. Working Paper.
Murry, Charles and Yiyi Zhou, “Consumer Search and Automobile Dealer Co-Location,”
2017.
Petrin, Amil, “Quantifying the benefit of new products: the case of minivan,” Journal of
Political Economy, 2002, 110 (4), 705–729.
Sallee, James, “The Surprising Incidence of Tax Credits for the Toyota Prius,” American
Economics Journal: Economics Policy, 2011, 3, 189–219.
Sexton, Steven and Alison Sexton, “Conspicuous Conservation: the Prius Halo and
Willingness to Pay for Environmental Bona Fides,” Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management, 2014, 67, 303–317.
Small, K. and H. Rosen, “Applied Welfare Economics with Discrete Choice Models,”
Econometrica, 1981, 49 (1), 59–80.
Springel, Katalin, “Network Externality and Subsidy Structure in Two-sided Market:
Evidence from Electric Vechile Incentives,” 2016.
Train, Kenneth E. and Clifford Winston, “Vehicle Choice Behavior and the Declining
Market Share of U.S. Automakers,” International Economic Review, 2007, 48, 1469–1496.
West, Jeremy, Mark Hoekstra, Jonathan Meer, and Steve Puller, “Vehicle Miles (Not)
44

Traveled: Fuel Economy Requirements, Vehicle Characteristics, and Household Driving,”
Journal of Public Economics, 2017, 145, 65–81.
Whitefoot, Kate, Meredith Fowlie, and Steven J. Skerlos, “Compliance by Design:
Industry Response to Energy Efficiency Standards,” 2013. Working Paper.

45

Appendices
A

Additional Literature Review

Our analysis contributes to the literature on the diffusion of vehicles with advanced fuel
technologies (e.g., hybrid vehicles) and alternative fuels (e.g., FFVs). Kahn (2007), Kahn and
Vaughn (2009), and Sexton and Sexton (2014) examine the role of consumer environmental
awareness and signaling in the market for conventional hybrid vehicles. Heutel and Muehlegger
(2015) study the effect of consumer learning in hybrid vehicle adoption, focusing on different
diffusion paths of Honda Insight and Toyota Prius. Several recent studies have examined the
impacts of government programs at both the federal and state levels in promoting the adoption of
hybrid vehicles, including Diamond (2009), Beresteanu and Li (2011), Gallagher and Muehlegger
(2007), and Sallee (2011). These studies consistently find that better environmental awareness,
higher gasoline prices, and more generous incentives are associated with higher adoption of
“green” vehicles. We add to this literature by estimating substitution patterns among gasolinepowered vehicles, hybrids, and EVs. To the best of our knowledge, our results are the first
to provide cross-price elasticities among these vehicle types, which will allow researchers and
policy-makers to determine how subsidy designs alter the sales mix of different power types.
Our analysis relates to the literature that studies the cost-effectiveness of energy subsidy
programs. Allcott et al. (2015) find that some energy efficiency subsidies are poorly-targeted
and are primarily taken up by consumers who are wealthier and more informed about energy
costs. They conclude that restricting subsidy eligibility could increase the welfare gains from
those subsidies. Boomhower and Davis (2014) find that half of all participants would have
adopted the energy-efficient technology even with no subsidy. Ito (2015) shows that most of
the treatment effects of incentives come from consumers who are closer to the target level of
consumption, and the treatment effect is not significantly different from zero for consumers
who are far from the target level. Fowlie et al. (2015) find evidence that high non-monetary
costs contribute to the low participation of energy efficiency investment for households and
there are demographic differences between households that chose to participate on their own
and those that were encouraged to participate in the program by encouragement intervention.
Langer and Lemoine (2018) investigate the efficient subsidy schedule for durable goods in a
dynamic setting and show that an efficient subsidy often increases over time and that consumers’
rational expectations of future subsidies and technological progress could substantially increase

46

public spending. By empirically estimating a national vehicle demand model in a static setting
and obtaining consumer preference parameters, we are able to run counterfactual simulations
to examine the cost-effectiveness of the current EV subsidy design and compare it with other
possible designs.

B

Defining the Simulated Log-Likelihood and Gradient

The utility of household i purchasing vehicle model j is defined as:

uij =

K
X

X
lnPj X
o
+
xjk zir βkr
+
xjk vik βku +εij ,
Yi
kr
k
{z
}
|

xjk β¯k − α1 lnPj + ξj + α2

|k=1

{z
δj

}

µij

where δj is the mean utility of vehicle model j, which is constant across consumers, and
µij is the individual-specific utility component related to observed and unobserved consumer
o
demographics. Let θ = {βkr
, βku } be the non-linear parameters that are estimated from the first

stage. The last component, εij , is the idiosyncratic preference of household i for vehicle model j
and is assumed to have an i.i.d. type 1 extreme value distribution. The probability of household
i purchasing j and considering h as the second choice is:
Z
Pijh =

exp[δh (θ) + µih (θ)]
exp[δ (θ) + µij (θ)]
P j
f (v)dv.
·P
1 + g exp[δg (θ) + µig (θ)]
g6=j exp[δg (θ) + µig (θ)]

Note that the choice set of the second choice excludes the purchased product j. Since
the random taste vik is not observed, the probability above is calculated by integrating over
the distribution of the unobserved taste v. This high-dimensional integration is estimated via
simulation where R denotes the number of simulation draws and the subscript r denotes a specific
random draw r:
R

Pijh

1X
exp[δ (θ) + µijr (θ)]
exp[δh (θ) + µihr (θ)]
P j
=
·P
R 1 1 + g exp[δg (θ) + µigr (θ)]
g6=j exp[δg (θ) + µigr (θ)]
R

=

1 X Ajr Ahr
·
R 1 Br Br−j

=

1X
−j
Pijr · Pihr
,
R 1

R

47

where Br−j = Br − exp[δj (θ) + µijr (θ)], which denotes the choice set for the second choice
−j
conditional on choosing j as the first good, and Pihr
is the probability of choosing h from a choice

set that excludes j conditional on a set of random draws r.
P
PR −j
−j
1
Let lnRi = lnPijh = lnPij + lnPih
= ln( R1 R
1 Pijr ) + ln( R
1 Pihr ), the individual loglikelihood of household i choosing the observed purchased model j and considering the observed
second choice h. The log-likelihood function of the entire sample for a single market is therefore:
lnL =

N
X

lnRi .

i=1

The derivative of the individual log-likelihood function with respect to θk is


0 
0 

R 
∂lnPijh
1
1 X Ajr Ahr
Ajr
Ahr
=
·
+
∂θk
Pijh R r=1 Br Cr−j
Br
Cr−j
h
i
h
i
P
∂µigr (θ)
∂δg (θ)
∂δh (θ)
∂µihr (θ)

−j
R
A
+
+
C
−
A
A
hr
r
g6=j gr
∂θk
∂θk
∂θk
1 X Ajr hr ∂θk
1
·
=

2
Pijh R r=1 Br
Cr−j
h
i
h
i
P
∂δ (θ)
∂µijr (θ)
∂µigr (θ)
∂δg (θ)

Ajr ∂θj k + ∂θ
+
B
−
A
A
r
jr
gr
g
∂θk
∂θk
Ahr
k
+
Cr−j
(Br )2




R 
1 X Ajr Ahr ∂δh (θ) ∂µihr (θ)
Ajr Ahr X Agr ∂δg (θ) ∂µigr (θ)
1
·
+
−
+
=
Pijh R 1
Br Cr−j
∂θk
∂θk
Br Cr−j g6=j Cr−j
∂θk
∂θk





Ajr Ahr X Agr ∂δg (θ) ∂µigr (θ)
Ajr Ahr ∂δj (θ) ∂µijr (θ)
+
+
−
+
Br Cr−j
∂θk
∂θk
Br Cr−j g Br
∂θk
∂θk
"
#
R 
X
X
X
∂δh (θ) ∂µihr (θ)
1
1
−j ∂δg (θ)
−j ∂µigr (θ)
Pijhr
=
·
+
−
Pigr
−
Pigr
Pijh R 1
∂θk
∂θk
∂θk
∂θk
g6=j
g6=j
"
#
∂δj (θ) ∂µijr (θ) X
∂δg (θ) X
∂µigr (θ)
+ Pijhr
+
−
Pigr
−
Pigr
,
∂θk
∂θk
∂θk
∂θk
g
g
Agr
, which is the probability of i
Br
−j
gr
Pigr
= BA−j
, which is the probability of
r

where Pigr =

choosing g as first choice conditional on a random

draw r.

i choosing g as a second choice from the choice set

that excludes the first choice j conditional on a random draw r. δj (θ) is estimated via contraction
mapping and does not have an analytical solution. To estimate
theorem:
48

∂δj (θ)
,
∂θk

we use implicit function

∂δj (θ)
∂ Sˆj −1 ∂ Sˆj
= −(
)
,
∂θk
∂δj
∂θk
where Sˆj is the predicted market share for model j, and
N
N
N
N
1 X ∂Pij
1 X
1 X
1 X 2
∂ Sˆj
=
=
Pij (1 − Pij ) =
Pij −
P
∂δj
N i=1 ∂δj
N i=1
N i=1
N i=1 ij

N
N
N
X
∂ Sˆj
1 X ∂Pij
1 X
∂uij
1 X
∂uig
=
=
Pij
−
Pij
Pig
.
∂θk
N i=1 ∂θk
N i=1
∂θk
N i=1
∂θ
k
g
∂δh (θ)
∂θk

is estimated by the same method. The score matrix is then:


∂lnR 

=

∂θ


∂lnP1jh
∂θ1
∂lnP2jh
∂θ1

∂lnP1jh
∂θ2
∂lnP2jh
∂θ2

...

...

...

...

...

∂lnPN jh
∂θ1

∂lnPN jh
∂θ2

...

∂lnPN jh
∂θk

|

...

∂lnP1jh
∂θk
∂lnP2jh
∂θk





.



{z

}

N ×k

Then, averaging the above matrix across households using the sample weight for each
household gives the gradient of the likelihood function, which is the average of the scores across
individuals:
∂lnL h PN
=
i=1 wi ·
∂θ
|

∂lnPijh
∂θ1

∂lnP

PN

ijh
...
i=1 wi · ∂θ2
{z

PN

i=1 wi ·

1×k

∂lnPijh
∂θk

i

,

}

where wi is the sample weight for household i.

C

Derivation of Own- and Cross-Price Elasticities of
Demand

The predicted market share for model j is the average of individual probabilities of purchasing
vehicle model j:
N
N
1 X
exp(uij )
1 X
P
Pij =
.
sj =
N i=1
N i=1 1 + g exp(uij )

49

The partial derivative of individual probability of purchasing j with respect to the price of j
is:
P
∂u
∂u
exp(uij ) ∂pijj (1 + g exp(uij )) − exp(uij )exp(uij ) ∂pijj
∂Pij
P
=
∂pj
(1 + g exp(uij ))2
!2
∂uij
exp(uij )
∂uij
exp(uij )
−
=
PJ
PJ
∂pj
1 + j=1 exp(uij ) ∂pj
1 + j=1 exp(uij )
= (Pij − Pij2 )

∂uij
.
∂pj

The own-price elasticity of product j is:
N
∂lnsj
pj 1 X
∂uij
=
·
(Pij − Pij2 )
.
∂pj
sj N i=1
∂pj

The partial derivative of individual probability of purchasing j with respect to the price of
model k is:
ik
0 − exp(uij )exp(uik ) ∂u
∂Pij
∂pk
=
P
∂pk
(1 + Jj=1 exp(uij ))2
∂uik
= −Pij Pik
.
∂pk

The cross-price elasticity of product j with respect to price of product k is thus:
N
pk 1 X
∂lnsj
∂uik
=
·
−Pij Pik
.
∂pk
sj N i=1
∂pk

50

D

Additional Tables and Figures
Table D.1: Vehicle emissions per 100 miles (National average grid mix)
Vehicle Fuel Type
Gasoline
Hybrid Electric
Plug-in Hybrid Electric
All electric

GHG Emissions
87 lb. CO2
57 lb. CO2
62 lb. CO2
54 lb. CO2

Notes: The data are from the AFDC, https://www.afdc.energy.
gov/vehicles/electric_emissions_sources.html (accessed on
October 15, 2018). The emissions from electric vehicles are
calculated based on the national average fuel sources used in
electricity generation in the United States.

51

Table D.2: Summary Statistics of Household Data by Fuel Type
EV Buyers
Non-EV Buyers
Mean S.D.
Mean S.D.
Household income (1,000$)
180.98 134.73 131.94 107.44
With a college degree
0.81
0.40
0.60
0.49
Charging stations
0.87
1.76
0.29
0.93
Living in an urban area
0.78
0.41
0.64
0.48
Average gasoline price ($)
3.73
0.25
3.43
0.40
Average vehicle price (1,000$) 32.58 13.28 32.37 12.03
Leasing the vehicle
0.44
0.50
0.15
0.36
Observations
2,018
9,610
Notes: The data represent the 11,628 observations drawn from the MaritzCX
household survey data. Household income is converted to 2014 $ using the
BLS calculator. With a college degree indicates whether the purchaser of the
vehicle has obtained a college degree. The number of charging stations is the
cumulative sum of the charging stations that have been built in the survey
respondent’s neighborhood (zip code) by the purchase date of the vehicle.
The charging stations data are collected from the AFDC. Gasoline prices are
monthly average regional prices from the EIA. Average vehicle price is the
average transaction price in year when the vehicle was purchased.

Table D.3: Environmental Benefits of EV Subsidy
Pollutants
CO2
VOC
NOx
PM2.5
SO2
All

Reduction (tons)
1,321,767.1
3,695.2
2,478.3
14.8
25.2

Damage ($/ton)
36.0
1,482.0
6,042.0
330,600.0
35,340.0

Damage reduction (million $)
47.6
5.5
15.0
4.9
0.9
73.8

Notes: The table summarizes the environmental benefits of the federal-level income tax credit
for EVs, with a total spending of $725.7 million in 2014. The environmental estimates are based
on the external cost savings from emissions reduction of various pollutants due to less petroleum
consumption. The emissions rates and associated damage values are obtained from EPA (2008).

52

Figure D.1: Own-price Elasticity Estimates

Notes: The figure plots each vehicle model’s own-price elasticity against its average transaction price in 2014.
The elasticity estimates are calculated based on the parameter estimates reported in Table 6, and are calculated
with the same individual weights and Halton draws used in the demand estimation.

53

