                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     LONG-RUN TAX INCIDENCE IN A HUMAN CAPITAL-BASED ENDOGENOUS
             GROWTH MODEL WITH LABOR-MARKET FRICTIONS

                                        Been-Lon Chen
                                        Hung-Ju Chen
                                          Ping Wang

                                      Working Paper 25783
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25783


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2019




We are grateful for valuable comments and suggestions from Marcus Berliant, Aubhik Khan,
Kevin Lansing, Zheng Liu, Rody Manuelli, Milton Marquis, B. Ravikumar and John Williams, as
well as participants at the Econometric Society Meeting, the Midwest Macroeconomic
Conference, the Society for Advanced Economic Theory Conference, and the Society for
Economic Dynamics Conference. Financial support from Academia Sinica, the National Science
Council Grant (NSC 98-2911-H-001-001), the Program for Globalization Studies Grant (NTU
99R018), the Public Economics Research Center, and the Weidenbaum Center on the Economy,
Government, and Public Policy is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Been-Lon Chen, Hung-Ju Chen, and Ping Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Long-Run Tax Incidence in a Human Capital-based Endogenous Growth Model with Labor-Market
Frictions
Been-Lon Chen, Hung-Ju Chen, and Ping Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 25783
April 2019
JEL No. E62,H22,J24,O41

                                          ABSTRACT

In a second-best optimal growth setup with only factor taxes, it is in general optimal to fully
replace capital by labor income taxation in the long run. We revisit this important issue by
developing a human capital-based endogenous growth model with frictional labor search,
allowing each firm to create multiple vacancies and each worker to determine market
participation. We find that the conventional efficient bargaining condition is necessary but not
sufficient for achieving constrained social optimality. We then conduct tax incidence exercises in
balanced growth by calibrating to the U.S. economy with a pre-existing 20% flat tax on capital
and labor income. Our quantitative results suggest that, due to a dominant channel via the
interactions between vacancy creation and market participation, it is optimal to switch only
partially from capital to labor taxation in a benchmark economy where human capital formation
depends on both physical and human capital stocks. This main finding is robust even along the
transition with time-varying factor tax rates. Moreover, our quantitative analysis under alternative
setups suggest that while endogenous human capital and labor market frictions are essential for
obtaining a positive optimal capital tax, endogenous leisure, nonlinear human capital
accumulation and endogenous growth are not crucial.

Been-Lon Chen                                    Ping Wang
Institute of Economics                           Department of Economics
Academia Sinica                                  Washington University in St. Louis
128 Academia Rd. Section 2                       Campus Box 1208
Taipei 11529 TAIWAN                              One Brookings Drive
bchen@econ.sinica.edu.tw                         St. Louis, MO 63130-4899
                                                 and NBER
Hung-Ju Chen                                     pingwang@wustl.edu
Department of Economics
National Taiwan University
Taipei
Taiwan, ROC
hjc@ntu.edu.tw
1    Introduction
Since the pivotal work by Chamley (1985a, 1985b, 1986) and Judd (1985, 1987), a large
body of literature has been devoted to studying long-run tax incidence in optimal
growth models to identify the optimal factor tax mix in a second-best world where
full access to the lump-sum tax is unavailable. Because labor endowment is fixed
but capital can be accumulated over time, Chamley and Judd recommended that the
optimal flat factor tax scheme be implemented to fully eliminate the tax on the more
elastic physical capital and to impose a tax only on the inelastic raw labor in the
long run. This Chamley-Judd proposition has been revisited and extended to various
economic environments and the general conclusion has been fairly robust under a
benevolent nonproductive central planner using flat-rate factor taxes without other
meanings of financing.
    About three decades ago, the celebrated work by Lucas (1988) provided a com-
pelling argument that human capital is a primary engine of the endogenously deter-
mined economy-wide growth rate. Because human capital augments labor, an immedi-
ate question arises: Would it be welfare-reducing to tax labor in a human capital-based
endogenous growth framework? Two years later, Lucas (1990) himself addressed this
question based on tax incidence exercises and provided a policy recommendation that
neither physical nor human capital should be taxed and that only raw labor should
be taxed. His policy recommendation has hardly been challenged within the canoni-
cal balanced-growth framework with a benevolent nonproductive central planner using
only flat-rate factor taxes to finance.
    In this paper, we follow this convention by reexamining the validity of the Lucasian
policy recommendation in a generalized human capital-based endogenous growth econ-
omy with individuals endogenously participating in the frictional labor market. It was
well-documented in the celebrated work on labor search pioneered by Diamond (1982a),
Mortensen (1982) and Pissarides (1984) that informational and institutional barriers
to job search, employee recruiting, and vacancy creation were substantial. In our pa-
per, we inquire whether such frictions may influence individual decisions to generate
suﬃcient “responsiveness” in the long run to a tax on labor income such that labor
taxation becomes too distortionary to be used to fully replace capital taxation.
    Our paper attempts to address this important issue that has practically valuable
implications for tax reform considerations. Intuitively, by introducing labor search

                                           1
and matching friction, there are two types of distortions. First, there are matching
externalities that arise from the fact that one additional job-seeker externally increases
the probability that a firm will match with a worker but externally decreases the
probability that job-seekers already in the market will match with a firm.1 Second,
a successful match generates a surplus to be split between the worker and the firm
based on a wage bargaining process rather than on a Walrasian process. The split
of the surplus from a successful match is in general not eﬃcient because firms and
households ignore that the rate at which each side finds a job-match depends on the
tightness of the labor market, i.e. the relative number of traders on both sides of the
market. A positive capital tax can then be used to correct for distortions to labor
market tightness.
   Specifically, we construct a two-sector human capital-based endogenous growth
framework with labor market search and matching frictions in which the worker’s
market participation is tied to the household’s valuation of leisure. We assume that
vacancy creation and maintenance as well as job search are all costly and that un-
filled vacancies and active job seekers are brought together by a matching technology
exhibiting constant returns. We consider “large” firms and “large” households where
each firm creates and maintains multiple vacancies and each household contains a con-
tinuum of members comprising employed and nonemployed workers. The wage rate (in
eﬃciency units) is determined based on a cooperative bargain between the matched
firm and household pair. A benevolent fiscal authority finances direct transfers to
households and unemployment compensation only by way of taxing factor incomes
and maximizes social welfare given labor-market frictions. Notably, labor market fric-
tions aﬀect human capital accumulation, which is an important engine of sustainable
growth. Thus, an endogenous growth model is a proper framework to evaluate the
long-run eﬀects of capital and labor income taxes and their welfare consequences.
   Following the conventional tax incidence literature cited above, we begin with a
long-run analysis examining the optimal factor tax mix along a balanced growth path
(BGP). We generalize the benchmark study in various ways. First, we recognize that a
full analysis of Ramsey taxation requires managing not only the dynamic interactions
of the evolution of physical/human capital and employment (which is a state variable
in search models) but also changes in household and firm values and dynamic wage
bargaining. To circumvent such complication, we propose a dynamic tax incidence

                                            2
analysis under a BGP value of consumption with stationary matching and stationary
bargaining. Second, we consider an alternative government instrument, in particular,
the replacement ratio of unemployment compensation. In this case, we examine the
optimal mix of the replacement ratio and the labor tax under the benchmark setting.
Third, we reevaluate the benchmark finding by removing the channel through the
labor-leisure tradeoﬀ. Fourth, in the benchmark setup, we consider a general two-sector
framework as proposed by Bond, Wang and Yip (1996) in which the accumulation of
physical and human capital are both driven by physical and human capital stocks. We
also consider an alternative setup with a Lucasian human capital accumulation process
which is independent of physical capital.
   We calibrate our economy to fit observations in the U.S. over the post-WWII period,
with a pre-existing 20% tax rate being levied on both capital and labor income. This
enables us to conduct tax incidence exercises along the BGP, and to draw policy
recommendations based on a revenue-neutral welfare comparison of factor taxes.
   Our main findings can be summarized as follows. We show that while the capital
tax lowers the bargained wage rate (in eﬃciency units), the labor tax increases it.
However, these factor taxes can generate very diﬀerent eﬀects on the wage discount
that measures how much our equilibrium wage in the presence of labor market search
and matching frictions is below the competitive counterpart in a frictionless Walrasian
setup. Specifically, if the capital tax rate is initially too low (lower than its optimum),
then an increase in the capital income tax rate accompanied by a revenue-neutral re-
duction in the labor tax turns out to raise the wage discount and to encourage firms
to create more vacancies. This in turn raises the job finding rate and hence induces
workers to more actively participate in the labor market to seek employment. Be-
cause this leads to positive eﬀects on employment and output growth, a shift from a
zero to a positive capital tax rate becomes welfare-improving, thereby yielding a pol-
icy recommendation diﬀerent from that of Chamley-Judd-Lucas. Moreover, we show
that the conventional eﬃcient bargaining condition is necessary but not suﬃcient for
achieving constrained social optimality. In addition to conventional eﬃcient bargain-
ing and restrictions on firms discounting at the market rate and valuing capital the
same as households, eﬃciency requires that distorted pre-existing taxes and subsidies
be removed and that the wage discount be at an optimal level aligning labor-leisure-
consumption trade-oﬀ atemporally and intertemporally in our endogenously growing


                                            3
economy with labor search frictions.
   By conducting factor tax incidence exercises in our benchmark economy calibrated
to U.S. data, we find that, in the benchmark case with factor taxes at pre-existing
rates of (20% 20%), it is optimal to only partially replace the capital tax by the labor
tax: the optimal flat tax rates on capital and labor income are 1611% and 2409%,
respectively. Since the above-mentioned vacancy creation-market participation channel
in the presence of labor market frictions is quantitatively significant, the optimal capital
tax rate is significantly greater than zero. As a consequence, such a reform induces
a 00389% welfare gain in consumption equivalence whereas setting the capital tax
rate to zero would lead to a large welfare loss of 06490% in consumption equivalence.
Upon various sensitivity and robustness checks, we find that it is hardly optimal to fully
replace capital by labor taxation within all reasonable ranges of parameterization so
long as labor-search and vacancy-creation frictions are present. The conclusion remains
even when we remove the labor-leisure trade-oﬀ, or use the Lucas (1988, 1990) human
capital accumulation process, or consider exogenous growth with endogenous human
capital accumulation. In all cases, the optimal capital tax rate is still positive. On
the contrary, with exogenous human capital or with a frictionless labor market, it is
always optimal to fully eliminate capital taxation by taxing only labor income.
   The Chamley-Judd proposition of zero capital taxation is obtained in a Walrasian
economy without endogenous human capital accumulation. By allowing human capital
to be determined in his endogenous growth framework, Lucas (1990) reconfirmed the
Chamley-Judd proposition. By considering both endogenous human capital accumula-
tion and labor search distortions, our paper overturns the Chamley-Judd proposition
even under eﬃcient bargains.
   Our results suggest that while endogenous human capital accumulation, labor
search frictions and costly vacancy creation are crucial for tax incidence to feature
a positive optimal capital tax rate in the long run, the presence of labor-leisure trade-
oﬀ, the form of human capital accumulation and endogenous growth alone is not. The
main takeaway of our paper is that, to achieve the highest social welfare, a proper tax
reform must take into account labor market frictions and when such frictions are sub-
stantial, fully replacing capital with labor income taxation can be welfare-retarding.
This finding is still robust along the transition with time-varying factor tax rates.



                                             4
Related Literature
   Our paper is related to the discrete-time, real-business-cycle (RBC) search liter-
ature pioneered by Merz (1995) and Andolfatto (1996). In contrast with theirs, our
model considers sustained economic growth with endogenous human capital accumu-
lation. Previously, Laing, Palivos and Wang (1995) incorporated human capital-based
endogenous growth into the Mortensen-Pissarides search framework, whereas Chen,
Chen and Wang (2011) introduced human capital growth into the Andolfatto-Merz
RBC search framework using a pseudo central planning setup. We follow the lat-
ter strategy, allowing comprehensive labor-leisure-learning-search trade-oﬀs. Diﬀering
from their work, our paper performs tax incidence analysis in a fully decentralized
setup with a more general human capital accumulation process.
   Over the past two decades, several studies have investigated the long-run growth
eﬀects of factor taxes, including King and Rebelo (1990), Stokey and Rebelo (1995),
Bond, Wang and Yip (1996), and Mino (1996), under perfectly competitive setups
without externalities. This literature has been extended to incorporate positive exter-
nalities, productive public capital or market imperfections, such as Guo and Lansing
(1999) and Chen (2007). This strand of the literature, however, focuses exclusively on
long-run growth or welfare eﬀects of factor taxation rather than on factor tax incidence.
   The closely related literature was initiated by Lucas (1990) who reexamined the
Chamley-Judd proposition of tax incidence in a human capital-based endogenous
growth framework.2 His primary conclusion was that the government should not tax
either physical or human capital but rather tax raw labor only. This Lucasian pol-
icy recommendation was reconfirmed by Jones, Manuelli and Rossi (1993) in which
only investment goods enter physical and human capital accumulation (i.e., there is no
trade-oﬀ between education time and work hours). Even in a more general setup by
Jones, Manuelli and Rossi (1997) that allowed both investment goods and education
time to enter human capital accumulation, the Lucasian policy recommendation still
remains valid under constant-returns technologies in the absence of an alternative tax
on consumption.
    It is noted that the Chamley-Judd proposition can be overturned under some
circumstances. In an infinite-horizon endogenous growth model with human-capital
formation, Chen and Lu (2013) showed that a positive long-run capital tax is optimal
if raw labor and learning-based human capital are inseparable so that they cannot be


                                           5
taxed separately. Lu and Chen (2015) obtained a positive long-run capital tax in the
model of Chamley (1986) without human capital when the government expenditure
is maintained at a fixed proportion of output so that the social marginal product of
capital is below its private counterpart (thus requiring a tax to correct this distortion).
Reis (2011) found that capital income taxation is positive when there are two types
of labor: production labor and entrepreneurial labor. Lansing (1999) and Straub
and Werning (2014) both considered the Judd (1985) framework where workers are
hand to mouth without saving. A positive optimal capital tax is found when the
intertemporal elasticity of substitution is one (log linear) or below one. Since our setup
is of the Chamley (1986) type with a representative household, it is more appropriate
to compare our results with the findings in Straub and Werning who also consider
Chamley’s framework. In particular, Straub and Werning showed that when capital
taxation is subject to an upper bound, the optimal capital tax rate is positive. In our
paper, a positive optimal capital tax rate is obtained without any of such bound.
   The role of search frictions played in tax incidence has been examined by Domeij
(2005). In the presence of labor search distortions but the absence of human capital
accumulation, Domeij (2005) applied the neoclassical growth framework to study the
Ramsey taxation with the government being constrained to flat capital and labor
income taxes. He showed that the result of zero capital taxation in the long run is
not robust to the introduction of search frictions if Hosios’ rule is not met and thus
the wage bargaining is not eﬃcient. Our quantitative results suggest that, even when
Hosios’ rule is met, the optimal capital tax rate is positive as long as human capital is
endogenously accumulation and labor market frictions are present.
   In the present paper, we follow the lead of Lucas (1990) to revisit the tax incidence
issue under an endogenous growth setting with endogenous accumulation of human
capital. Our departure is to consider labor-market frictions. However, when we allow
for interplays between the firm’s creation of vacancies and the household’s decision
on employment versus unemployment (referred to as the vacancy creation-market par-
ticipation eﬀect) in the presence of endogenous human capital accumulation, we find
that the Chamley-Judd-Lucas proposition may now fail even under eﬃcient bargains
and even without imposing inseparability between human capital and raw labor and
without assuming a government spending distortion. Our proposed new channel is of
particular significance not only because of the prevalence of labor-market frictions in


                                            6
the real world but also because of the robustness of our conclusion to various alternative
settings.


2    The Model
We consider a discrete-time model with a continuum of identical infinitely-lived large
firms (of measure one), a continuum of identical infinitely-lived large households (of
measure one) and a fiscal authority determining the factor tax mix.
    The adoption of the large household setup is to ease unnecessary complexity in-
volved in tracking the distribution of the employed and the unemployed, so as to
eliminate the possibility of an endogenous distribution of human and physical capi-
tal stocks as a result of idiosyncratic search and matching risk in the frictional labor
market. The large household consists of a continuum of members (of measure one),
who are either (i) employed, by engaging in production or on-the-job learning activity,
or (ii) nonemployed, by engaging in job seeking or leisure activity. We assume that
households own both productive factors, capital and labor.
    While the goods market is Walrasian and the capital market is perfect, the labor
market exhibits search and matching frictions. In particular, a firm can create and
maintain (multiple) vacancies only upon paying a vacancy creation and maintenance
cost in the form of labor inputs. The household’s (endogenously determined) search
activity is also costly with a foregone earning cost. Unfilled vacancies and active job
seekers are brought together through a Diamond (1982b) type matching technology,
where each vacancy can be filled by exactly one searching worker. In our model, the
flow matching rates (job finding and employee recruitment rates) are both endogenous,
depending on the masses of both matching parties. In every period, filled vacancies
and employed workers are separated at an exogenous rate.
    The benevolent fiscal authority’s behavior is simple: it taxes factor incomes at flat
rates to finance direct transfers to households and unemployment compensation, given
labor-market frictions. The optimal factor tax mix is to maximize social welfare by
maintaining a periodically balanced budget.




                                            7
2.1   Households

The economy is populated with a continuum of large households of mass one, each
consisting of a continuum of members of unit mass. Within each group, household
members are identical; moreover, the “household head” pulls all resources for each
member to achieve the same enjoyment. This assumption is common in the unitary
household literature, which is made to avoid the diﬃculty from keeping track within-
household distribution over time.
   In addition to the labor endowment and human capital  , households are assumed
to own the entire stock of physical capital  , where the initial stocks of human and
physical capital are given by, 0  0 and 0  0. A representative large household with
a unified preference pools all resources and enjoyment from its members. In period ,
a fraction  of the members are employed and 1 −  are nonemployed. In this setup,
the unemployment rate is simply  = 1 −  . The allocation of labor is delineated in
Figure 1.
   Since job matches are not instantaneous, the level of employment from the house-
hold’s perspective is given by the following birth-death process,

                             +1 = (1 − ) +  (1 −  )                        (1)

where  denotes the (exogenous) job separation rate and  is the (endogenous) job
finding rate. That is, the change in employment (+1 −  ) is equal to the inflow
of workers into the employment pool ( (1 −  )) net of the outflow as a result of
separation ( ).
   We consider a general human capital accumulation technology proposed by Bond,
Wang and Yip (1996) in which the production of incremental human capital requires
both human and physical capital inputs. Denote the fraction of physical capital de-
voted to goods production as  and that to human capital accumulation as 1 −  .
The aggregate human capital of the household can thus be accumulated via learning
by the employed and inputs of the market good — physical capital:

                                            e −  ) ] [ (1 −  ) ]1−
              +1 −  =  (1 −  ) + [(1                                    (2)

                                                         e ≥ 0. When 
where 0  0 is exogenously given,  ∈ (0 1),   0 and            e =
0 (and  = 1), human capital accumulation is independent of market goods. This


                                             8
linear human capital evolution process resembles that proposed by Lucas (1988): it
reduces to the Lucasian setup when  = 1. Since the accumulation of human capital
depends on the employment rate  , it gives the flavor of on-the-job learning. The
above setup implies that the unemployed cannot accumulate human capital, or, more
generally, their human capital accumulation is completely oﬀset by their human capital
                           e  0 and the accumulation of human capital requires inputs
depreciation.3 In general, 
of market goods. The functional form given above implies that physical capital is not
necessary for human capital accumulation as long as   0. We follow Lucas (1990)
assuming that education or learning activities are completely tax-exempt.
   Denote the eﬀective wage and the capital rental rates by  and  , respectively.
The labor and capital income tax rates are constant over time, denoted by   and
  , respectively. Let  be household consumption and   be the physical capital
depreciation rate. In addition, denote the replacement ratio by ̄ , the per household
lump-sum profit distribution by   (to be specified below) and the per household lump-
sum transfer from the government by  .4 The household faces the following budget
constraint:
                        £                    ¤
 +1 = (1 −   )    + (1 −  )̄ + [(1 −   ) + (1 −   )  ] −  +   +  (3)

That is, the household allocates the total wage from employed members, total unem-
ployment compensations from unemployed members, total rentals from market capital
devoted to production (  ), total profits and total transfers, to consumption and
gross investment.
   Let   0 be the subjective rate of time preference. The representative household’s
preference takes a standard time-additive form:
                                     X∞ µ     ¶
                                           1
                                  Ω=             ̃ (   )
                                     =0
                                          1+

   The periodic utility function is given by

                           ̃ (   ) =  ( ) + (1 −  ) ̃()
                                        =  ( ) +  (1 −  )

where  ≡ ̃(), ̃  0 measures the large household’s utility weight toward valuing
unemployed members’ leisure, and  is a function of individual leisure time  facing

                                                  9
each unemployed, taking a standard form with constant elasticity of intertemporal
                                        −1
                                     1−
substitution  ∈ (0 1): () =     1−−1
                                             (e.g., see Andolfatto 1996 and many others in
the macro labor literature). In this setup, what is emphasized is the extensive margin:
the unemployment takes more leisure than the employed. For simplicity, we ignore
the intensive margin, viewing  as exogenous, so  is a constant that is irrelevant
for household’s optimization.5 In this way, the large household’s leisure is endogenous
purely due to the extensive margin related to endogenous labor participation. It is
noteworthy that with  ∈ (0 1), ()  0 and hence we expect to have   0.
    Let H = (     ) denote the vector of current period state variables and H0
denote that of the next period state variables. Then, the household’s optimization
problem can be expressed in a Bellman equation form as:
                                                        1
        Ω(     ) = max  ( ) +  (1 −  ) +     Ω(+1  +1  +1 )           (4)
                                               1+
subject to constraints (1), (2), and (3).
    Define conveniently eﬀective capital-labor ratios in the nonmarket and market sec-
                 (1 −  )                
tors as  =                  and  =           , respectively. Then the household’s
                 (1 −  )              
optimizing decisions can be summarized as follows:6

Lemma 1. (Household’s Optimization) The representative large household’s optimiza-
tion satisfies the following first-order conditions (with respect to {     }),
                                             1
                                     =         Ω (H0 )                                   (5)
                                           1+
                                                   h               ¡ ¢ i
                 Ω (H0 )(1 −   ) = Ω (H0 )  + (1 e − )                         (6)
                                                                         
                                                    ¡ ¢
                                                 e   −1
                 Ω (H0 )(1 −   ) = Ω (H0 )                                         (7)
                                                     


together with the respective Benveniste-Scheinkman conditions (associated with {     }):
                1
Ω (H) =            Ω (H0 )[(1 −   ) + (1 −   ) ]                                            (8)
             1+
               1                                                                           ¡  ¢
Ω (H) =                                                                              e
                  (Ω (H0 )(1-  ) [  +(1- )̄ ]+Ω (H0 ){1+ (1- )[+(1-)   ]}) (9)
             1+
                                                                                  ¡  ¢
                                                                          e
                   Ω (H0 )(1-  )  ( -̄ )+Ω (H0 )(1- ) [+(1-)    ]+Ω (H0 )(1-- )
Ω (H) = -+                                                                                        (10)
                                                                1+
    From (6) and (7), we can solve the nonmarket eﬀective capital-labor ratio   as a
function of the after-tax wage-rental ratio alone:
                   ¡  ¢1− h              ¡ ¢ i
                                e − )   = 
                              + (1               e (1 −   )                         (11)
                                              
                                                     (1 −   )

                                               10
This positive relationship may be thought of as the relative factor input schedule
to nonmarket activity: the higher the after-tax wage-rental ratio is, the greater the
nonmarket eﬀective capital-labor ratio will be. How sensitive the nonmarket eﬀec-
tive capital-labor ratio  is to changes in the after-tax wage-rental ratio depends on
technology parameter . e


2.2   Firms

The economy is populated by a continuum of large firms of mass one, each creating
and maintaining multiple job vacancies. A representative firm produces a single final
good  by renting capital  from households and employing labor of mass  under a
constant-returns-to-scale Cobb-Douglas technology,

                               =  (  ) (   )1−                      (12)

where   0 and  ∈ (0 1).
   Denoting   as the (endogenous) recruitment rate and  as (endogenous) vacancies
created, we can specify the level of employment from the firm’s perspective as follows:

                               +1 = (1 − ) +                              (13)

where the change in employment is equal to the inflow of employees (   ) net of the
outflow ( ).
   To be consistent with a balanced growth equilibrium, we assume that the unit cost
of creating and maintaining a vacancy is proportional to the average firm output ̄ .
This setup is natural — the more production the economy has, the more firms will
compete for resources and the greater the vacancy creation cost will be. Moreover, it
is parsimonious — the optimization is simple because ̄ is regarded as given to each
individual firm. Furthermore, it is neutral — the base in which vacancy costs grow is
not biased toward one of the two production factor inputs. Thus, the resource cost
for vacancy creation and maintenance is given by Φ( ) = ̄  , where   0. The
level of employment is the only state variable in the representative firm’s optimization
problem. Each unit of employment is augmented by the multiple of both work eﬀort
and human capital,  =   . In this endogenous growth framework, both capital
stocks grow unboundedly. To ensure the stationarity of the optimization problem


                                            11
(i.e., bounded firm value), we consider the firm’s flow profit   = (  ) (  )1− −
   −    − ̄  in eﬀective units by dividing it by the “eﬀective productivity”
( ) of the state variable  , where  is taken as given by the representative firm (see
Chen, Chen and Wang 2011). Given the discount rate  , the associated Bellman
equation can then be written as:
             ©                                                      ª           1
 Γ( ) = max (  ) (  )1− −    −    − ̄   +          Γ(+1 ) (14)
                                                                        1 + 

subject to constraint (13).

Lemma 2. (Firm’s Optimization) The representative firm’s optimization satisfies the
following first-order conditions (with respect to {   }) and the Benveniste-Scheinkman
condition (associated with { }):
                                      ¡ ¢
                      Γ (+1 ) =                                                   (15)
               1 + 
                      ¡ ¢−1
                            =                                                        (16)
                                           ¡ ¢        1−
                        Γ ( ) = (1 − )  −  +        Γ (+1 )                    (17)
                                                       1 + 
Moreover, in the interest of the owner’s of the firm, the discount rate is equal to the
market rental rate, i.e.,  =  .

   From (16), we can derive the market eﬀective capital-labor ratio  as a function
of the capital rental rate alone:
                                                µ        ¶    1
                                                           1−
                                         =                                               (18)
                                                    

which is downward-sloping as expected.


2.3   Labor Matching and Bargaining

While the capital market is assumed to be perfect, the labor market exhibits search
frictions. Following Diamond (1982), we assume pair-wise random matching in which
the matching technology takes the following constant-returns form:

                                   = (1 −  ) ( )1−                                 (19)

where   0 measures the degree of matching eﬃcacy and  ∈ (0 1).

                                                12
   In our model economy, the household’s surplus accrued from a successful match is
measured by its incremental value of supplying an additional worker (Ω ) whereas the
firm’s surplus is measured by its incremental value of hiring an additional employee
(Γ ). The representative household and the representative firm determine the eﬀective
wage rate through cooperative bargaining to maximize their joint surplus:

                                        max(Ω ) (Γ )1−
                                         

where  ∈ (0 1) denotes the bargaining share to the household. In solving this wage
bargaining problem, the household-firm pair treats matching rates ( and   ), the
beginning-of-period level of employment ( ), and the market rental rate ( ) as given.7

Lemma 3. (Wage Bargain) The wage bargaining problem satisfies the following first-
order condition:                 µ             ¶           µ          ¶
                                     Ω         1−       Γ
                                                   =        −                              (20)
                                   Ω                 Γ 


   With a frictional labor market and cooperative bargaining, firms will have none
zero flow profit, which will be redistributed in a lump-sum fashion to households as
given in (3).


2.4   The Government

The purpose of this paper is to study tax incidence in an economy with labor search
frictions and costly vacancy creation. In order for better comparisons with the conven-
tional tax incidence studies under canonical Walrasian settings, we regard the govern-
ment as a pure tax authority, which cannot coordinate labor matching/wage bargain
and cannot internalize the externality from vacancy creation via {̄ }. Moreover, as in
the conventional tax incidence, the government revenues are tied to the pre-existing
distortionary taxes. That is, we are solving for a third best solution. The government’s
objective is to maximize the social welfare under a balanced budget taking matching
rates as given (i.e., regard matching rates { } as given). Its budget constraint is
given by,8
                                                    £                   ¤
                 +   (1 −  )̄ =       + (1 −  )̄ +        (21)



                                                    13
That is, the government receives wage and capital income taxes to spend on direct
transfers to households and unemployment compensation. Of particular note is that
the inclusion of transfers is to ensure that the government’s budget is balanced in the
presence of pre-existing factor taxes and unemployment compensation that fits the
data observations.
    Since firms’ profits are redistributed to households, the social welfare is measured
simply by the household’s lifetime utility Ω. Thus, our tax incidence problem is to de-
                                     ¡            ¢
termine optimal factor tax schedules  ∗   ∗ by evaluating the long-run welfare out-
come measured by Ω, subject to all the policy functions obtained from the household’s
and the firm’s optimization problems, the bargaining problem, and the government’s
budget constraint (21).


3    Equilibrium
A dynamic search equilibrium is a tuple of individual quantity variables, {     
       ,  }∞                                              ∞
                        =0 , a pair of aggregate quantities {   }=0 , a pair of matching
rates {    }∞                                     ∞
                 =0 , and a pair of prices, {   }=0 , such that: (i) all households and
firms optimize; (ii) human capital and employment evolution hold, (iii) labor-market
matching and wage bargaining conditions are met; (iv) the government budget is
balanced; and (v) the goods market clears. A balanced growth path (BGP) is a dynamic
search equilibrium along which consumption, physical and human capital, and output
all grow at positive constant rates. In our model, both the market goods and the
human capital investment production technologies are homogeneous of degree one in
reproducible factors ( and ). Thus, all endogenously growing quantities (, ,  and
) must grow at a common rate, , on a BGP, whereas employment (), vacancies
() and equilibrium matches ( ) must all be stationary. Given the common growth
property, we can divide all the perpetually growing variables by  to obtain stationary
                      
ratios,   , ,   and   ,   where the latter two ratios measure eﬀective consumption and
eﬀective output, respectively.
    Along a BGP, the labor market must satisfy the steady-state matching (Beveridge
curve) relationships given by  = (1 − ) =  = (1 − ) ()1−  An additional
condition to the previously defined employment evolution and labor-market matching
equations, (1), (13) and (19), is to require the equilibrium employment inflows from

                                               14
the household side ((1 − )) to be equal to those from the firm side (). The above
relationships enable us to obtain:

Lemma 4. (Steady-State Matching) Under steady-state matching, the job finding rate
( ), the employee recruitment rate ( ) and equilibrium vacancies ( ) can all be solved
as functions of employment ( ) only:
                                                     
                                       () =                                        (22)
                                                    1−
                                                1             −
                                  () =  1− () 1−                              (23)
                                           −1             
                                () =  1− () 1−                              (24)

While the job finding rate and equilibrium vacancies are positively related to equilibrium
employment, the employee recruitment rate is negatively related to it.

Accordingly, we can also derive the labor-market tightness measure (from the firm’s
point of view),  = (1 − ), as:
                                           ∙         ¸    1
                                            ()         1−
                                     () =                                          (25)
                                             
which is positively related to the job finding rate and hence equilibrium employment.
   In order to generate a BGP equilibrium, we must impose a logarithmic utility
function:  () = ln .9 Using the Judd (1985) framework without endogenous human
capital or labor market frictions, Lansing (1999) and Straub and Werning (2014) as-
sume that capitalists save and workers do not save. Under a log linear utility, Lansing
showed that the capital tax is nonzero, though such a finding is extended by Straub
and Werning even when the intertemporal elasticity of substitution is below one. As
we will see later, log utility is not a key driver of the result because in the absence of
endogenous human capital or labor market frictions, capital should not be taxed at
optimum even under log utility.10
   Under this preference specification, households’ lifetime utility is always bounded
along a BGP. Moreover, Γ (0 ) and Ω (H0 ) are constant along a BGP, whereas Ω (H0 )
and Ω (H0 ) are decreasing at rate . Using (6), (8), and (9), in the Appendix we de-
rived a standard Keynes-Ramsey relationship governing consumption growth and an
intertemporal optimization condition governing human capital accumulation. Follow-
ing the argument in Bond, Wang and Yip (1996), we assume throughout the paper
the following condition to ensure nondegenerate balanced growth:

                                           15
                                                        +
Condition G. (Nondegenerate Growth) inf {}          1−  .

This condition basically limits the range of factor price frontier.11
   We can use human capital evolution (2) to relate learning eﬀort to the nonmarket
eﬀective capital-labor ratio, employment and the balanced growth rate:
                                            
                               1−=      h           i                               (26)
                                            e ( )
                                         +
                                                  h            i
Further define unit wage income as  = (1−  ) 1 + (1−)
                                                         
                                                            ̄
                                                                 and unit rental income as
     h                   i
 = (1 −   ) − +
                     
                       
                          . From the definition of  and (16), we have derived the flow
profit redistribution to each household in eﬀective units in the Appendix. Moreover,
from (3), the definition of   and the flow profit redistribution given above, we have
derived eﬀective consumption along a BGP in the Appendix.
   To solve the wage bargaining problem, we first note that the household-firm pair
in the bargaining game must take {   } as given. From (18),   must also be
regarded as predetermined. Using (11) and the intertemporal optimization condi-
tion governing human capital accumulatio in the Appendix, we can express both the
nonmarket eﬀective capital-labor ratio and the balanced growth rate as increasing
functions of the bargained wage only:   =   () and  = (). Intuitively, while
it is clear that a higher wage and hence a higher wage-rental ratio (given ) leads to
a higher non-market eﬀective capital-output ratio, the latter in turn raises the BGP
human capital accumulation rate. Combining the Keynes-Ramsey relationship in the
                                              h                  i−1
Appendix and (26) yields () = 1 − (1−)()
                                        
                                                (1+)()+
                                                  +(1−)̄
                                                            −      
   The bargained wage serves as an incentive to encourage households, on the one
hand, to devote more eﬀort to market activity, while, on the other hand, accumulating
more human capital. When the long-run human capital accumulation eﬀect dominates
(as it will in the calibrated economy), it is expected that an increase in the bargained
wage will reduce work eﬀort. By the definitions of   and   , we have:
                                         1 − ()
                                 
                                      =                                              (27)
                                 ()   1 −  ()
which can then be used to derive  = () as a decreasing function of the bargained
wage. Intuitively, a higher bargained wage raises the learning eﬀort (1 − ) and, by
capital-labor complementarity, results in a larger fraction of capital being devoted to
human capital accumulation (i.e., a higher 1 − ).

                                           16
   Endowed with the functions   (), (), () and () given above, we are now
ready to determine the equilibrium wage. Substituting (5) and (7) into (10), we can
write the household’s surplus accrued from a successful match as follows:
                                     ∙                               ¸
                             1+                             
                   Ω =               (1 −   )(1 − ̄ )        −                                   (28)
                           +  +                          
                       
where from (50)            is increasing in  but less than proportionally, implying that the
household’s surplus is increasing in  .
   It is informative to compute the wage discount that measures how much the bar-
gained wage is below its competitive counterpart (i.e., the marginal product of labor,
  ):
                                            −            
                                ∆ ≡                 =1−          ¡ ¢                                  (29)
                                                     (1 − ) 
Straightforward diﬀerentiation of the surplus accrued by each party leads to − Γ Γ
                                                                                     =
                                                                                      

1−∆          Ω                +( + )(   )
 ∆    and   Ω       =      +  +(  + )(  )
                                                                  .   While the former is decreasing in the
wage discount ∆ and hence increasing in , the latter is decreasing in . Thus, we
can manipulate (20) to obtain (see Appendix):

Lemma 5. (Wage Determination) The bargained wage is characterized by,

                                                                 + + 
                                                                                                    1-
  =                                                   ¡               ¢       
                                                                                      +
                                                                                            =       ¡ ¢     = 
                  (  +  )  +(  + )                 
                                                            +    +              (1-)  -
           -           (1−  )(1−̄ )
                                                                                                        (30)
where   is decreasing but   is increasing in .

The determination of bargained wage is illustrated in the top panel of Figure 2, when
the marginal benefit from the household’s point of view (  ) equals the marginal
cost from the firm’s point of view (  ). We are now prepared to characterize the
eﬀects of factor taxes on bargained wages, given {       } and hence the eﬀective
capital-labor ratio  (refer to (18)).
   An increase in   has a direct negative eﬀect via the after-tax rental on the unit
rental income ( ), which decreases the household’s marginal benefit and leads to a
downward shift in the   locus.12 There is also an indirect eﬀect via the labor-
leisure trade-oﬀ (which would have vanished if  = 0), which tends to shift the  
locus upward (recall that   0). Similarly, there are two direct eﬀects via the after-
tax wage of higher labor taxation   : one is to reduce  and thus shift the  

                                                            17
locus up and another is to suppress   via the extensive margin of leisure. The
indirect eﬀect via leisure is generally ambiguous (one via  and another via the net
opportunity cost of staying unemployed, (1 −   )(1 − ̄ )). Since  is taken as given
for a particular value of  , it is clear that the   locus will not respond to changes
in factor tax rates. As a result, the marginal benefit from the household’s point of
view is decreasing in the capital tax rate, whereas it is increasing in the labor tax rate
when the marginal valuation of leisure is suﬃciently low (such that the magnitude of
 is suﬃciently small).
   Moreover, by similar arguments, we can show that the marginal benefit from the
household’s point of view is increasing in employment when the marginal valuation of
leisure is suﬃciently low. We arrive at:

Proposition 1. (Wage Oﬀer) There is a unique bargained wage  ( ;      ) solving
(30), which possesses the following properties:

(i) it is decreasing in the capital tax rate (   ) unambiguously, but increasing in the
      labor tax rate (   ) if the marginal valuation of leisure is suﬃciently low;

(ii) it is increasing in employment (  ) if the marginal valuation of leisure is suﬃ-
      ciently low (  suﬃciently small in magnitude).

Intuitively, a higher capital tax discourages capital accumulation, thus lowering the
marginal product of labor and the bargained wage. On the contrary, a higher labor
tax discourages household’s participation in the labor market, thereby requiring a high
wage to induce the participation. We can also plot the relationship between the wage
discount and the wage rate, which is downward-sloping based on the expression in (29)
above (see the bottom panel of Figure 2).
   Once the bargained wage is determined (see 0 in Figure 2), we can then solve
the associated wage discount using (29). Notice that this wage discount schedule only
depends on the market eﬀective capital-labor ratio  . From (11), (18), (27), and the
Keynes-Ramsey relationship governing consumption growth, we can see that for each
 , the pre-tax real rental rate  is increasing in the capital tax rate but decreasing
in the labor tax rate as long as the labor cost share in the goods sector (1 − ) is
suﬃciently high:

Condition LC. (Goods-Sector Labor Cost Share) 1 −   sup {(1 − ( ))( )} 

                                            18
Under this (suﬃcient but not necessary) condition on labor cost shares, by raising
the pre-tax real rental rate and hence reducing  , an increase in   shifts the wage
discount schedule down; on the contrary, an increase in   raises  and shifts the
wage discount schedule up.
   We then obtain the following:

Proposition 2. (Wage Discount Function) Under Condition LC, the wage discount
function possesses the following properties:

(i) its schedule ∆( ) is a decreasing function of the bargained wage (  ), shifting
      down in response to a higher capital tax rate (   ) and up in response to a
      higher labor tax rate (   );

(iii) its value ∆ is increasing in the capital tax rate and decreasing in the labor tax
      rate when the bargained wage is suﬃciently responsive to factor tax changes.

In response to a higher capital tax, the bargained wage is lower, the pre-tax rental is
higher and the wage discount schedule shifts downward. When the bargained wage
is suﬃciently responsive, the wage discount is higher. Similarly, with a suﬃciently
responsive bargained wage, the wage discount is lower in response to a higher labor
tax. Such negative relationships between the bargained wage and the wage discount
are intuitive and natural, which are supported by our calibration analysis.
   Furthermore, we can manipulate (15), (16), (17) and (23) to obtain an expression
that relates employment and capital rental to the wage rate:
                                    ∙                       ¸
                                          ( + )
                         =         (1 − ) −                                       (31)
                                                ( )
Using the capital rental function derived above ( ;      ) and the wage function
 ( ;      ) given in Proposition 1, we can then express (31) as a relationship in
(   ). This relationship summarizes a firm’s eﬃciency condition that governs cap-
ital demand, labor demand and vacancy creation, with steady-state matching and
bargained wage conditions embedded, which is referred to as the equilibrium firm eﬃ-
ciency ( ) relationship. Note that   is decreasing in  whereas ( ) is decreasing
in  , so the right-hand side of (31) is decreasing in both  and  . From (47),  is
increasing in  , whereas from Proposition 1,  is increasing in  when the marginal
valuation of leisure is suﬃciently low. Thus it is clear that the   locus is downward

                                            19
sloping. Moreover, a higher tax on capital income unambiguously raises the pre-tax
capital rental and reduces the barged wage whereas a higher tax on labor income gen-
erates opposite eﬀects. Thus, when the own price eﬀect via the after-tax wage-rental
ratio dominates, an increase in either tax rate shifts the   locus downward (see
Figure 3).
   Similarly, we can substitute the capital rental function ( ;      ) and the wage
function  ( ;      ) into (11) and use it with the intertemporal optimization con-
dition to obtain another balanced growth relationship in (   ), which is referred to
as the optimized human capital accumulation () relationship. It is obvious that,
with  increasing in  and  increasing in  , the  locus is upward sloping. Re-
call that a higher capital tax or a lower labor tax increases the pre-tax capital rental
and reduces the bargained wage. Notably, the intertemporal optimization condition
governing human capital accumulation indicates that factor taxes only aﬀect this 
locus via the nonmarket eﬀective capital-labor ratio  that is an increasing function of
the after-tax wage-rental ratio. Because an increase in the capital tax rate reduces the
after-tax rental (1−   ) and an increase in the labor tax rate decreases the after-tax
wage (1 −   ) , it is easily seen that, when the own price eﬀect dominates, a higher
capital tax tends to raise  whereas a higher labor tax tends to lower it. Thus, while
a higher capital tax shifts the  locus upward, a higher labor tax shifts the locus
downward (see Figure 3). We should note that the nonmarket eﬀective capital-labor
ratio will not be responsive to changes in the after-tax wage-rental ratio when the
technology parameter  e is small. This implies that the factor tax eﬀects on the 
                           e becomes suﬃciently small.
locus become negligible as 
   To characterize the eﬀects of factor income taxes on employment and growth, we
further impose a condition on factor price responses:

Condition FP. (Dominant Own Price Eﬀects of Factor Taxes) Each factor price and
after-tax factor price are more responsive to its own factor tax rate.

From (11), it is clearly seen that Condition FP holds true if the technology parameter
e is suﬃciently small.13 We then have:


Proposition 3. (Employment and Growth) Under Conditions LC and FP, the bal-
anced growth equilibrium possesses the following properties:

(i) an increase in either the capital tax rate (   ) or the labor tax rate (   ) shifts the

                                              20
        locus down, but an increase in the capital tax rate (   ) shifts the  locus
      up whereas an increase in the labor tax rate (   ) shifts the  locus down;

                                   e is suﬃciently small such that the  locus is
(ii) when the technology parameter 
      not too responsive to changes in the factor taxes, an increase in either factor tax
      reduces employment and growth.

The results depicted in Figure 3 are under own price dominance (Condition FP) and
                  e Based on the discussion above, we can easily show that along the
suﬃciently small .
balanced growth path, a higher capital tax induces physical capital to be allocated away
from the market sector (thus decreasing the eﬀective capital-labor ratio in the market
sector), a higher labor tax encourages human capital to be allocated to nonmarket
activity (thus lowering the eﬀective capital-labor ratio in the nonmarket sector). Just
how capital taxation may aﬀect the eﬀective capital-labor ratio in the nonmarket sector
or how labor taxation may aﬀect the eﬀective capital-labor ratio in the market sector
will depend on both factor substitution and other indirect eﬀects, which cannot be
pinned down analytically in a clear-cut manner.


4    Eﬃciency
In this section, we turn to eﬃciency issues by considering a quasi-social planner’s
problem where the central planner takes ̄ as given (as the vacancy-creation externality
is purely for providing unbiased support for endogenous growth, which is not present
in the standard eﬃcient bargain literature).
    The quasi-social planner can allocate consumption, labor, capital and vacancy un-
der its budget constraint given by (21), as well as coordinate labor matching to achieve
eﬃciency (in the second best sense due to its ignorance of the vacancy-creation exter-
nality). To save the space, we express the quasi-social planner’s problem and the
first-order conditions in the Appendix.
    The main task here is to derive conditions for eﬃciency by setting the decentralized
solution to be the same as the centralized solution. Recall that in order to generate
a BGP equilibrium, we impose () = ln  and, along a BGP, Γ (0 ) and Ω (H0 ) are
constant whereas Ω (H0 ) and Ω (H0 ) are decreasing at rate . We shall use these
properties of the value functions in our analysis below. In particular, as shown in

                                           21
the Appendix, we can combine the decentralized solution with the cooperative Nash
wage bargain expression to yield an expression for a labor-leisure-consumption trade-
oﬀ under the decentralized solution. Moreover, we also obtain counterpart of this
labor-leisure-consumption trade-oﬀ under the centralized solution.
   Then, by comparing the decentralized and centralized solutions, namely (51) and
(55) in the Appendix, we can identify four conditions. Moreover, to ensure the labor-
leisure-consumption trade-oﬀ under decentralization and centralization to be identical,
in the Appendix we have established equivalence between the decentralized labor-
leisure-consumption trade-oﬀ and the counterpart of this labor-leisure-consumption
trade-oﬀ under the centralized solution and obtained four conditions. We therefore
arrive at:

Proposition 4. (Eﬃciency) By taking the vacancy creation externality ( ̄ ) as given
in both decentralized and centralized problems, the decentralized dynamic search equi-
librium along the balanced growth path achieves second-best, solving the quasi-social
planner problem, under the following conditions:

(i) (discounting and valuation of capital) firms discount at the market rental rate
      (  =  ) and value capital in the same manner as the quasi-social planner
      ( Ω (H0 ) = Λ (H0 ));

(ii) (removal of distortionary factor taxes and subsidies)   =   = ̄ = 0;

(iii) (eﬃcient bargains)  = ;
                                                                     (++ ) 
(iv) (eﬃcient wage discount): wage discount is set at ∆ = ∆∗ =        (1−)       .


That is, the Hosios’ rule, based on labor-market matching and bargaining eﬃciency and
equating matching elasticities to the respective bargaining shares  = , is necessary
but not suﬃcient for eﬃciency. With endogenous human capital accumulation and
endogenous labor-leisure-consumption trade-oﬀ atemporally and intertemporally, we
need additional conditions to achieve eﬃciency. The eﬃcient wage discount condition
may be understood as follows. Intuitively, each firm sets a level of discount such that
the bargaining outcome exactly balances the household’s incentives between working
and consuming the fruit of wage payment and taking the leisure by not participating
in the labor market. In response to an increase in the vacancy creation cost (higher ),

                                           22
it would thus require larger wage discount (higher ∆∗ ) in order to compensate firms
while maintaining workers indiﬀerent. While better matching to workers (higher )
requires greater wage discount to compensate firms, better matching to firms (higher
) have the opposite eﬀects. Moreover, since a rising job separation rate () reduces
firm’s surplus by more than household’s, it requires the wage discount to increase. We
must note that in the case when the vacancy creation cost is zero  = 0, or when
the matching to firms is instantaneous  = ∞, then ∆ = 0 and Condition (iv) is not
needed.
    Notably, both the first set of conditions regarding discounting and valuation of
capital and the third entailing the Hosios’ rule are standard in the literature, which
will be imposed throughout the remainder of the paper. Unfortunately, the second
set of conditions involves removal of distortionary factor taxes and subsidies, which
cannot be imposed in our analysis, because the tax incidence is the primary purpose
of our paper. Specifically, in the tax incidence literature (e.g., Judd, 1985; Chamley,
1986; Lucas, 1990), it is standard to study what the optimal factor income tax mix is
to finance a positive level of government expenditure.
    As a consequence, we shall not impose an eﬃcient wage discount as it is a property
derived in the absence of any pre-existing distortionary factor taxes or subsidies. Thus,
in the calibrated economy below, the optimality is more precisely referred to as to
achieve the third best (by not correcting the vacancy creation externality and by
allowing for pre-existing distortionary factor taxes and subsidies). We will establish
quantitatively in Section 6 below that, no matter whether Hosios’ rule is met or not,
it is optimal to tax capital.


5    Dynamic Taxation
In this section, we examine dynamic taxation. Notably, a full analysis of Ramsey
taxation requires managing not only the evolution of the state vector (      ) but
also changes in household and firm values, Ω (      ) and Γ (      ), as
well as dynamic wage bargaining. The dynamic interactions are complicated, so a
full analysis is next to impossible. To circumvent this problem, we focus on studying
dynamic taxation under a BGP value of consumption with stationary matching and
stationary bargaining. More specifically, we consider dynamic paths of factor tax rates

                                              23
starting from their pre-existing levels and asymptotically approaching to their optimal
BGP levels ( ∗   ∗ ), while maintaining the replacement ratio at its pre-existing level
̄ = ̄. We shall return to examining optimal replacement ratio in the extension
section.
     While we will reconfirm numerically that such a simplification is innocuous, we
would like to stress now that the benefit to consider this simplified structure is to
isolate the long-run growth and matching eﬀects via ( ) from short-run transition
analysis. In particular, when  and  are at their BGP levels, we can derive from
(22), (23), (24) and (25) that , , , and  are all constant. This enables us to study
dynamic taxation in a parsimonious manner.
     In the Appendix, we show that, both factor prices can be expressed as functions of
the capital tax alone (independent of the labor tax rate and the replacement ratio):

              (  ) = [(1 + ) +   + ] (1 −   )
                                     1                      
             (  ) =  1− ((  )) 1− [1 −  − ((  ) + )()]

We further show that capital rental is increasing in the capital tax rate at an increasing
rate (0 (  )  0 00 (  )  0) and the after-tax capital rental is decreasing in the
capital tax rate. As a result of factor substitution, eﬀective wage is shown to be
decreasing in the capital tax rate. When the direct production cost eﬀect dominates
the labor market friction eﬀect (the last term in the square bracket of the eﬀective wage
expression), eﬀective wage is strictly concave in the capital tax rate. As shown in the
Appendix, we can also utilize (18), (48) and (26) to obtain  =   (  )  =   (̄ )
                                                         
and  = (̄ ), with           0,    ̄
                                                    0 and        ̄
                                                                          0
     Since the eﬀective capital-labor ratio in the nonmarket sector is a function of the
replacement ratio alone, equation (11) can be rewritten as:

                                                   ̄ =  (     )                 (32)

This is referred to as an iso-replacement ratio (IR) locus, As shown in the Appendix,
  ̄               ̄
      0 and         0, so time varying factor tax rates are negatively related along
each IR locus. That is, to maintain a constant replacement ratio, there is a trade-oﬀ
between the two required factor tax rates. Moreover, under the condition mentioned
above, the IR locus is concave.


                                                            24
      Recall that the dynamic paths of factor tax rates satisfy: (i) ( 0   0 ) are at their
pre-existing levels; (ii) lim→∞   =  ∗ and lim→∞   =  ∗ ; and, (iii) (     )
satisfy the IR locus with ̄ = ̄. We may thus express the two factor tax schedules as
follows:

                                     −  ∗ =  − ()·
                                     −  ∗ = − − ()·

where  and  are all positive for  =  , the initial tax rates are  0 =  ∗ + 
and  0 =  ∗ −  with (   ) satisfying the IR locus, and the transition speeds
are captured by ( ()  ()) which must satisfy the IR locus for all .
                  ¡        ¢1− h              ¡      ¢ i
    Define Θ(̄) =   (̄)           e − )   (̄)  (1+)+ + . We show in the
                                  + (1                                  
Appendix that
                                                    −1
                                                         h                   i    
                                                             (1+)+  +       1−
                                            ( ) 1−        1− ∗ −           Θ(̄)
                   ( ) = −1 +  ∗ +                      h                      i     (33)
                                                                (1+)+  +
                                             1−−                 1− ∗ −     +

which depends positively on  when the capital income share is not too high such
             n            o
that   min 12  1 − 
                          . Thus the two initial tax rates are negatively related,
which is easily understood because the IR locus is downward sloping. Moreover, the
speed of labor taxation  () is governed by,
                    h                             i             −1
                 ln 1 −  ∗ +  ( ) − ()· = ln ( ) 1− Θ(̄)
                                        (1 + ) +   + 
                               +     ln                                                    (34)
                               1 −  1 −  ∗ −  − ()·
                          ½            ∙                          ¸¾
                                        (1 + ) +   + 
                      − ln 1 −  −                             +
                                     1 −  ∗ −  − ()·
By expressing  () as a function of ( ()  ), it is straightforward to show that

     0. The eﬀect of the gap between the initial and the asymptotic levels of the
capital tax rate ( ) is, however, complicated. On the one hand, it aﬀects the gap
between the initial and the asymptotic levels of the labor tax rate ( ) as given in
(33), which requires the speed of adjustment in the labor tax rate to be faster in order
for convergence toward its long-run level. On the other hand, there is an opposite
eﬀect via the IR locus, thus leading to an ambiguous net eﬀect.
      With the above characterization of the two factor tax schedules along the transition,
we are now ready to set up the steps toward welfare evaluation. To begin, we note

                                               25
from (2) that once  and  are at their BGP levels, the growth rate of  is constant as
                                                                                          
well. We may thus focus on analyzing the transition of eﬀective consumption,               ,   when
evaluating welfare. To do so, we show in the Appendix that the fraction of capital
devoted to goods production can be written as a function of the capital tax rate and
the replacement ratio:  = (   ̄). Moreover, we can express unit wage income
and unit rental income as  =  (   ̄) and  =  (   ̄), and the eﬀective
                             
lump-sum tax rebate as        (      ̄).   We may thus rewrite (50) as:
                                n £           ¤
             (      ̄) =     (  ) [(1 − ) − ] +  (   ̄)  (  )
          
                                    £                 ¤        ª    
                                  − 1 −  (   ̄) (  )  + (      ̄)
                                                                    
In the Appendix, we show that, when the eﬀective lump-sum tax rebate eﬀect is
neglected, a higher labor tax rate suppresses eﬀective consumption, whereas the capital
tax rate also has a negative eﬀect if its impact via the bargained wage rate is not too
large.


6     Numerical Analysis
We now turn to calibrating our benchmark model. We then conduct comparative-static
exercises quantitatively, particularly focusing on the balanced growth eﬀects of the two
factor tax rates. We then perform tax incidence exercises and derive the optimal factor
tax mix numerically. Finally, we perform sensitivity analysis to examine the robustness
of our numerical results.


6.1      Calibration

We calibrate parameter values to match the U.S. quarterly data during the post-WWII
period. We set the quarterly per capita real GDP growth rate to  = 045% and the
quarterly depreciation rate of capital to 001 to match the annual per capita real GDP
growth rate of 18% and the annual depreciation rate of capital in the range of 3 − 8%,
respectively. With an annual time preference rate of 5%, we set our quarterly rate
of time preference to 00125. The output elasticity of capital is set at the average
capital income share  = 028. Based on the observation and the factor tax incidence
exercises conducted by Judd (1985) and many others, we set the pre-existing flat tax

                                                       26
rates:   = 02 and   = 02.14 The capital rental rate can then be calibrated by
                                                                            
using (47):  = 003382, which implies a capital-output ratio  =            = 8279, close
to the observed value. As argued by Kendrick (1976), human capital is as large as
physical capital. We thus set the benchmark value of the physical to human capital
ratio at  = 1.
   The ratio of unemployment compensation to the market wage (̄) in the benchmark
case is set to 042, in line with Shimer (2005) and Hall (2005). Also based on Shimer
(2005), the monthly separation rate is given as 0034 and the monthly job finding rate as
045. These enable us to compute the quarterly separation rate  = 1 − (1 − 0034)3 =
00986 and the quarterly job finding rate  = 1 − (1 − 045)3 = 08336. From the
                                             
Beveridge curve, we can compute:  =        +    = 08943. By following Shimer (2005) to
normalize the vacancy-searching worker ratio (  ) as one, we can utilize the Beveridge
                                                                                
curve and (22) to calibrate  =  = 0834 and use (24) to obtain  =                = 01057.
Following Blanchard and Diamond (1990), we set the benchmark value of the worker
elasticity of matching as  = 04. Because the Hosios’ rule is a necessary condition for
eﬃcient bargains, we impose  =  = 04.
   Next, we follow Andolfatto (1995), setting  = 05. In Andolfatto, the marginal
utility from leisure accrued by the unemployed is ̃ = 137. In addition, we can
have a quick accounting of households’ time use to obtain a reasonable allocation of
time for work, learning and leisure at 20%, 8% and 72%, respectively. These together
with the calibrated value of  yield total units of time facing the large household
 = +(1−)+(1−) = 3167, equilibrium work eﬀort  = 0725 and equilibrium
leisure  = 215 (i.e., at the household level, the fractions of work, learning and leisure
            (1−)      (1−)
time are   ,         and    , respectively,      which match the respective targets).15
Thus,  =                 −1
            −137 · (215) = −0064.
   Moreover, from the definitions of   and  , we can write:
                                             
                           =        =                 =   ()
                                      08943 · 0725
                                  (1 − )           1−
                           =               =                  =   ()
                                  (1 − )    08943 · 0275

which can be substituted into (18) to yield:
                                                1−
                                     () =      ()
                                              


                                              27
                     h                i                              h                        i
                            (1−)̄                                                   + 
While  = (1 −   ) 1 +               is a given number,  () = (1 −   ) −              is a
function of  alone. Since human capital investment is expected to be more human
capital-intensive than goods production (i.e.,    = 028), we set the benchmark
value of  = 025.16 From (48) and (26), we have:
                                  ¡      ¢                 
                                e   ()  =
                              +
                                                        (1 − )

                                                 ¡ ¢
             + (1 + ) = { + (1 − )[ +  e    ]}[ + (1 − )̄]
                                             
                         = { + (1 − )           }[ + (1 − )̄]
                                          (1 − )

From the latter expression, we solve (), which can then be plugged into the former to
       e
derive () These can then be substituted into (11) and (31) to obtain, respectively:

                      (1 −   ) ¡  ¢1− h       e
                                                              ¡       ¢ i
          () =                     ()   () + ()(1 − )   ()
                               e
                   (1 −   ) ()
                                         ∙                ¸
                                                  ()
                         () =           (1 − ) − 
                                ( + )            ()
By writing (21), (49) and (50), we now get, respectively:
                              £                            ¤         
                       () =     − (1 −   ) (1 − )̄ +   
                                                                     
                               n  ¡      ¢                          o
                       () =     () [(1 − ) − ] − ()
                     
                           ¡                       ¢             
                     () =  () +  ()  ()  + () + ()
                                                                  
The above expressions can then be substituted into (30) to compute  = 09981.
Thus, in this calibrated economy, most of the physical capital inputs are used for
goods production. By plugging the calibrated value of  into the above functions of
, we can then compute:   = 1539,   = 0007908,  = 01648,  = 001779,
e = 0001715,  = 3631,  = 001033,  = 001588, and  = 005977. Thus,
                                                       
the lump-sum government and firm profit redistributions and household consumption
are about 86%, 123%, and 500%, respectively, in our benchmark economy. We can
further plug in the value of  into (29) to compute ∆ = 07161.
   We summarize the observables, benchmark parameter values and calibrated values
of key endogenous variables in Table 1. To ensure the working of each channel discussed


                                                 28
in the theory, we simulate the benchmark model to examine quantitatively the eﬀects
of two factor tax rates (  and   ) on an array of endogenous variables of interest,
including the balanced growth rate (), eﬀective consumption (), the physical-
human capital ratio (), eﬀective output (), employment (), work eﬀort ()
the wage (), the wage discount (∆), the workers’ job finding rate (), the firms’
employee recruitment rate (), and firms’ vacancies (). The results obtained based on
the responses of these endogenous variables around the balanced growth equilibrium
to a 10% increase in each of the factor tax rates are reported in Table 2.
   In our calibrated economy, we can now quantify the eﬀects of the two factor tax
rates (  and   ) on the bargained wage and the wage discount in our calibrated
economy. A higher capital tax is found to lower the bargained wage and to raise
the wage discount slightly, whereas a higher labor tax raises the bargained (pre-tax)
wage rate but lowers the wage discount. While both factor taxes discourage vacancy
creation and suppress employment, the negative eﬀects of capital taxation are much
stronger than those of labor taxation. In response to either capital or labor taxation,
                                                    
the market becomes tighter to workers (i.e.,  =       is lower) and hence it is easier for
firms to recruit but harder for workers to locate jobs. Either tax suppresses learning
eﬀort and the balanced growth rate, as well as the after-tax capital rental rate and the
after-tax eﬀective wage rate. Since factor taxation has a stronger negative eﬀect on
the taxed factor, the physical-human capital ratio falls in response to higher capital
taxation, but rises in response to higher labor taxation. Our numerical results also
suggest that a higher capital tax rate reduces output and consumption more than
proportionately than human capital, whereas labor taxation suppresses human capital
more than proportionately than output. Furthermore, since factor taxation encourages
a shift from market to tax-exempt nonmarket activity, it partly oﬀsets the distortion
on households’ incentives to accumulate human capital. This, together with a small
                                             e implies that the  locus is not too
calibrated value of the technology parameter ,
responsive to changes in the factor taxes. On the contrary, either tax increase reduces
firm eﬃciency, thus implying a sizable downward shift in the   locus. Our numerical
results suggest that capital taxation induces a larger shift in the   locus. As a result,
capital taxation causes a larger drop in employment and balanced growth compared
to labor taxation.



                                            29
6.2     Factor Tax Incidence under Flat Taxes

We are now prepared to conduct tax incidence analysis in our endogenously growing
economy. In particular, we change the composition of the two factor tax rates by
keeping the government revenue unchanged.


6.2.1    Benchmark

Under the pre-existing rates (     ) = (20% 20%), the eﬀective lump-sum tax is
computed as ( )∗ = 00103. This benchmark value will be kept constant and the
government budget constraint (21) will remain balanced in our revenue-neutral tax-
incidence exercises.
    We next compute the social welfare measure along the BGP. Setting 0 = 0 = 1,
we can calculate the lifetime utility as follows:17
                     ∙                                                                  ¸
                 1+                                             1
 Ω(     ) =       ln( (     )) +  (1 − (     )) + ln(1 + (     )) (35)
                                                                

where eﬀective consumption is given by (50) with   = ( )∗ . In short, social
welfare is mainly driven by three endogenous variables: eﬀective consumption (  ),
leisure (1 − ) and the economy-wide balanced growth rate (), all of which depend
on factor tax rates (     ).
    Figure 4 plots the tax incidence results. From Table 2, an increase in either the
capital tax or the labor tax rate from its benchmark value of 20% leads to higher
eﬀective consumption as a result of a larger reduction in human capital. The eﬀect of
a shift from labor to capital taxation on eﬀective consumption turns out to be hump-
shaped and peaked at around   = 2057%. In contrast, a shift from labor to capital
taxation always reduces growth. Moreover, there is an eﬀect via leisure. Combining
all together, we find that our welfare measure (the lifetime utility of a household) is
hump-shaped and maximized at ( ∗   ∗ ) = (1611% 2409%). That is, in the absence
of other tax alternatives, the socially optimal factor tax mix requires a decrease in
the capital tax rate in conjunction with an increase in the labor tax rate from their
benchmark values. Such a tax reform will lead to a 0203% increase in economic
growth and a 0016% increase in welfare, which is a 0039% increase in consumption
equivalence. Moreover, one may ask how much the welfare loss is if one would set the
capital tax rate at zero. Our quantitative analysis suggests such a loss is in the order

                                             30
of 0649% in consumption equivalence. Our finding that the optimal capital tax rate is
significantly larger than zero is in contrast to the conventional tax incidence literature
within both the exogenous and endogenous growth frameworks.

Quantitative Result 1. For the tax incidence exercises in response to a shift from la-
bor to capital taxation, eﬀective consumption and welfare are both hump-shaped whereas
economic growth and leisure are both decreasing. Under the benchmark parametriza-
tion, the optimal tax mix features a moderate shift from capital to labor taxation but
the optimal capital tax rate is far above zero.

   It is important to understand the numerically dominant channel underlying this
finding: the vacancy creation-market participation channel with endogenous human
capital in a non-Walrasian economy with labor market frictions. Specifically, if initially
the capital tax rate is too low, then a higher tax on capital income accompanied by
a revenue-neutral reduction in the labor tax turns out to raise the (endogenous) wage
discount and to encourage firms to create more vacancies. This in turn raises the
(endogenous) job finding rate and hence induces workers to more actively participate
in the labor market to seek employment. Because this leads to positive eﬀects on
employment and output growth under endogenous human capital accumulation, a
shift from a zero to a positive capital tax rate becomes welfare-improving, thereby
yielding a policy recommendation diﬀerent from that of Chamley-Judd-Lucas.
   It is noted that under the Chamley (1986) framework with a representative house-
hold, Straub and Werning (2014) showed that when capital taxation is not subject
to an upper bound, the optimal capital tax rate is zero and that a positive optimal
capital tax can be obtained when there is a bound. In contrast, we establish a positive
optimal capital tax rate without any of such bound. Admittedly, a full analysis of the
quantitative eﬀect would require incorporation of the Straub-Werning arguments to
our model, which is by no means straightforward but certainly beyond the scope of
the present paper.


6.2.2   Sensitivity Analysis

While our pre-set parameters in the calibration exercises are all justified basically, some
of the calibration criteria may be open to discussion. We therefore perform sensitivity
analysis to check the robustness of our results. In particular, we consider the following

                                            31
alternatives:

(i) We allow the worker elasticity of matching, , to take alternative values used in
      the literature, including 0235 (Hall 2005), 054 (Hall and Milgrom 2008) and
      072 (Shimer 2005).

(ii) We allow the leisure parameter,  (which is a combination of the preference
      parameter ̃ and the intensity of enjoyment ()), to be 50% below and above
      its benchmark value.

(iii) We allow the labor-market tightness,  = (1−), the ratio of the unemployment
      compensation to the market wage, ̄, and the capital share of human capital
      accumulation, , to be 10% below and above their respective benchmark values.

(iv) We allow the amount of physical capital to be half or twice as large as the amount
      of human capital, i.e.,  = 05 2.

(v) We allow the pre-existing tax rates to take alternative values used in previous
      studies, (     ) = (35% 20%) (Judd 1987) and (     ) = (40% 36%) (Lucas
      1990).

The sensitivity analysis results are reported in Table 3.18
   When we recalibrate the model with diﬀerent capital shares of human capital accu-
mulation, or diﬀerent physical-human capital ratios, labor-market matching, bargain-
ing and human capital accumulation are either unchanged or changed only negligibly.
Thus, the wage discount eﬀect and the vacancy creation-market participation channel
are essentially identical to those in the benchmark case, thereby leaving the factor tax
incidence result largely unaﬀected.
   When we vary the worker elasticity of matching to take alternative values  =
{0235 054 072} used by Hall (2005), Hall and Milgrom (2008) and Shimer (2005),
respectively, the optimal capital tax rate ranges from 10% to 23%, all significantly
higher than zero. The higher the worker elasticity of matching is, the more impor-
tant workers contribute to labor-market matching. As a consequence, labor taxation
becomes more distortive and, eventually, when worker elasticity of matching is above
a threshold level ( about 056), the optimal tax mix features a shift from labor to
capital taxation.

                                              32
Quantitative Result 2. Within a reasonable parameter range, the optimal tax mix
always features a shift from capital to labor taxation compared to the pre-existing tax
rates and the optimal capital tax rate is always positive, regardless of the relative mag-
nitude of the bargaining share to the household () to the labor share in matching
production ().

    When the leisure parameter  is 50% above its benchmark value, the optimal tax
mix still features a shift from capital to labor taxation: ( ∗   ∗ ) = (2110% 1877%),
but such a shift is much smaller than the benchmark case. When the leisure para-
meter is 50% below its benchmark value, the optimal tax mix becomes: ( ∗   ∗ ) =
(934% 3047%), featuring a larger shift from capital to labor taxation but still with
a significantly positive tax on capital income. Notably, when  is suﬃciently large
in magnitude, for example twice as large as its benchmark value ( = −0064 · 2 =
−0128), the direct eﬀect of labor taxation on leisure is so strong that the detrimen-
tal eﬀect of a higher labor tax on the marginal benefit of the household in a wage
bargain is larger than that of a higher capital tax. Due to its greater distortion on
the wage discount, labor taxation becomes more harmful to welfare and the opti-
mal tax mix in this case turns out to feature a shift from labor to capital taxation:
( ∗   ∗ ) = (2501% 1403%).19
    When the labor-market tightness measure  is 10% higher than its benchmark
value, the labor market is less tight to workers. As workers become less vulnerable
to labor taxation, it is better to tax them. The optimal tax mix therefore features
a larger shift from capital to labor taxation: ( ∗   ∗ ) = (225% 3500%). On the
contrary, when  is 10% lower, workers become more vulnerable to labor taxation
and the optimal tax mix turns out to feature a shift from labor to capital taxation:
( ∗   ∗ ) = (3278% 123%). As one can see, when the labor-market tightness measure
is further away from its benchmark value, the optimal tax mix will feature complete
elimination of either capital taxation (with much less tightness to workers) or labor
taxation (with much greater tightness to workers).
    Our quantitative results are not too sensitive to either the unemployment compensation-
market wage ratio ̄ or the capital share of human capital accumulation . When ̄
is 10% higher, it is required that the government raises both tax rates in order to
maintain a balanced budget. Relatively speaking, however, the overall distortion of  



                                             33
reduces because of better insurance provision against the unemployment state. There-
fore, the optimal tax mix becomes: ( ∗   ∗ ) = (1603% 2412%), which features a
marginally larger shift from capital to labor taxation. When  is 10% higher, more
capital is required for human capital accumulation. Since education/learning is fully
tax-exempt, the overall distortion of   is lower. In this case, the optimal tax mix
is: ( ∗   ∗ ) = (1644% 2375%), featuring a marginally smaller shift from capital to
labor taxation.
   Finally, when pre-existing tax rates take the values used by Judd (1987) at (     ) =
(35% 20%) with a much higher capital tax rate initially, the optimal tax mix turns
out to be very close to the pre-existing mix: ( ∗   ∗ ) = (3497% 2004%), featuring a
quantitatively negligible shift from capital to labor taxation. When both of the pre-
existing tax rates take higher values (     ) = (40% 36%) as used by Lucas (1990),
the optimal factor tax mix becomes: ( ∗   ∗ ) = (4275% 3208%), now featuring a
small shift from labor to capital taxation. In both cases, it is still optimal to tax
capital as in the benchmark economy and in the latter case replacing labor by capital
taxation actually enhances welfare. Because the pre-existing factor tax distortions are
almost optimal, the welfare gains from the respective tax reforms are very small.


6.3   Dynamic Tax Incidence

We turn next to calibrating the two factor tax schedules proposed in Section 5 above.
The initial tax rates are given at the pre-existing levels ( 0   0 ) = (20% 20%),
which satisfy the IR locus with the replacement ratio ̄ fixed at 042. The long-run
asymptotic factor tax rates are given by their optimal values in the benchmark case:
( ∗   ∗ ) = (1611% 2409%). To ensure the robustness of our benchmark results under
flat taxes, we consider various transitional tax schemes:

(i) (Case 1)   converges monotonically from 20% to 1611%:   = 01611+00389·
      −00637· ,   = 02409 − 00409 · −005931256· ;

(ii) (Case 2)   drops instantaneously from 20% to 10% and  1 jumps instanta-
      neously from 20% to 2869% and then converge monotonically to their opti-
      mal values in the benchmark case:   = 01611 − 00611 ∗ −00728· ,   =
      02409 + 004598475 ∗ −00821716· ;


                                               34
(iii) (Case 3)   drops instantaneously from 20% to 5% and  1 jumps instanta-
     neously from 20% to 3208% and then converge monotonically to their opti-
     mal values in the benchmark case:   = 01611 − 01111 ∗ −00847· ,   =
     02409 + 007993234 ∗ −0097084646· ;

(iv) (Case 4)   drops instantaneously from 20% to 0 and  1 jumps instantaneously
     from 20% to 3502% and then converge monotonically to their optimal values in
     the benchmark case:   = 01611−01611∗−00922· ,   = 02409+010934954∗
     −01067882· .

(v) (Case 5)   drops instantaneously from 20% to −10% (i.e., capital subsidy) and
      1 jumps instantaneously from 20% to 3989% and then converge monotonically
     to their optimal values in the benchmark case:   = 01611 − 02611 ∗ −01018· ,
       = 02409 + 015795212 ∗ −011960536· .

In all cases, (     ) satisfy the IR locus. Moreover, we determine the converging
speed such that the gap between the initial and the asymptotic levels of both tax rates
to be 1% of their respective long-run values in the 50th period.
   To compare welfare along the transitional path with that in the BGP equilibrium,
we denote e
                                                             
           as the BGP level of eﬀective consumption and  (     ) as the cor-
responding values along the transitional path. We approximate lifetime utility up to
the 50th period and use the following equation to derive the consumption equivalence
() measure:
                          50 µ       ¶ " "                  ##
                         X       1          (1 + ) e   
                                                          
                                         ln                    =0
                         =0
                               1 +          (     )
We compute the consumption equivalence in the five cases, which are:

(i) (Case 1)  = 04385%;

(ii) (Case 2)  = 04905%;

(iii) (Case 3)  = 06385%;

(iv) (Case 4)  = 07576%;

(v) (Case 5)  = 09347%.



                                            35
Thus, the highest welfare is reached when the capital tax rate is negative in period 1
(capital subsidy), gradually rising to the long-run optimal tax level.
    Intuitively, the unemployment compensation is essential for the extensive mar-
gin of labor force decision, which is fixed in the transition. While the labor income
tax is crucial for both intratemporal work-learning eﬀort trade-oﬀ and intertemporal
human capital accumulation, the capital income tax aﬀects critically both intratempo-
ral physical capital allocation and intertemporal physical capital accumulation. Our
quantitative analysis suggests that, along the transition, the eﬀect of   on eﬀective
consumption is negative, whereas that of   is basically negligible. As a result, the
detrimental eﬀect of the capital tax outweighs that of the labor tax. Therefore, the
tax incidence of changing the mix of capital and labor taxes is in favor of taxing more
heavily on labor income while subsidizing capital to minimize the harmful impact of
capital taxation. This dynamic tax incidence result is in contrary to that in Chamley
(1986), wherein in early periods the government raises revenues on existing capital
as much as possible, while the government generates revenues only by taxing wage
income in the long run. Nonetheless, even in this best case scenario, the welfare gain
compared to flat tax is modest, only 07576% in consumption equivalence.


7    Extensions
To better understand the key factors driving the main results, we now check various
setups, labeled as Models I-VI, that may potentially change the relative distortion of
capital and labor taxes. The first is devoted to studying the role played by endogenous
leisure, whereas the second to understanding whether zero capital taxation at optimum
may still hold under the linear human capital setup proposed by Lucas (1990). In
the next two exercises, we try to diﬀerentiate the role between endogenous human
capital and endogenous growth. We then examine the importance of labor market
frictions by investigating the case of a frictionless Walrasian economy, followed by the
consideration of a third instrument beyond factor taxation — the replacement ratio.
Table 4 summarizes the main tax incidence results.




                                          36
7.1   Model I: Inelastic Leisure

In the benchmark model with endogenous labor-leisure choice, labor-related decisions
become more elastic, implying that the tax on labor income is more distortionary than
the case with inelastic leisure. While this labor participation response is tied to the
labor-leisure trade-oﬀ, just how important such a channel is to the optimal tax mix
outcome is a quantitative matter.
   To check the robustness of our quantitative findings, we consider the case of inelastic
leisure with  = 0. By performing tax incidence analysis, we find that the optimal tax
mix ( ∗   ∗ ) is now at (905% 3133%), featuring a sizable shift from capital to labor
taxation (though the optimal capital tax rate is still far above zero). This suggests that,
by removing the labor-leisure trade-oﬀ, taxing labor becomes quantitatively much less
harmful. In this case, a tax reform will lead to a nonnegligible welfare gain of 020%
(in consumption equivalence).

Quantitative Result 3. The optimal capital tax is positive even by removing the
labor-leisure trade-oﬀ. By removing such a trade-oﬀ, however, it is optimal to shift
more tax burden to labor income.


7.2   Model II: Linear Human Capital Accumulation Function

In the benchmark case, we assume that human capital and physical capital are both
required for human capital accumulation. Now we consider an alternative setup of
human capital formation where only human capital is used as an input (the Lucasian
                                                                              e =0
human capital formation). One can think of this as a special case of (2) with 
and  = 1, that is,
                                +1 −  =  (1 −  )

   The modified optimization and BGP conditions are presented in the Appendix.
In this case, the calibrated value of  is fairly close to the benchmark setup ( =
00182), whereas the calibrated bargaining share to household parameter is moderately
higher ( = 03254). Recall that human capital production is fully tax-exempt. When
market goods (physical capital) are no longer inputs to human capital accumulation,
the entirety of physical capital must be subject to taxation. As a consequence, the
overall distortion of   rises and the optimal tax mix now features a larger shift from


                                             37
capital to labor taxation: ( ∗   ∗ ) = (499% 4668%), which generates a larger welfare
gain of 15407% (in consumption equivalence), compared to the benchmark case. Thus,
elimination of the interactions between physical and human capital in the process of
human capital accumulation tends to lower the distortion of labor taxation relative to
capital taxation. Nonetheless, the optimal tax mix still features a positive capital tax
rate even under this simple Lucasian form of human capital accumulation.

Quantitative Result 4. Under a simple Lucasian form of human capital accumula-
tion, the optimal capital tax is still positive but at a lower rate than in the benchmark
economy.


7.3   Model III: Exogenous Human Capital

We next diﬀerentiate the role between endogenous human capital and endogenous
growth. To begin, we consider the case of exgenous human capital, which can be
viewed as one capturing the case discussed in Domeij (2005) where the Hosios’ rule is
met. This is equivalent to setting  = 1  = 1  = 1 and  = 0, while eliminating
the human capital accumulation equation (2), the nonmarket eﬀective capital-labor
ratio   and the associated condition (11). By performing tax incidence analysis,
the optimal tax mix ( ∗   ∗ ) is now at (0% 4255%). That is, at optimum, capital
taxation is fully replaced by labor taxation, indicating that endogenous human capital
is essential for obtaining a positive optimal capital tax rate.

Quantitative Result 5. In a model with exogenous human capital, it is optimal to
fully eliminate capital taxation by taxing only labor income.

   The essential role of endogenous human is readily understood. Without it, search
and matching frictions under Hosios’ rule is not enough to make labor taxation more
distortionary than capital taxation, as argued by Domeij (2005). With endogenous
human capital, we incorporate three additional quantitatively important channels of
labor tax distortion: one via the growth eﬀect of human capital accumulation, the
second via capital-labor reallocation in the education sector, and the third via the
endogenous wage discount influenced by the interactions between the vacancy creation-
market participation channel and the human capital channel. These quantitatively
over-turn the finding of full elimination of capital taxation.


                                             38
7.4    Model IV: Exogenous Growth with Endogenous Human Capital

We have learned from Quantitative Result 5 that endogenous human capital is cru-
cial for the positive optimal capital taxation finding. One may now inquire whether
endogenous growth is essential. This can be checked by fixing the growth rate at a
given benchmark value,  = 00045, when we conduct tax incidence exercises. In this
case, we still allow human capital to be endogenously accumulated. We find that the
optimal tax mix ( ∗   ∗ ) is at (1619% 2401%), featuring a shift from capital to labor
taxation with the optimal capital tax rate slightly above its benchmark counterpart
(1611%). This result can be understood by examining Figure 4 where capital taxa-
tion is more harmful for economic growth than labor taxation; thus, by setting the
growth rate at an exogenous level, one may tax capital more (though only marginally
higher). In this case, a tax reform has a slightly smaller welfare gain of 003889% (in
consumption equivalence), compared to the benchmark case. Nonetheless, our finding
indicates that endogenous growth alone is inconsequential for the optimal capital tax
rate to be positive.

Quantitative Result 6. In an exogenous growth model with endogenous human
capital accumulation, the optimal capital tax is positive and at a higher rate than in
the benchmark economy.


7.5    Model V: Walrasian Economy

To highlight the role played by labor-market frictions, we investigate the tax incidence
outcome in a frictionless Walrasian economy with full employment. By construction,
 = 1 and hence there is no labor-leisure trade-oﬀ (i.e., (1 − ) = 0). The modified
optimization and BGP conditions are presented in the Appendix. By comparing it with
the optimal tax mix result in our benchmark case, the role of labor-market frictions
can be identified. Specifically, we find that the optimal tax mix becomes: ( ∗   ∗ ) =
(0% 2751%), which restores the Lucasian policy recommendation — the optimal tax
mix in the Lucas (1990) case is ( ∗   ∗ ) = (0% 46%) based on higher pre-existing tax
rates (     ) = (40% 36%). Thus, even in a human capital-based endogenous growth
model, one should replace capital taxation fully by labor taxation if the labor market
is frictionless. This suggests that labor-market frictions are essential for obtaining a
diﬀerent tax incidence conclusion from previous studies.

                                             39
Quantitative Result 7. In a model with a Walrasian frictionless labor market, it is
optimal to fully eliminate capital taxation by taxing only labor income.


7.6   Model VI: An Alternative Instrument

Thus far, our model only allows for two tax instruments, namely, capital and labor
income taxes. We turn now to adding a third instrument, namely the replacement
ratio while maintaining eﬀective lump-sum transfer to households as in the bench-
mark to ensure government revenue-neutral. We find an optimal replacement ratio
at ̄∗ = 0577, which is 157 percentage points higher than its benchmark value. The
corresponding optimal capital and labor tax rates are ( ∗   ∗ ) = (1596% 2405%).
Thus, compared to the benchmark, a higher replacement ratio at optimum does require
a bit more labor but less capital tax to finance. Even with the optimal replacement
ratio as a third instrument, our main conclusion is that the socially optimal factor tax
mix requires a shift from the capital to the labor tax, though it is never optimal to
completely eliminate the capital tax.


7.7   Summary

The above exercises promote better understanding of the key drivers of the factor
tax incidence results. While endogenous human capital and labor market frictions
are essential for the conclusion of a positive optimal capital tax, endogenous leisure,
nonlinear human capital accumulation and endogenous growth are not crucial.


8     Concluding Remarks
In this paper, we have developed a human capital-based endogenous growth framework
with labor market search and matching frictions that permit individuals to participate
in the labor force voluntarily. By conducting tax incidence exercises quantitatively, we
have found that it is never optimal to set the capital tax rate to zero when both physical
and human capital are used as inputs of human capital accumulation. We have also
found that, in the benchmark case with physical capital entering the human capital
accumulation process and with a pre-existing flat rate of 20% on both capital and
labor income, a partial shift from capital to labor taxation maximizes social welfare


                                           40
— this main finding is robust to diﬀerent parameterization as well as to alternative
setups with inelastic leisure, or with a Lucasian human capital accumulation process
that is independent of market goods (physical capital), or with exogenous growth. The
main drivers leading to a positive optimal capital tax are endogenous human capital in
conjunction with frictional labor markets. Our results suggest that, in order to enhance
social welfare, a proper tax reform must take into account labor market frictions. When
such frictions are substantial, fully replacing capital with labor income taxation can
be welfare-retarding. This main conclusion is robust even along the transition and by
considering optimal replacement ratio of unemployment compensation.
   For future research along these lines, it is perhaps most interesting to incorporate
a pecuniary vacancy creation cost that requires capital financing. In the presence of
credit market frictions as a result of private information, such a financing constraint
is anticipated to increase the capital tax distortion. On the contrary, one may also
extend the model to allow the separation rate to depend on on-the-job learning eﬀort
(as in Mortensen 1988). Since the labor income tax discourages on-the-job learning, it
is anticipated that such a generalization may cause the labor tax to be more distorted.
Thus, both extensions call for a revisit of tax incidence exercises: while the former may
favor a shift from taxing capital to taxing labor income, the latter may yield opposite
policy outcomes.




                                           41
   NOTES
    1. Equivalently, the externality can be thought of as arising from one additional
firm with a vacancy which increases the probability that a job-seeker will match with a
firm but decreases the probability that firms with vacancies already posted will match
with a job-seeker.
    2. There is a recent strand in the literature on optimal taxation which does not
incorporate human capital, but instead considers nonlinear labor taxation, alterna-
tive non-factor taxes, incentive problems and/or political economy. Its focus is very
diﬀerent from ours.
    3. See Jacobson, LaLonde and Sullivan (1993) and Laing, Palivos and Wang (2003)
for a further discussion of the human capital depreciation of displaced workers. We
could follow Chen, Chen and Wang (2011) to consider a general setting of human
capital formation with the unemployed workers allowed to accumulate human capital.
While the analysis becomes much more complicated, our main findings remain valid.
    4. In line with the literature, we rule out double taxation assuming profit redistri-
bution is tax-exempt. Moreover, in the interest of factor tax incidence, we shall not
add other types of taxes such as consumption taxes, as such an addition would not
cause major change in the relative advantage of the factor taxes.
    5. Although the setup of () is not important in our theoretical analysis, it is
crucial for calibrating the value of leisure.
    6. We note that the second-order conditions and the concavity property of the
value functions for the household’s and firm’s optimization are rather complex, which
are relegated to the Appendix.
    7. Again, we relegate the second-order condition of the wage bargaining problem
to the Appendix.
    8. In balanced growth equilibrium to be defined below with constant factor tax
rates, allowing for debt financing would not make any diﬀerence, as this does not create
a motive for a saving distortion.
    9. Suppose the utility function takes a constant elasticity of intertemporal substi-
tution form. It can be easily verified that, should this elasticity be diﬀerent from one,
(10) would violate the BGP requirements.
    10. We suspect that a key assumption leading to a positive optimal capital tax is
that workers are hand to mouth without saving. This is because, in such a case, the
detrimental eﬀect of capital taxation is dampened.
    11. Since the wage herein is determined by cooperative bargaining, it is not easy
to derive a clean condition as in the Walrasian framework of Bond, Wang and Yip
(1996).
    12. While the "simple tax structure" approach via elasticities of changes in income
tax rates in models with heterogeneous agents (e.g., Saez, 2001) provides a simple link
between optimal tax formulas and elasticities of earnings familiar to empirical studies,
our model uses the approach that follows from Judd (1985), Chamley (1986) and Lucas


                                           42
(1990). Our approach is standard in the study of the optimal Ramsey tax in models
with homogeneous agents.
    13. All the conditions imposed (Conditions G, LC and FP) will be verified in our
calibrated benchmark economy.
    14. In our quantitative analysis, we have targeted our model to the U.S. economy;
we thus choose the initital tax rates at (20% 20%) which subsequently provides an
eﬀective government revenue based on which our revene-neutral tax incidence exercises
are conducted. It should be noted that without pre-existing factor tax distoration, it
remains best not to tax factor incomes, consistent with our theoretical results presented
in Proposition 5.
    15. For detailed data documentation on labor and time allocation, the reader is
referred to Chen, Chen and Wang (2011).
    16. For  and other preset parameters, sensitivity analysis will be conducted to
check the robustness of our findings.
    17. See the proof in Chen, Chen and Wang (2011) in a similar context of welfare
computation.
    18. In some cases, we do not report the welfare loss from setting   = 0, because
there is no    1 to maintain revenue neutral.
    19. We shall relegate the discussion of the inelastic leisure case ( = 0) to the next
section.




                                           43
References
 [1] Andolfatto, David (1996), “Business Cycles and Labor-Market Search,” American
     Economic Review, 86: 112-132.

 [2] Blanchard, Oliver and Peter Diamond (1990), “The Cyclical Behavior of the Gross
     Flows of U.S. Workers,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2: 85-143.

 [3] Bond, Eric, Ping Wang and Chong K. Yip (1996), “A General Two-Sector Model
     of Endogenous Growth with Human and Physical Capital: Balanced Growth and
     Transitional Dynamics,” Journal of Economic Theory, 68: 149-173.

 [4] Chamley, Christophe (1985a), “Eﬃcient Tax Reform in a Dynamic Model of Gen-
     eral Equilibrium,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 100: 335-356.

 [5] Chamley, Christophe (1985b), “Eﬃcient Taxation in a Stylized Model of Intertem-
     poral General Equilibrium,” International Economic Review, 26: 451-468.

 [6] Chamley, Christophe (1986), “Optimal Taxation of Capital Income in General
     Equilibrium with Infinite Lives,” Econometrica, 54: 607-622.

 [7] Chen, Been-Lon (2007), “Factor Taxation and Labor Supply in a Dynamic One-
     Sector Growth Model,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 31: 3941-
     3964.

 [8] Chen, Been-Lon, Hung-Ju Chen and Ping Wang (2011), “Labor-Market Frictions,
     Human Capital Accumulation, and Long-Run Growth: Positive Analysis and
     Policy Evaluation,” International Economic Review, 52: 131-160.

 [9] Chen, Been-Lon and Chia-Hui Lu (2013), “Optimal Factor Tax Incidence in Two-
     sector Human Capital-based Models,” Journal of Public Economics, 97: 75-94.

[10] Diamond, Peter A. (1982a) “Aggregate Demand Management in Search Equilib-
     rium,” Journal of Political Economy, 90: 881-894.

[11] Diamond, Peter A. (1982b), “Wage Determination and Eﬃciency in Search Equi-
     librium,” Review of Economic Studies, 49: 217-227.

[12] Domeij, David (2005), “Optimal capital taxation and labor market search,” Re-
     view of Economic Dynamics, 8: 623-650.

[13] Guo, Jang-Ting and Kevin J. Lansing (1999), “Optimal Taxation of Capital In-
     come with Imperfectly Competitive Product Markets,” Journal of Economic Dy-
     namics and Control, 23: 967-995.

[14] Hall, Robert E. (2005), “Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stick-
     iness,” American Economic Review, 95: 50-65.


                                        44
[15] Hall, Robert E. and Paul R. Milgrom (2008), “The Limited Influence of Unem-
     ployment on the Wage Bargain,” American Economic Review, 98: 1653-1674.

[16] Hosios, Arthur J. (1990), “On the Eﬃciency of Matching and Related Models of
     Search and Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies, 57: 279-298.

[17] Jacobson, Louis S., Robert J. LaLonde and Daniel Sullivan (1993), “Earnings
     Losses of Displaced Workers,” American Economic Review, 83: 685-709.

[18] Jones, Larry E., Rodolfo E. Manuelli and Peter E. Rossi (1993), “Optimal Taxa-
     tion in Models of Endogenous Growth,” Journal of Political Economy, 101: 485-
     517.

[19] Jones, Larry E., Rodolfo E. Manuelli and Peter E. Rossi (1997), “On the Optimal
     Taxation of Capital Income,” Journal of Economic Theory, 73: 93-117.

[20] Judd, Kenneth L. (1985), “Redistributive Taxation in a Simple Perfect Foresight
     Model,” Journal of Public Economics, 28: 59 83.

[21] Judd, Kenneth L. (1987), “The Welfare Cost of Factor Taxation in a Perfect
     Foresight Model,” Journal of Political Economy, 95: 675-709.

[22] Kendrick, John W. (1976), The Formation and Stocks of Total Capital, New York:
     Columbia University Press.

[23] Lansing, Kevin (1999) “Optimal redistributive capital taxation in a neoclassical
     growth model,” Journal of Public Economics 73, 423—453.

[24] King, Robert and Sergio Rebelo (1990), “Public Policy and Economic Growth:
     Developing Neoclassical Implications,” Journal of Political Economy, 98: S126-
     S150.

[25] Laing, Derek, Theodore Palivos and Ping Wang (1995), “Learning, Matching, and
     Growth,” Review of Economic Studies, 62: 115-129.

[26] Laing, Derek, Theodore Palivos and Ping Wang (2003), “The Economics of New
     Blood,” Journal of Economic Theory, 112: 106-156.

[27] Lu, Chia-Hui and Been-Lon Chen (2015), "Optimal Capital Taxation in a Neo-
     classical Growth Model," Journal of Public Economic Theory, 17: 257-269.

[28] Lucas, Robert E. Jr. (1988), “On the Mechanics of Economic Development,”
     Journal of Monetary Economics, 22: 3-42.

[29] Lucas, Robert E. Jr. (1990),“Supply-side Economics: An Analytical Review,”
     Oxford Economic Papers, 42: 293-316.



                                         45
[30] Merz, Monika (1995), “Search in the Labor Market and the Real Business Cycle,”
     Journal of Monetary Economics, 36: 269—300.

[31] Mino, Kazuo (1996), “Analysis of a Two-Sector Model of Endogenous Growth
     with Capital Income Taxation,” International Economic Review, 37: 227-251.

[32] Mortensen, Dale T. (1982), “Property Rights and Eﬃciency in Mating, Racing
     and Related Games,” American Economic Review, 72: 968-969.

[33] Pissarides, Christopher A. (1984), “Eﬃcient Job Rejection,” Economic Journal,
     94: S97-S108.

[34] Reis, Catarina (2011), “Entrepreneurial Labor and Capital Taxation,” Macroeco-
     nomic Dynamics, 15: 326—335.

[35] Saez, Emmanuel (2001), “Using Elasticities to Derive Optimal Income Tax Rates,”
     Review of Economic Studies, 68: 205—229.

[36] Shimer, Robert (2005), “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment
     and Vacancies,” American Economic Review, 95: 25-49.

[37] Stokey, Nancy L. and Sergio Rebelo (1995), “Growth Eﬀects of Flat-Rate Taxes,”
     Journal of Political Economy, 103: 519-550.

[38] Straub, Ludwig and Ivan Werning (2014), “Positive Long Run Capital Taxation:
     Chamley-Judd Revisited”, NBER Working Paper 20441.




                                        46
9     Appendix
(Not Intended for Publication)

    In the Appendix, we provide mathematical details of the second-order conditions
of household/firm optimization and wage bargaining, the concavity of household/firm
value functions, quasi-socail planner’s optimization, the centralized solution by coordi-
nating labor matching and wage bargain, dynamic taxation, as well as the Alternative
Models II (linear human capital accumulation) and III (Walrasian).


9.1   Second-Order Conditions
The second-order conditions of firm’s optimization with respect to  and  are (to ease
notation burden, we carry time subscript  only for perpetually growing variables):

                                2 Γ( )      2
                                          =        Γ (+1 )  0
                                 ( )2    1 + ̄
                                             µ     ¶
                      2 Γ( )               −1
                            2 =   ( − 1)        ( )−2  0
                      ( )                   

which hold automatically under our functional form specifications.
    The second-order conditions of household’s optimization with respect to  ,  and
 are:
                                           1
                         Ω (H) =  +       Ω (H0 )  0
                                         1+

                          n                                                 h           ¡  ¢ i       o
Ω (H) =                                                                           e
                  {(1-  ) Ω (H0 )(1-  )   -[Ω (H0 )+Ω (H0 )] +(1-)           
            1+
                                     ¡  ¢−1                        h           ¡  ¢ i2
                              e
                   −Ω (H0 )(1-)                                      e
                                                  +1 ( )+Ω (H0 ) +(1-)             }  0


                                 h                                              ¡ ¢ i
    Ω (H) =                                                                  e   −1
                    {(1-  )  Ω (H0 )(1-  ) -[Ω (H0 )+Ω (H0 )]  
                1+
                                       ¡  ¢−2                        h     ¡ ¢ i2
                              e
                    −Ω (H0 )(-1)                                    e   −1 }  0
                                                  +1 ( )+Ω (H0 )      


which also hold under our functional form specifications and parameterization in the
benchmark model.
    Finally, we turn to the second-order condition of wage bargaining. From (30), it is
easily see that    0 and    0, thus assuring the second-order condition:
(  −   )  0.




                                                i
9.2     Wage Bargaining
The bargained wage rate and the equilibrium wage can be derived by solving the
following quadratic equation:

    (1-)1 2 + {  [(1-)1 +]- 2 (1-)} −   [(1-)2 + (1-) ] = 0
             (1−  )(1−̄)+                   −[ +(+ )]
where 1 =       (1−  )(1−̄)
                                     0 and 2 =       (1−  )(1−̄)
                                                                           0.


9.3     Concavity of Household and Firm Value Functions
The concavity of the value function Γ( ) in firm’s optimization is easily confirmed as:

             2 Γ( )             ¡  ¢−1             (1 − )2
                       = (1 − )         +1
                                                 ( ) +          Γ ( +1 )  0
             ( )2                 
                                                           1 + ̄

    The concavity of the value function Ω(H) in household’s optimization is not as
trivial, as it requires the Hessian matrix of Ω(H)
                                     ⎛              ⎞
                                        Ω Ω Ω
                                     ⎜              ⎟
                                     ⎜              ⎟
                                Ω ≡ ⎜ Ω Ω Ω ⎟
                                     ⎝              ⎠
                                        Ω Ω Ω

to be negative semidefinite. We can easily show:
            1 −   + (1 −   )                                                       ¡ ¢
Ω (H) =                                                                               e   −1 }
                                    {Ω (H0 )[1−  +(1−  )  ]+Ω (H0 )(1− )  
                    1+
Under our parameterization in the benchmark model, Ω ()  0.
  By exhaustive manipulations, we have:
                                     1
                       Ω (H) =        ( 1 +  2 +  3 +  4)
                                    1+
where
                ©                              ª2
 1 = Ω (H0 ) (1-  ) [  +(1-)̄ ]  0
                                              ¡  ¢ 2
                                     e
 2 = Ω (H0 ){1+ (1- )[+(1-)          ]}  0
                                      ¡    ¢ −1 
                           e
 3 = Ω (H0 ) (1 −  )(1-)             +1 ( )  0
                                                                                     ¡  ¢
                                                                              e
 4 = [Ω (H0 ) + Ω (H0 )](1-  ) [  +(1- )̄ ]{1+ (1- )[+(1-)   ]}  0

Under our parameterization in the benchmark model, Ω (H)  0. Additional ex-
haustive manipulations yield:
                       1
         Ω (H) =        ( 5 +  6 +  7 +  8 +  9 +  10 +  11)
                      1+

                                               ii
where

       5 = Ω (H0 )[(1-  )  ( -̄ )]2  0
                                                   ¡  ¢ 2
                                        e
       6 = Ω (H0 ){(1- ) [+(1-)           ]}  0
                                           ¡     ¢ −1
       7 = Ω (H0 )(1- )f
                              (1-)                
                                                       +1 ( )  0
       8 = Ω (H0 )(1-- )2  0
                                                                                ¡  ¢
                                                                         e
       9 = [Ω (H0 ) + Ω (H0 ](1-  )  ( -̄ )(1- ) [+(1-)   ]  0
    10 = [Ω (H0 ) + Ω (H0 )](1-  )  ( -̄ )(1-- )  0
                                                             ¡  ¢
                                                  e
    11 = [Ω (H0 ) + Ω (H0 )](1- ) [+(1-)          ](1-- )  0

Under our parameterization in the benchmark model, Ω ¯ (H)¯  0. The 2 × 2 principal
minors of  need be all positive and the determinant  ¯ need be negative, which
           Ω                                           ¯  Ω

are too complicated to identify clean suﬃcient conditions; nonetheless, they all hold
true under our calibrated benchmark parametrization.


9.4     Quasi-Social Planner’s Optimization
The quasi-social planner’s problem is given by,
                                                                            1
        Λ(     ) =       max              ( ) +  (1 −  ) +       Λ(+1  +1  +1 )   (36)
                                                                1+

subject to:
                                 +1 = (  ) (   )1− − ̄  −                         (37)
                                               e −  ) ] [ (1 −  ) ]1−
                 +1 −  =  (1 −  ) + [(1                                                     (38)
                                   +1 = (1 − ) + (1 −  ) ( )1−                              (39)
It is noted that while the resource constraint is straightforward by replacing income
with net output and the human capital accumulation equation is identical to the decen-
tralized problem, the evolution equations of employment diﬀers from the decentralized
program now with coordinated labor matches.
    The quasi-social planner’s optimization satisfies the following first-order conditions
(with respect to {       }),
                                                            1
                                                    =        Λ (H0 )                                 (40)
                                                          1+
                                                                  h           ¡ ¢ i
                 Λ (H0 )(1 − )( )                                e − )   
                                                        = Λ (H0 )  + (1                              (41)
                                                                                

                                                               0 e
                                                                     ¡  ¢−1
                     Λ (H0 )( )−1                = Λ (H )                                   (42)
                 Λ (H0 )( )    = Λ (H0 )(1 − )(1 −  ) ( )−                        (43)



                                                             iii
together with the respective Benveniste-Scheinkman conditions (associated with {     }):
           1
 Λ (H) =     Λ (H0 )[1-  +( )−1 ]                                        (44)
          1+
           1                                                                ¡  ¢
 Λ (H) =                                                             e
              (Λ (H0 )(1-)( )   +Λ (H0 ){1+ (1- )[+(1-)    ]})(45)
          1+
               1                                                             ¡  ¢
 Λ (H) = -+                                                         e
                   {Λ (H0 )(1-)( )   +Λ (H0 )(1- ) [+(1-)   (46)
                                                                                    ]
              1+
                +Λ (H0 )(1--(1- )−1 ( )1− )}


9.5   Equilibrium
We derive algebra in Section 3.Under the logarithmic utility function:  () = ln ,
households’ lifetime utility is always bounded along a BGP. Moreover, Γ (0 ) and
Ω (H0 ) are constant along a BGP, whereas Ω (H0 ) and Ω (H0 ) are decreasing at rate
. Then, we use (6), (8), and (9) to derive a standard Keynes-Ramsey relationship
governing consumption growth and an intertemporal optimization condition governing
human capital accumulation as follows.

                                      (1 −   ) −   − 
                                  =                                                 (47)
                                             1+
                                                   ¡ ¢
                                         e − )    ][ + (1 − )̄]
                      + (1 + ) = [ + (1                                         (48)
   From the definition of  and (16), we can derive the flow profit redistribution to
each household in eﬀective units as follows.
                              n ¡ ¢                      o
                          =    [(1 − ) − ] −                            (49)
                        
From (3), the definition of   and the flow profit redistribution given above, we can
derive eﬀective consumption along a BGP as:
                     ¡          ¢     
                 =    +     + +
                                         
                   n ¡ ¢                                        o     
                        
                 =        [(1 − ) − ] +    − (1 −  )   +               (50)
                                                                       
where  is regarded as given by individuals with its equilibrium value being pinned
down by the government budget constraint (21).


9.6   Eﬃciency
This Appendix derive algebra in Section 4. For the purpose of comparison, it is
convenient to rewrite the conditions in Lemmas 1 and 2 in the decentralized problem


                                             iv
as:

                         Ω (H0 ) = (1 + ) 
                                             h           ¡ ¢ i
                                                   e − )   
             Ω (H0 )(1 −   ) = Ω (H0 )  + (1      

                   0                      0 e
                                                ¡  ¢−1
             Ω (H )(1 −   ) = Ω (H )                                     (51)
                (1 + ) (1 +  ) = [1 −   + (1 −   ) ]
                                    h                ¡ ¢ i
            (1 + ) (1 +  ) − 1 =  + (1 e − )   [ + (1 −  )̄ ]


                               1 +  £¡        ¢                       ¤
                   Ω =                 1 − ̄ (1 −   )   −              (52)
                             +  + 
                            1 +  h          ¡ ¢         i
                   Γ =             (1 − )  −                                (53)
                             + 

We can then diﬀerentiate (52) and (53) to obtain:
                                     1+ ¡          ¢
                    Ω  =               1 − ̄ (1 −   ) 
                                   +  + 
                                    1 + 
                     Γ    = −
                                     + 
The cooperative Nash wage bargaining therefore implies:

                            Ω 
                Ω = −                  Γ
                         1 −  Γ 
                            Ω  1 +  h         ¡ ¢      i
                     = −                       (1 − )  − 
                         1 −  Γ   + 

The above expression can be combined with (52) to yield:
        £¡     ¢                    ¤       Ω  (1+ ) (++ ) h         ¡ ¢     i
(1+)     1-̄ (1-  )   - = −                                    (1-)  -
                                          1- Γ        +
                                                  ¡   ¢              h       ¡ ¢    i
                                      =     (1+) 1-̄ (1-  )  (1-)  -
                                        1-
which can be simplified to the decentralized labor-leisure-consumption trade-oﬀ as
follows.

 ¡       ¢                                   ¡       ¢                      ¡ ¢
  1 − ̄ (1 −   )   − (1 − )  =  1 − ̄ (1 −   ) (1 − )   (54)




                                            v
   Concerning centralized solution, we rewrite the conditions in Lemma 5 to get:

                                  Λ (H0 ) = (1 + ) 
                                                  h             ¡ ¢ i
                                                        e − )   
                Λ (H0 )(1 − )( ) = Λ (H0 )  + (1       

                                                          ¡   ¢
                                                       e   −1
                         Λ (H0 )( )−1 = Λ (H0 )   
                                                                                             (55)
                Λ (H0 )( )    = Λ (H0 )(1 − )(1 −  ) ( )−

                    (1 + ) (1 +  ) = [1 −   + ( )−1 ]
                                        h                ¡ ¢ i
                (1 + ) (1 +  ) − 1 =  + (1 e − )   


     h                               i            £                         ¤
       +  + (1 −  )−1 ( )1− Λ = (1 + ) (1 − )( )   −  (56)
             (1 − )(1 −  ) ( )− Λ = ( )    (1 + )                    (57)

where the last two expressions can be combined with  =  (1 −  ) =   =
(1 −  ) ( )1− to yield:

                                      +  + (1 −  )−1 ( )1−
   (1 − )( )   −  =                                   −
                                                                         ( )    
                                                          )
                                        (1 − )(1 −  ( )
                                      +  + 
                                =                ( )    
                                      (1 − ) 

which can be simplified to the counterpart of this labor-leisure-consumption trade-oﬀ
under the centralized solution as follows.
                              +  + 
   (1 − )( )   −               Φ − (1 − ) = (1 − )( )               (58)
                                  

where Φ =  ̄ =  ( )    is the vacancy creation cost.
   Then, by comparing the decentralized and centralized solutions, namely (51) and
(55), we can identify four conditions in a more straightforward manner:

                                         = 
                                    Ω (H0 ) = Λ (H0 )
                                         = 0
                                         ̄ = 0

Moreover, to ensure the labor-leisure-consumption trade-oﬀ under decentralization and
centralization to be identical, we need to establish equivalence between the decen-
tralized labor-leisure-consumption trade-oﬀ and the counterpart of this labor-leisure-


                                             vi
consumption trade-oﬀ under the centralized solution, which holds true under the fol-
lowing conditions:

                                         = 
                                       = 0
                                       = (1 − ∆∗ ) (1 − )( )

where eﬃcient wage discount ∆∗ is given by,
                                   ( +  +  )     ( +  +  )  
                        ∆∗ =                            =
                                        (1 − )                (1 − ) 

9.7    Dynamic Taxation and Dynamic Tax Incidence
This Appendix derives dynamic taxation. In deriving dynamic taxation, we maintain a
BGP equilibrium with stationary matching and bargaining. This implies that  and 
are constant. Then (22)), (23), (24), and (25) indicate that , , , and  are constant.
    From (47), we derive:
                                                           1
                               = (  ) =                    [(1 + ) +   + ]
                                                        1 −  

implying 0 (  ) = (1−1 )2 [(1 + ) +   + ]  0 and 00 (  ) =                         2
                                                                                                 (1−  )3
                                                                                                            [(1   + ) +
  + ]  0
    From (48), we derive:
                                                  (                  ∙                        ¸) 1
                                                           1    + (1 + )
                             
                             =  (̄ ) =                                     −
                                                      e
                                                      (1 − )  + (1 − )̄

                                                          
implying  ̄  0 Moreover,                      0 and              0.
              
   From (26), we derive:
                                                                      
                                    = (̄ ) = 1 −
                                                                     e
                                                               { + [  (̄ )] }
                                                             
implying 0 (̄ )  0Moreover,                   0 and             0.
   From (16), we derive:
                                                = (  ) = (  )
    From (18), we derive:
                                                                     µ              ¶    1
                                                                                      1−
                                                 
                                              =  (  ) =
                                                                         (  )
                               ³              ´    1
                                                      −1
                      1                     1−
implying       =   − 1−       (  )                0 (  )  0.

                                                               vii
   From (47) and (31), we derive:
                                        µ                    ¶    1     ∙                       ¸
                                                              1−          ((  ) + )
                  = (  ) =                                         1−−                 
                                              (  )                            ()
                                                             ½             −1                                           −     ¾
                                         1                       (  ) 1− ()(1−)−((  )+)       (  ) 1−
implying 0 (    )   =   − ( ) 1−      0 (    )           1−                ()              +       ()             
0 Although 00 (  ) may be ambiguous, as a result of factor substitution, when the
direct production cost eﬀect dominates the labor market friction eﬀect (the last term
in the square bracket of the eﬀective wage expression), eﬀective wage is strictly concave
in the capital tax rate and thus, 00 (  )  0.
    Equation (11) becomes:
             ¡       ¢1− h          ¡          ¢ i
               (̄ )       + (1                   e (1 −   )(  )
                                e − )   (̄ )  =                                                             (59)
                                                         (1 −   )(  )
   from which we can express ̄ as an equation of   and   :

                                                  ̄ = ̄(     )
           ̄
implying   
                 0. Moreover,  ̄
                                     
                                         0, because from (47), (1−  )(  ) is dependent
on   only through its BGP eﬀect on , which we have already proved. Thus, the
time varying eﬀect of   only aﬀect (  ) negatively, so   also aﬀects ̄ positively.
This is the IR locus.
   The IR locus is negatively sloping in the (     ) plane.

              0 (  )(1 −   )   0 (  )(1 −   )(1 −   )(  )
                =        (  )
                                        =                                           0
                                                     (  )
                            (1−  )(  )

    To see whether the isoquant is concave or convex, we take a second-order derivative
to get


2     {(  )” (  ) − 0 (  )2 [1 + (1 −   )(  )]}(1 −   )(1 −   )(  )
        =
 2                                            (  )2
                                    2  
   If 00 (  )  0, then          2
                                               0 and the IR locus is concave to the origin. Our
quantitative exercises confirm 00 (  )  0 and thus, the IR locus is concave to the
origin.
    In order to quantify time-varying factor taxes, we impose the following factor tax
schedules


                                         −  ∗ =  − ()·
                                          −  ∗ = − − ()·

                                                                 viii
    where    ()    () are coeﬃcients that are to be calibrated. Below, we
characterize these coeﬃcients. First, from (47), we have (1 −   )(  ) = (1 + ) +
  +  which is constant. Then we rewrite (11) as
                 ¡       ¢1− h          ¡          ¢ i
                   (̄ )       + (1                   e (1 −   )(  )
                                    e − )   (̄ )  = 
                                                             (1 + ) +   + 

Next, using (31) to substitute (  ) in (11), we have
                               µ          ∙    ¶    1               ¸
                                                
                                                   1−
              (1 −   )                  1−−       ((  ) + ) = Θ
                                   (  )        
          ¡        ¢1− h                ¡      ¢ i
where Θ =  (̄ )           e − )   (̄ )  (1+)+ + 
                           + (1                       
                                                        
   Using (47) to substitute (  ) in (11) gives
            µ                        ¶ − ∙                                          ¸
                (1 + ) +   +     1−           1                                         −1
(1−  )                                  1−−    {        [(1 + ) +   + ] + } = ( ) 1− Θ
                     1 −                       1 −  

At  = 0, the initial condition is  0 =  ∗ +  and  0 =  ∗ −  . Then (11) at
 = 0 gives the relationship between  and  as follows.
                                                                 −1
                                                                      h                   i    
                                                                          (1+)+  +       1−
                                                        ( ) 1−         1− ∗ −           Θ(̄)
                     ( ) = −1 +  ∗ +                                 h                      i
                                                                             (1+)+  +
                                                         1−−                  1− ∗ −     +

which depends npositively ono  when the capital income share is not too high such
                 1      
that   min 2  1 −  . Thus the two initial tax rates are negatively related,
which is easily understood because the IR locus is downward sloping. Moreover, at
time , the speed of labor taxation  () is governed by
  h                              i             −1                   (1 + ) +   + 
ln 1 −  ∗ +  ( ) − ()· = ln ( ) 1− Θ(̄) +       ln
                                                          1 −  1 −  ∗ −  − ()·
                                         ½              ∙                            ¸¾
                                                          (1 + ) +   + 
                                    − ln 1 −  −                                +
                                                     1 −  ∗ −  − ()·

                            1                                                     (1+)+ +
                                                                                                                              .
Define Ξ =       1− 1−  − ·− ()· +                             2                             (1+)+ +
                                                    [1−  − − ()·        ]    1−−                             +
                                                                                                   1−  − − ()·
Totally diﬀerentiating (34) gives
                              (                                      )
     − ()·                0 ( )− ()·
                         =                           − Ξ− ()·  +Ξ − ()· 
1 −   +  − ()·         1 −   +  − ()·

                                             
Thus, 
            0 whereas    
                              is ambiguous, but    
                                                        0 if the eﬀect through 
dominates (which is the case of our calibrated economy).

                                                            ix
    To evaluate the welfare, first we rewrite (2) as
                        +1                       e  )  (1 −  )
                             = 1 +  (1 −  ) + (
                         
Since  ,  and  are constant, then the growth rate of  is constant. Since the
growth rate of  is constant, then we only need to analyze the transition of  when
evaluating welfare.
   Then, from (27), we derive
                                                        (  )(̄ )
                       = (   ̄) =
                                            [1 − (̄)]  (̄) +   (  )(̄)
which is decreasing in   .
   Moreover, from (21), we have
                          £              ¤
             = (  ){   + (1 − )̄ − (1 − )̄} +   (  )  (  )
          
which is increasing in   but the eﬀect of   is complicated. Since   (  )  (  ) ∝
                  
  (1 −   ) 1− , straightforward diﬀerentiation implies   (  )  (  ) is increas-
ing in   if    1 − . Yet, a higher   lowers (  ), thus leading to an
ambiguous result. In our calibrated economy, the indirect eﬀect via (  ) is domi-
nated by the direct eﬀect. As a result, both factor        h tax ratesiraise eﬀective lump-sum
tax. Also note that  =  (   ̄) = (1 −   ) 1 + (1−)  
                                                                     ̄
                                                                          and  =  (   ̄) =
h                                   i
  (1 −   )(  ) − (+̄ ) . While  is decreasing in   ,  is decreasing in   .
                             
     Furthermore, from (50), we have
     n ¡             ¢                                          ¡                  ¢          o   
                                                        
    =   (  ) [(1 − ) − ] +  (   ̄) (  ) − 1 −  (   ̄ ) (  ) +
                                                                                                   
Finally, we are ready to calibrate tax schedules. The calibration is carried out in the
following steps.
    (1) We set  so to match the (given) initial  0 ;
    (2) Given  , the value of  is set so that the diﬀerence between   and  ∗
(the optimal capital tax rate, 1611%) is within 1% of  ∗ in the 50th period;
    (3) Then  is set so that (11) is satisfied at the 10th period ( = 9);
    (4) The value of  is set so that the diﬀerence between   and  ∗ (the optimal
capital labor rate, 2409%) is within 1% of  ∗ at the 50th period.


9.8    Alternative Model II: Linear Human Capital Accumulation
In the case with a linear human capital accumulation process independent of market
goods, the first-order condition of the household’s optimization problem (5) is the same
while (6) becomes:
                             Ω (H0 )(1 −   ) = Ω (H0 )

                                                   x
The Benveniste-Scheinkman conditions of the household’s optimization problem are
now:
                                 1
                   Ω (H) =           Ω (H0 )[(1 −   ) + (1 −   ) ]
                              1+
             1 ©                                                                             ª
  Ω (H) =        Ω (H0 )(1 −   ) [  + (1 −  )̄ ] + Ω (H0 )[1 +  (1 −  )]
           1+
               1 £          ¡       ¢                                                          ¤
Ω (H) = −+        Ω (H0 )  -̄ (1-  )   + Ω (H0 )(1- ) + Ω (H0 )(1-- )
              1+
                                                         e = 0 and  = 1.
The BGP equilibrium expressions follow by simply setting 


9.9    Alternative Model III: Walrasin Model
                                                                   (1 −  )            
We consider a Walrasian economy with  = 1. Let  =                          and  =       .
                                                                   (1 −  )            
Then the firm’s optimal decisions are:
                                         ¡ ¢−1
                                             = 
                                           ¡  ¢
                                  (1 − )      = 

Combining these, we have:
                                                  
                                        =
                                               (1 − )
The household faces the following budget constraint:

              +1 = (1 −   )   + [(1 −   + (1 −   ) ] −  + 

The main change is the Benveniste-Scheinkman condition with respect to  :
              1 n                                   h         h
                                                                 e
                                                                        ¡  ¢ iio
    Ω (H) =        Ω (H0 )(1-  )  +Ω (H0 ) 1+(1- ) +(1-)  
             1+

By imposing a log utility function  () = ln , we can derive the following equations
along the BGP:                         h               ¡ ¢ i
                         + (1 + ) =  + (1e − )   

                                                    
                                   =1−
                                                   e
                                                +  (  )
The Keynes-Ramsey relationship (47) and (11) remain unchanged. The eﬀective con-
sumption along a BGP becomes:
                                   ∙                    ¸
                                                  +       
                   = (1 −   ) + (1 −   ) −          +
                                                             




                                                xi
             Table 1: Benchmark Parameter Values and Calibration
Benchmark Parameters and Observables
   per capita real economic growth rate                          g    0.0045
   physical capital’s depreciation rate                         δk    0.0100
   time preference rate                                          ρ    0.0125
   tax rate on capital                                          τK    0.2000
   tax rate on income                                           τL    0.2000
   replacement ratio                                            b     0.4200
   capital’s share                                              α     0.2800
   physical capital-human capital ratio                         k/h   1.0000
   job separating rate                                           ψ    0.0986
   job finding rate                                              μ    0.8336
   vacancy-searching worker ratio                               v/u   1.0000
   labor searcher’s share in matching production                 β    0.4000
   parameter of human capital accumulation                           0.2500
   preference parameter of leisure                                   0.5000
Calibration
   coefficient of goods technology                               A    0.1648
   coefficient of matching technology                            B    0.8336
   capital-output ratio                                         k/y   8.2790
   consumption-human capital ratio                              c/h   0.0598
   effective flow profit redistribution                         π/h   0.0159
   transfer-human capital ratio                                 T/h   0.0103
   fraction of physical capital devoted to goods production      s    0.9981
   effective capital-labor ratio in the nonmarket sector        qH    0.0079
   effective capital-labor ratio in the market sector           qF    1.5394
   coefficient of the cost of vacancy creation and management        3.6306
   coefficient of human capital accumulation                    D     0.0178
   coefficient of human capital accumulation                    ~     0.0017
                                                                D
   rate of return of capital                                    r     0.0338
   fraction of time devoted to employment                       n     0.8943
   fraction of time devoted to work                             ℓ     0.7250
   leisure preference parameter augmented by the intensity of   m     -0.0640
   leisure enjoyment
   bargaining share to the household                            ζ     0.4000
   vacancy creation                                             v     0.1057
   employee recruitment rate                                    η     0.8336
   wage                                                         w     0.0380
   wage discount                                                Δ     0.7161
                      Table 2: Numerical Results (τK=20%, τL=20%)
    Key Variables               Benchmark                τK increases              τL increases
             g                   0.004500                 -0.020797                 -0.008461
            c/h                  0.059771                  0.008626                 0.008231
            k/h                  1.000000                 -0.357480                 0.002187
            y/h                  0.120552                 -0.103532                 0.001378
             s                   0.998055                 -0.000407                 0.000616
             n                   0.894259                 -0.008813                 -0.001134
            1-n                   0.105741                 0.074383                 0.009590
             ℓ                   0.725000                  0.004200                 0.001959
          (1- ℓ)n                0.245921                 -0.019891                 -0.006299
            qH                   0.007908                 -0.129685                 -0.309929
            qF                   1.539406                 -0.353275                 0.001979
             r                   0.033820                  0.254361                 -0.001425
          (1-τK)r                0.027056                 -0.003501                 -0.001425
             w                   0.038001                 -0.101448                 0.022356
          (1-τL)w                0.030401                 -0.101448                 -0.235506
             Δ                    0.716148                 0.001002                 -0.008648
             μ                   0.833625                 -0.083196                 -0.010724
             η                   0.833625                  0.055464                 0.007150
             ν                    0.105741                -0.064277                 -0.008284
Note 1.    Numbers reported are elasticities with respect to respective exogenous shift in tax rates.
     2.     g : per capita real economic growth rate;      c/h: consumption-human capital ratio; k/h :
          physical capital-human capital ratio; k/y :output-human capital ratio; s: fraction of physical
          capital devoted to goods production; n: fraction of time devoted to employment; ℓ: fraction
          of time devoted to work; qH: effective capital-labor ratio in the nonmarket sector; qF: effective
          capital-labor ratio in the market sector; r: rate of return of capital; Δ: wage discount; μ: job
          finding rate; η: employee recruitment rate; v: vacancy creation.
                                                      Table 3: Sensitivity Analysis
                                                                                            Welfare gain in Welfare loss in
                                                              *
                              τK   *
                                             τL   *
                                                            (g -g)/g       (Ω*- Ω)/ Ω       consumption     consumption
                                                                                             equivalence equivalence if τK = 0
Benchmark                    16.11          24.09            0.2025           0.0158             0.0389                 0.6490
 β = 0.235                   10.12          30.28            1.0003           0.1166             0.2879                 0.2881
 β = ζ = 0.40                16.11          24.09            0.2025           0.0158             0.0389                 0.6490
 β = 0.54                    19.62          20.40            0.0102           0.0001             0.0003                 0.8985
 β = 0.72                    22.93          16.88           -0.0145           0.0077             0.0190                 1.1525
 m = -0.064*0.5               9.34          30.47            0.4542           0.0966             0.2367                 0.1672
     (-0.032)
 m = -0.064*1.5              21.10          18.77           -0.0652           0.0015             0.0037                 1.3947
     (-0.096)
 m = -0.064*2                25.01          14.03           -0.3255           0.0350             0.0876                 2.4131
     (-0.128)
 θ= 0.9                      32.78          1.23            -0.9782           0.2617             0.6717                 5.6679
 θ= 1.1                       2.25          35.00            0.7049           0.2927             0.7049                 0.0109

 b = 0.42*0.9                16.21          24.04            0.2662           0.0148             0.0366                 0.6497
     (0.378)

 b = 0.42*1.1                16.03          24.12            0.1368           0.0166             0.0410                 0.6511
     (0.462)
= 0.25*0.9               15.74          24.48            0.2176           0.0186             0.0459                 0.6109
     (0.225)
= 0.25*1.1               16.44          23.75            0.1886           0.0134             0.0329                 0.6857
     (0.275)
 k/h = 0.5                   16.11          24.09            0.2025           0.0123             0.0389                 0.6491
 k/h = 2                     16.11          24.09            0.2025           0.0220             0.0389                 0.6490
 τK = 35%, τL = 20%          34.97          20.04            0.0030           0.0000             0.0000                  N/A
 τK = 40%, τL = 36%          42.75          32.08           -0.3308           0.0254             0.0552                  N/A
             Note 1:   Numbers reported are in percentage.
                  2:   g : per capita real economic growth rate; Ω: household’s lifetime utility; β: labor searcher’s share in
             matching production; m: leisure preference parameter augmented by the intensity of leisure enjoyment;θ:
             labor-market tightness; b : replacement ratio; : parameter of human capital accumulation; k/h : physical
             capital-human capital ratio; τK : tax rate on capital income; τL : tax rate on labor income.
                        Table 4: Tax Incidence Analysis under Various Setups
                                                                    Welfare gain in      Welfare loss in
                            τK *    τL *   (g *-g)/g   (Ω*- Ω)/ Ω   consumption          consumption
                                                                     equivalence      equivalence if τK = 0
Benchmark                  16.11   24.09   0.2025       0.0158          0.0389               0.6490
 I. Inelastic leisure      9.05    31.33   0.39929      0.0833          0.2049               0.1194
II. Linear HC              4.99    46.68   1.1434       0.5578          1.5407               0.3115
III. Exogenous HC          0.00    42.55    N/A         0.4809          1.1784               0.0000
IV. Exog g & endog HC 16.19        24.01   0.1987       0.0158          0.0389               0.6490
V. Walrasian               0.00    27.51   5.4285       4.5347         10.3581               0.0000
VI. Alterna Instrument 15.96 24.05 -0.0430              0.0179          0.0441               0.6793
Note:     Numbers reported are in percentage.
                                                   n (work)

                     n (employed)

      １                                           (1- )n (learning)



                     1-n (nonemployed)



                Figure 1:      Labor Allocation by Households



          MCw
                                                         MCw
          MBw



                                                   E2
                                                               MBw(τL ↑)


                                   E0
                          E1
                                                               MBw
                                          MBw(τk ↑)
                                                                           w
          0               w1       w0               w2


          Δ


          1



       Δ1           E1

       Δ0                           E0

       Δ2                                          E2
                                         (τk ↑)           (τL ↑)
          0              w1        w0              w2                  w

Figure 2: Effects of Factor Taxes on Wage Bargaining: Higher  K or  L
                                   HA
                           HA(τK ↑)
g                                   HA(τL ↑)




g0
g2                                      FE
g1
                                    FE (τL ↑)
                                  FE(τK ↑)
0            n1    n2 n0                        n

     Figure 3: Growth Effects of Factor Taxes




     Figure 4: Dynamic Tax Incidence Results
