NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAN SUCCESSFUL SCHOOLS REPLICATE? SCALING UP BOSTON’S CHARTER
SCHOOL SECTOR
Sarah Cohodes
Elizabeth Setren
Christopher R. Walters
Working Paper 25796
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25796

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2019
Special thanks go to Carrie Conaway, Cliff Chuang, the staff of the Massachusetts Department of
Elementary and Secondary Education, and Boston’s charter schools for data and assistance. We
also thank Josh Angrist, Bob Gibbons, Caroline Hoxby, Parag Pathak, Derek Neal, Eric Taylor
and seminar participants at the NBER Education Program Meetings, Columbia Teachers College
Economics of Education workshop, the Association for Education Finance and Policy
Conference, the Society for Research on Educational Effectiveness Conference, Harvard
Graduate School of Education, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, MIT Organizational
Economics Lunch, MIT Labor Lunch, and University of Michigan Causal Inference for
Education Research Seminar for helpful comments. We are grateful to the school leaders who
shared their experiences expanding their charter networks: Shane Dunn, Jon Clark, Will Austin,
Anna Hall, and Dana Lehman. Setren was supported by a National Science Foundation Graduate
Research Fellowship. The Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education
had the right to review this paper prior to circulation in order to determine no individual’s data
was disclosed. The authors obtained Institutional Review Board (IRB) approvals for this project
from NBER and Teachers College Columbia University. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Sarah Cohodes, Elizabeth Setren, and Christopher R. Walters. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Can Successful Schools Replicate? Scaling Up Boston’s Charter School Sector
Sarah Cohodes, Elizabeth Setren, and Christopher R. Walters
NBER Working Paper No. 25796
May 2019
JEL No. H75,I21,I28
ABSTRACT
Can schools that boost student outcomes reproduce their success at new campuses? We study a
policy reform that allowed effective charter schools in Boston, Massachusetts to replicate their
school models at new locations. Estimates based on randomized admission lotteries show that
replication charter schools generate large achievement gains on par with those produced by their
parent campuses. The average effectiveness of Boston’s charter middle school sector increased
after the reform despite a doubling of charter market share. An exploration of mechanisms shows
that Boston charter schools reduce the returns to teacher experience and compress the distribution
of teacher effectiveness, suggesting the highly standardized practices in place at charter schools
may facilitate replicability.
Sarah Cohodes
Teachers College
Columbia University
525 West 120th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
cohodes@tc.columbia.edu
Elizabeth Setren
8 Upper Campus Road
Braker Hall
Tufts University
Medford, MA 02155
United States
elizabeth.setren@tufts.edu

Christopher R. Walters
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
crwalters@econ.berkeley.edu

1

Introduction
The feasibility of scaling up eﬀective programs is a perennial problem in social policy. Successful

demonstration projects often fail to reproduce their eﬀects at scale. In the education sphere, for
example, recent large-scale studies of early childhood programs, class size reductions, and the Success
For All curriculum show eﬀects that fall short of the impressive gains seen in smaller-scale evaluations
of similar interventions (Heckman et al., 2010; Heckman, Pinto, and Savelyev, 2013; Puma, Bell, and
Heid, 2012; Krueger, 1999; Jepsen and Rivkin, 2009; Borman et al., 2007; Quint et al., 2015). This
suggests that in some cases the success of programs may be driven by unique inputs or population
characteristics such as special teachers, school leaders, peer environments, or other factors that
cannot be easily replicated (see Banerjee et al. (2017) on the challenges of scaling up demonstration
programs, including general equilibrium and spillover eﬀects and Davis et al. (2017) on the role of
labor supply in scale-up).
The potential for sustained success at scale is of particular interest for “No Excuses” charter
schools, a recent educational innovation that has demonstrated promise for low-income urban students. These schools share a set of practices that includes high expectations, strict discipline,
increased time in school, frequent teacher feedback, high-intensity tutoring, and data-driven instruction. Evidence based on randomized admission lotteries shows that No Excuses charter schools
generate test score gains large enough to close racial and socioeconomic achievement gaps in a short
time, as well as improvements in longer-run outcomes like teen pregnancy and four-year college
attendance (Abdulkadiroğlu et al., 2011, 2017; Angrist, Pathak, and Walters, 2013; Angrist et al.,
2012, 2016; Dobbie and Fryer, 2011, 2013, 2015; Tuttle et al., 2013; Walters, 2018). Other recent
studies demonstrate positive eﬀects of No Excuses policies when implemented in traditional public
schools or in low-performing schools converted to charter status (Fryer, 2014; Abdulkadiroğlu et al.,
2016). No school district has adopted these policies on a wide scale, however, and No Excuses charters serve small shares of students in many of the cities where they operate. It therefore remains
an open question whether the eﬀects documented in previous research can be replicated at a larger
scale. Replicability is of particular interest in the context of charter schools, which by design are
intended to serve as laboratories of innovation and spread successful educational practices.1
1

Massachusetts charters are required by law to disseminate their “best
http://www.doe.mass.edu/charter/bestpractices/ for details on the Massachusetts policy.

2

practices,”

see:

We address this question using a recent policy change that expanded the charter school sector
in Boston, Massachusetts, a city where most charter schools operate according to No Excuses
principles. In 2010, Massachusetts passed a comprehensive education reform law that raised the
state’s cap on the fraction of funding dedicated to charter school tuition payments in low-performing
districts. Charter operators that the state deemed “proven providers” with track records of success
were permitted to expand existing campuses or open new schools in these districts. As a result, the
number of charter schools in Boston increased from 16 to 32 between 2010 and 2014, with most of
these new campuses linked to existing No Excuses charter schools. This expansion led to dramatic
growth in charter market share in Boston: the fraction of sixth grade students attending charter
schools increased from 15 to 31 percent between 2010 and 2015.
This increase in charter share is equivalent from going from the 100th ranked school district in
terms of charter sector share to the 15th ranked school district (rankings from 2016-17, see David,
Hesla, and Pendergrass 2017).2 Boston’s charter expansion is therefore a large, policy relevant
change in charter share. The closest studied analog is the expansion of the Knowledge is Power
Program (KIPP) network of charter schools (Tuttle et al., 2015). Between 2010 and 2015, the KIPP
network doubled the number of students served, from about 27,000 to 55,000 students. Observational
estimates comparing KIPP students to matched comparisons showed that the network continued
to boost student achievement over this period of expansion, but that these gains were smaller in
the years of greater expansion. The KIPP setting is in contrast to our city-speciﬁc study, as the
expansion of KIPP schools was diﬀuse, over many cities, and may not have had a great inﬂuence
on the share of students in charters in a given locality.
Other localities are facing the potential for charter expansion similar to the policy change we
study here. New York City reached its cap on the number of charter schools in the city in winter
2019 with 10 percent of students enrolled in charter schools. A policy change permitting more
charters could result in an inﬂux of charter schools, and would follow similar cap increases in 2007
and 2010 (New York State Department of Education, 2019). Massachusetts voters faced a decision
about a referendum for another, similar charter school cap raise in 2016, which did not pass. Boston
has again reached the cap on charter schools and thus the state may face future legislation about
2

School district rankings are for all grade levels, and the charter share we focus on here is for middle schools. The
leap for all grade levels is a move from approximately 208th to 63rd.

3

changing the cap. Several states have also reached their overall cap on charter schools or have
limited remaining growth, including Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts (as previously discussed),
and Rhode Island, setting these states up for policy decisions around further growth (Ziebarth and
Palmer, 2018). The federal government also supports charter school replication, with several charter
school networks receiving very large grants to replicate their models, including 2019 awards of over
$100 million to IDEA Public Schools and over $85 million to KIPP.3
We use records from randomized charter school admission lotteries to study changes in the
eﬀectiveness of Boston’s charter middle school sector during this period of rapid expansion. By
comparing the outcomes of students who receive lottery oﬀers to those that do not, we remove
selection bias and therefore generate reliable estimates of the causal eﬀects of charter school attendance. The lottery records studied here cover 14 of the 15 charter schools admitting students
in ﬁfth or sixth grade during the time period of our study. This is important in light of evidence
that schools with more readily available lottery records tend to be more eﬀective (Abdulkadiroğlu
et al., 2011). Unlike previous studies that focus on subsets of oversubscribed charter schools, our
estimates provide a representative picture of the eﬀectiveness of the Boston charter middle school
sector before and after expansion.
Consistent with past work, our estimates for cohorts applying before 2010 show large positive
impacts of charter attendance on test scores. Speciﬁcally, a year of attendance at a Boston charter
middle school boosted math achievement by between 0.18 and 0.32 standard deviations (σ) and
increased English achievement by about 0.1σ during this period. Our results also indicate that
policymakers selected more eﬀective schools for expansion: proven providers produced larger eﬀects
than other charter schools before the reform.
Estimates for the post-reform period reveal that Boston’s charter sector remained eﬀective while
doubling in size. Proven providers and other existing charters maintained their eﬀectiveness after
the reform, while expansion charters generate achievement gains comparable to those of their parent schools. Moreover, expansion charters produce these large impacts while enrolling students that
appear more representative of the general Boston population than students at other charters. Together, the estimates for new and existing schools imply an increase in overall charter eﬀectiveness
3

For details on these awards, see: https://innovation.ed.gov/what-we-do/charter-schools/charter-schoolsprogram-grants-for-replications-and-expansion-of-high-quality-charter-schools/awards/.

4

despite the substantial growth in charter market share after the 2010 reform.
We explore the roles of student composition, public school alternatives, and school practices in
mediating the eﬀectiveness of expansion charter schools. Though changes in demographic composition contributed modestly to the positive impacts of new charters, neither changes in the student
body nor the quality of applicants’ fallback traditional public schools explain the pattern of results.
Instead, it appears that proven providers successfully transmitted hiring and pedagogical practices
to new campuses. An analysis of teacher value-added indicates that charter schools reduce returns to
experience and compress the distribution of teacher eﬀectiveness while also employing a large share
of new and inexperienced teachers. These ﬁndings are consistent with the possibility that Boston’s
charter schools use a highly standardized school model that limits teacher discretion, which may
facilitate replicability in new contexts.
The next section provides background on charter schools in Boston and the charter expansion
reform. Section 3 describes the data and Section 4 details the empirical framework used to analyze
it. Section 5 presents lottery-based estimates of charter school eﬀects before and after the reform.
Section 6 explores the role of student composition and fallback schools, and Section 7 discusses
charter management practices and teacher productivity. Section 8 oﬀers concluding thoughts.

2

Background

2.1

Charter Schools in Boston

The ﬁrst charter schools in Boston opened in 1994. Boston charters oﬀer a diﬀerent educational
experience than traditional public schools operating in the Boston Public Schools (BPS) district.
Table 1 compares inputs and practices of BPS schools and the 14 charter middle schools in our
analysis sample (described in more detail later on). Columns (1) and (5) of Panel A show that
charter students spend more days per year and hours per day in school than BPS students. Charter
teachers tend to be younger and less experienced than BPS teachers; as a result, they are much
less likely to be licensed or designated highly-qualiﬁed.4 Charter schools and BPS have similar
student/teacher ratios, but charters spend somewhat less money per pupil ($18,766 vs. $17,041), a
diﬀerence driven by lower salaries and retirement costs for their less-experienced teachers (Setren,
4

In the time period of our study teachers were designated highly qualified if they possessed a Massachusetts
teaching license and a bachelor’s degree, and passed a state examination or held a degree in their subject area. The
highly qualified label was discontinued with the passage of the federal Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) in 2015.

5

2016).
Boston charter schools commonly subscribe to No Excuses pedagogy, an approach that utilizes strict discipline, extended instructional time, selective teacher hiring, frequent testing, high
expectations, teacher feedback, data-driven instruction, and tutoring (Carter, 2000; Thernstrom
and Thernstrom, 2003). Panel B of Table 1 reports the mean of an index of No Excuses policies,
constructed as an equally-weighted average of features typically associated with the No Excuses
model.5 On average, Boston charter schools implement 90 percent of these policies. Charters also
commonly oﬀer Saturday school and school break programming for homework help and tutoring.
These practices diﬀer markedly from practices at BPS schools and at non-urban charter schools in
Massachusetts (Angrist, Pathak, and Walters, 2013).
Previous research has documented that Boston charters boost math and English standardized
test scores (Abdulkadiroğlu et al., 2011; Cohodes et al., 2013; Walters, 2018). This ﬁnding is
consistent with studies showing positive test score eﬀects for urban No Excuses charters elsewhere
(Dobbie and Fryer, 2011, 2013; Angrist et al., 2010, 2012; Chabrier, Cohodes, and Oreopoulos, 2016;
Abdulkadiroğlu et al., 2017). Recent evidence shows that Boston charter high schools also increase
longer-term outcomes, including SAT scores, Advanced Placement (AP) credit, and enrollment in
four-year college (Angrist et al., 2016).
Funding for Massachusetts public school students follows their school enrollment. Speciﬁcally,
charter schools receive tuition payments from their students’ home districts equal to district perpupil expenditure. The state partially reimburses districts for charter school payments during a
transition period, but these reimbursements have not been fully funded in recent years. Prior to
2010, Massachusetts law capped the overall number of charter schools at 120 and limited total
charter school tuition to 9 percent of a district’s spending. Charter expenditure in Boston reached
this cap in fall 2009 (Boston Municipal Research Bureau, 2008). As a result, the charter cap limited
the expansion of charter schools in Boston before 2010.

5
The No Excuses index is an average of indicators equal to one if the following items are mentioned in a school’s
annual report: high expectations for academics, high expectations for behavior, strict behavior code, college preparatory curriculum, core values in school culture, selective teacher hiring or incentive pay, emphasis on math and reading,
uniforms, hires Teach For America teachers, Teaching Fellows, or AmeriCorps members, affiliated with Teach For
America alumni, data driven instruction, and regular teacher feedback.

6

2.2

Charter Expansion

In January 2010, Governor Deval Patrick signed An Act Relative to the Achievement Gap into law.
This reform relaxed Massachusetts’ charter cap to allow the charter sector to double for districts in
the lowest decile of performance according to a measure derived from test score levels and growth.
The law also included provisions for school turnarounds and the creation of “innovation” schools
(Massachusetts State Legislature, 2010).
For Boston and other aﬀected districts, the 2010 reform increased the limit on charter spending
from 9 percent to 18 percent of district funds between 2010 and 2017. “Proven providers” – existing
schools or school models the Massachusetts Board of Elementary and Secondary Education deemed
eﬀective – could apply to open new schools or expand enrollment. The law also allowed school
districts to create up to 14 “in-district” charter schools without prior approval from the local teachers’
union or proven provider status. Concurrent with the increased supply of charter seats, the law
required charters to increase recruitment and retention eﬀorts for high need students and allowed
charters to send advertising mailers to all students in the district.6
The state received 71 initial applications (some of which it solicited) for new charter schools
or expansions from August 2010 to August 2012, and invited 60 percent of applicants to submit
ﬁnal round proposals. To determine whether a school model qualiﬁed for proven provider status,
the Massachusetts Board of Elementary and Secondary Education compared existing schools using
the model to other charters and traditional public schools. Criteria for this evaluation included
enrollment of high-need students, attrition, grade retention, dropout, graduation, attendance, suspensions, and performance on state achievement tests (Massachusetts Department of Elementary
and Secondary Education, 2015). The state granted proven provider status to four of seven Boston
charter middle schools, as well as to the KIPP organization, which operated a charter school in
Lynn, Massachusetts, but had not yet entered Boston. Together, the provisions of the 2010 reform
led to the establishment of 27 new charter campuses between 2011 and 2013, as well as expansions of
17 existing charter schools, typically to new grade levels (Massachusetts Department of Elementary
and Secondary Education, 2016).

6

The state’s definition of high need students includes those with special education or English language learner
status, eligibility for subsidized lunch, or low scores on state achievement tests, as well as students deemed to be at
risk of dropping out of school.

7

Charter enrollment in Boston expanded rapidly after 2010. This can be seen in Figure 1, which
plots shares of kindergarten, sixth, and ninth grade students attending charter schools. These
statistics are calculated using the administrative enrollment data described below. Sixth grade
charter enrollment doubled after the reform, expanding from 15 to 31 percent between 2010 and
2015. Charter enrollment also grew substantially in elementary and high school, though not as
dramatically as in middle school. The share of Boston students in charter schools increased from
5 percent to 13 percent in kindergarten and from 9 percent to 15 percent in ninth grade over the
same time period.
The characteristics and practices of Boston’s new expansion charter schools are broadly similar
to those of their proven provider parent schools. This is shown in columns (2) through (4) of Table
1, which describe proven providers, other charters operating before 2010, and new expansions. Like
proven providers, expansion schools have longer school days and years than BPS schools, and rate
highly on the index of No Excuses practices. Per-pupil expenditure is similar at proven provider
and expansion schools, and lower at other charters. New campuses located an average of 3.1 miles
from their parent campuses, often expanding into diﬀerent Boston neighborhoods (see Figure 2).
Expansion charter schools are primarily staﬀed by young teachers with little teaching experience.
Table 2 reports that 78 percent of teachers at proven providers in the year before expansion were
less than 32 years old, while 87 percent of expansion charter teachers were below this threshold
in the year after expansion. These and other teacher characteristics come from an administrative
database of Massachusetts public school employees (see the Data Appendix). Columns (4) and
(7) show that proven providers transferred some teachers from parent campuses to help staﬀ their
expansions: 12 percent of parent campus teachers moved to expansion campuses, accounting for 25
percent of the teaching workforce at these new schools. Transferred teachers were less experienced
than teachers who remained at parent campuses (2.2 years vs. 3.3 years). Most of the remaining
expansion teachers had not previously taught in a Massachusetts school (66 percent), though a few
transferred from other schools (9 percent). As a result, the average teacher at an expansion charter
had only 1.4 years of teaching experience, compared to 2.9 years for teachers at parent campuses
and 11.5 years for BPS teachers.

8

3

Data

3.1

Data Sources and Sample Construction

We study the eﬀectiveness of Boston charter middle schools using records from randomized admission
lotteries conducted between 2004 and 2013. Some charters serving middle school grades (ﬁfth
through eighth) accept students prior to ﬁfth grade, mostly in kindergarten; we focus on schools
with ﬁfth or sixth grade entry because their lotteried students are old enough to take achievement
tests within our data window. Our sample includes 14 of the 15 Boston charter schools with ﬁfth
or sixth grade entry, accounting for 94 percent of enrollment for schools in this category during the
2013-2014 school year.7
Lottery records typically list applicant names along with application grades, dates of birth, towns
of residence and sibling statuses. Our analysis excludes sibling applicants, out-of-area applicants,
and students who applied to non-entry grades (siblings are guaranteed admission, while out-ofarea applicants are typically ineligible). The lottery records also indicate which students received
admission oﬀers. We distinguish between immediate oﬀers received on the day of the lottery and later
oﬀers received from the waitlist; in some lotteries all students eventually receive waitlist oﬀers. All
oﬀers are coded as waitlist oﬀers in a few lotteries where we cannot distinguish between immediate
and waitlist oﬀers. Further information on school coverage and lottery records appears in Appendix
Tables A1 and A2. We use the “proven provider” label to refer to the four middle school charters
in Boston that were granted permission to expand. The seven new campuses opened in the 2011-12
and 2012-13 school years are labeled “expansion charters,” and the three remaining charter middle
schools are “other charters.” 8
We match the lottery records to state administrative data based on name, date of birth, town
of residence and application cohort. The administrative data cover all students enrolled in Mas7

Two charter middle schools that closed before 2010 are excluded from this calculation. The one missing school
declined to provide lottery records.
8
We categorize MATCH Middle School as a proven provider, as MATCH obtained that categorization from
the state. MATCH’s expansion campus opened at the elementary level, however. We categorize KIPP: Boston as
an expansion campus, but this school does not have a direct parent campus in Boston as KIPP’s only previous
Massachusetts campus was in Lynn. We classify UP Academy as an expansion charter even though it opened under
a different provision of the charter school law. To check whether our results are sensitive to these classification
decisions, Appendix Table A4 reports an alternative version of our main results with these three schools categorized
as “other charters.” The findings here remain generally the same, with other charters demonstrating slightly larger
effects and proven providers and expansion schools showing smaller gains than in our preferred specification.

9

sachusetts public schools between 2002 and 2014. As shown in Appendix Table A3, we ﬁnd matches
for 95 percent of lottery applicants in this database. Administrative records include school enrollment, gender, race, special education status, English language learner status, subsidized lunch
status, and test scores on Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessment System (MCAS) achievement
tests. We standardize MCAS scores to have mean zero and standard deviation one for Boston
students by subject, grade and year. In addition to information on charter lottery applicants, we
use administrative data on other Boston students to describe changes in charter application and
enrollment patterns after the 2010 reform. The Data Appendix provides more details regarding
data processing and sample construction.

3.2

Descriptive Statistics

Charter application and enrollment patterns in our analysis sample mirror the large increases in
charter market share displayed in Figure 1. As shown in Table 3, 15 percent of eligible Boston
students applied to charter schools with ﬁfth or sixth grade entry before the 2010 reform, 12 percent
received oﬀers from these schools, and 10 percent enrolled. This implies roughly 1.5 applicants for
each available charter seat. The application rate increased to 35 percent in 2013, and attendance
reached 17 percent.9 The increase in applications therefore outpaced enrollment growth, boosting
the number of applicants per seat to 2. This increase in demand was particularly pronounced at
other charter schools (neither proven providers nor expansions), which saw their applications per
seat rise from 1.9 to 4.10 After the expansion, half of charter school sixth grade students attended
new expansion campuses.
Table 4 describes the characteristics of Boston middle school students in BPS, charter schools,
and our randomized lottery applicant sample. Charter applicants and enrollees are consistently
more likely to be black than BPS students. Both before and after 2010, students attending proven
providers were less disadvantaged than other Boston students as measured by special education
status, limited English proﬁciency, and fourth grade test scores. Past achievement and other char9

These attendance percentages are lower than the percentages in Figure 1, since they exclude charter schools that
enroll students at earlier entry grade levels.
10
The number of applicants per seat is larger for each individual charter type than for the sector as a whole because
some students apply to more than one school.

10

acteristics of students enrolled at proven providers and randomized applicants were similar before
the reform, but diverged somewhat afterward. This is due to the fact that one proven provider
campus transitioned to a K - 8 structure in 2010-11 by grandfathering students from its elementary
school instead of ﬁlling its entire ﬁfth grade via random lottery.
As shown in columns (11) and (12) of Table 4, the characteristics of students enrolled at expansion charters diﬀer markedly from those of other charter students. Special education and limited
English proﬁciency rates are similar at expansion charters and in the BPS population. Expansion
charter students also score below the BPS average on 4th grade math and English tests, and are
more likely than BPS students to be eligible for subsidized lunches. These facts indicate that expansion charters attract a more disadvantaged, lower-achieving population than their proven provider
parent schools. This pattern may reﬂect the changes in recruitment practices resulting from the
2010 Achievement Gap Act, which mandated that charter schools take steps to enroll higher-need
students and allowed charters to advertise directly to all students in the district by mail.

4

Empirical Framework
We use charter lottery oﬀers as instruments for charter school attendance in a causal model

with multiple endogenous variables, each representing enrollment in a type of charter school. The
structural equation links charter attendance with outcomes as follows:

Yig = αg +

K
X
k=1

k
βk Cig
+

J
X

δj Rij + Xi′ γ + ǫig ,

(1)

j=1

k measures years of enrollment in
where Yig is a test score for charter applicant i in grade g and Cig

charter school type k through grade g. Charter types include parent campuses, expansion campuses,
and other charters; we also distinguish between enrollment before and after the charter expansion
law. The parameters of interest, βk , represent causal eﬀects of an additional year of attendance at
each charter type relative to traditional public schools. The key control variables in equation (1)
are a set of indicators, Rij , for all combinations of charter lottery applications present in the data.
Lottery oﬀers are randomly assigned within these “risk sets.” A vector of baseline demographic characteristics, Xi , is also included to increase precision. These characteristics, which are measured in

11

the year prior to a student’s lottery application, include gender, race, a female-minority interaction,
subsidized lunch status, English language learner status, and special education status.
The ﬁrst stage equations for each charter enrollment type are given by:

k
Cig
= µkg +

K 
X
ℓ=1

J
 X
k ℓ
k ℓ
k
; k = 1...K.
Zi2 +
πℓ1
Zi1 + πℓ2
λkj Rij + Xi′ θk + ηig

(2)

j=1

k denotes a dummy variable equal to one if applicant i received an immediate oﬀer to attend
Here Zi1
k equals one if the applicant later received an oﬀer
charter type k on the day of a lottery, and Zi2

from the waitlist. Like equation (1), the ﬁrst stage also controls for lottery risk set indicators and
baseline student characteristics. Two-stage least squares (2SLS) estimates are obtained by ordinary
least squares (OLS) estimation of equation (1) after substituting predicted values from (2) for the
charter attendance variables. The estimation sample stacks all post-lottery test scores in grades ﬁve
through eight for randomized charter applicants, and standard errors are clustered by student to
account for correlation in outcomes across grades.
Our empirical strategy is motivated by the fact that charter lottery oﬀers are randomly assigned
within lottery risk sets and are therefore independent of ability, family background, and all other predetermined student attributes. Appendix Table A5 presents a check on this by comparing baseline
characteristics for oﬀered and non-oﬀered applicants within lottery risk sets. These comparisons
show that lottery winners and losers are similar for all charter school types and time periods,
indicating that random assignment was successful.11

5

Lottery Estimates
We begin by reporting a pooled set of 2SLS impact estimates for all Boston charter middle

schools across our full sample period. These estimates, which appear in Table 5, come from a
version of equations (1) and (2) that uses a single instrument (any charter oﬀer) to instrument for
a single endogenous variable (total years in charter). The ﬁrst stage estimate in column (1) shows
that a charter school oﬀer increases charter attendance by an average of one year. Column (2)
11

Even with random assignment, selective attrition may lead to bias in comparisons of lottery winners and losers.
Appendix Tables A3 and A6 show that the attrition rate from our sample is low: we match 95 percent of applicants
to the administrative data, and find roughly 85 percent of post-lottery test scores that should be observed in our
sample window for matched students. The match rate is 4 percent higher for students offered charter seats, and we
are 3 percent more likely to find scores for students with lottery offers at non-proven-provider charters before 2010.
This modest differential attrition seems unlikely to meaningfully affect the results reported below.

12

reports reduced form diﬀerences in test scores between lottery winners and losers. The results here
show that lottery winners outscore losers by 0.22σ in math and 0.12σ in ELA. Because the ﬁrst
stage is roughly one, the 2SLS estimates in column (3) are similar to the reduced form, implying
that a year of charter attendance boosts math and ELA scores by 0.22σ and 0.12σ on average.
These results, which represent the most precise and representative estimates of the eﬀectiveness of
Boston’s charter sector to date, are similar to the eﬀects reported by Abdulkadiroğlu et al. (2011)
in a subsample of the schools and cohorts studied here.
Proven provider charter schools generated larger achievement gains than other charter schools
in Boston prior to the 2010 expansion. This can be seen in Table 6, which reports second-stage
estimates of equation (1).12 Columns (2) and (3) demonstrate that a year of charter attendance
at a proven provider increased math and English scores by 0.32σ and 0.12σ prior to the reform,
estimates that are highly statistically signiﬁcant. Corresponding math and English eﬀects for other
Boston charters equal 0.18σ and 0.08σ. The diﬀerence in eﬀects for proven providers and other
charters is statistically signiﬁcant in math (p = 0.00), though not in English. This ﬁnding indicates
that policymakers selected more eﬀective charter schools to be eligible for expansion.
Proven providers and other charters maintained their eﬀectiveness after the charter expansion
reform. As shown in columns (5) and (7) of Table 6, proven providers boost math and English
scores by 0.37σ and 0.19σ per year of attendance after 2010, while other charters increase scores
by 0.19σ and 0.13σ in this period. These estimates are slightly larger than estimates for earlier
cohorts, though the diﬀerences between pre- and post-reform eﬀects are not statistically signiﬁcant
for either group. As in the pre-reform period, the diﬀerence in eﬀects between proven providers and
other charters is signiﬁcant in math (p = 0.03). These results indicate that expanding to operate
new campuses did not dilute the eﬀectiveness of proven provider charters at their original campuses.
Proven providers also successfully replicated their impacts at expansion schools. Column (6)
of Table 6 demonstrates that a year of attendance at an expansion charter school increases math
and English test scores by 0.32σ and 0.23σ. These estimates are comparable to estimates for
parent campuses, and the hypothesis that expansion and proven provider eﬀects are equal cannot
12
Appendix Table A7 reports first stage estimates separately by charter type. The first stage coefficients are
generally smaller in the post-expansion period for all charter types. This reflects the fact that less time has elapsed in
our data for cohorts applying after 2010, resulting in fewer years of potential charter enrollment between lottery and
test dates. Reduced form estimates are reported in Appendix Table A8 and OLS estimates of charter school effects
that control for prior test scores and baseline characteristics are in Appendix Table A9.

13

be rejected at conventional levels (p = 0.63 and 0.62 in math and English). Estimated eﬀects
for expansion charters are larger than corresponding estimates for other charters during the same
time period, though these diﬀerences are only marginally statistically signiﬁcant for math and not
statistically signiﬁcant for English. Combined with the consistent eﬀects for proven providers and
other charters over time, these results indicate that Boston’s charter middle school sector slightly
increased its average eﬀectiveness despite the growth in charter market share over this period.

6

Exploring Effect Heterogeneity

The impacts of expansion charters are particularly striking in view of the changes in selection
documented in Table 4: new charter campuses continue to generate large eﬀects despite serving
more typical students. This suggests that positive charter eﬀects are not an artifact of a positivelyselected peer environment. This ﬁnding is also consistent with results reported by Walters (2018),
which suggest that charter eﬀects are larger for the average Boston student than for the average
charter applicant, as well as estimates in Abdulkadiroğlu et al. (2016), which indicate that charter
eﬀects are larger for students passively enrolled in charters through school conversion than for
students who voluntarily apply through lotteries. We further investigate the impact of changes in
the charter population on the eﬀects of charter expansion by studying eﬀect heterogeneity across
subgroups and changes in the quality of the fallback traditional public schools available to charter
applicants.

6.1

Student Characteristics

The 2010 charter expansion law encourages charter schools to recruit and retain students with
higher needs, as measured by criteria including English proﬁciency, special education status and
past achievement. Appendix Table A10 summarizes eﬀect heterogeneity as a function of these
characteristics.
The estimates show consistent positive impacts across most subgroups, charter school types,
time periods and subjects. Eﬀects are similar for English language learners and students without
this designation, though estimates for the former group are often imprecise due to small sample
sizes. All estimates are positive for students with and without special education status; eﬀects
for special education students appear to be somewhat smaller at proven providers and larger at

14

expansion charters, but these diﬀerences may be a chance ﬁnding due to the many splits examined.
As in previous studies (e.g., Walters, 2018), we ﬁnd that eﬀects tend to be larger for students with
lower previous test scores. The large estimated eﬀects for high-need subgroups at expansion charters
are noteworthy: expansion schools continue to generate substantial gains for these groups despite
serving larger shares of such students than other Boston charters.
We analyze the role of this heterogeneity in the eﬀectiveness of charter expansion via a OaxacaBlinder (1973)-style decomposition, which splits charter school treatment eﬀects into components
explained and unexplained by student characteristics. This decomposition is based on 2SLS models
of the form:
Yig = αg +

K
X
!

βk0

+

Xi′ β x

k=1



k
Cig

+

J
X

δj Rij + Xi′ γ + ǫig .

(3)

j=1

Equation (3) allows a separate main eﬀect for attendance at each charter type (βk0 ) as well as an
k
interaction with student characteristics common across charter types (β x ). Charter exposure Cig

and its interactions with Xi are treated as endogenous. The immediate and waitlist oﬀer variables
k , Z k , and their interactions with X are the excluded instruments.
for each charter type Zi1
i
i2

Let X̄k denote the average characteristics of students attending charter k, and let µx ≡ E[Xi ]
denote the mean of Xi for the Boston population. The eﬀect of charter type k for students enrolled
at k (the eﬀect of treatment on the treated, T OTk ) can be represented:
T OTk = βk0 + X̄k′ β x
′
 !
!
= βk0 + µx′ β x + X̄k − µx β x .
{z
} |
{z
}
|
AT Ek

(4)

M atchk

This expression decomposes the TOT for charter type k into an average treatment eﬀect for the
Boston population, AT Ek , and a deviation from the average treatment eﬀect due to the characteristics of type k’s students, M atchk . We quantify the contribution of student characteristics to
charter school eﬀectiveness by studying estimates of AT Ek and M atchk for each school type and
time period.
Table 7 reports estimates of the components of the decomposition in equation (4), using gender,
race, ethnicity, English language learner status, subsidized lunch, special education, and baseline
test scores as interaction variables. Two-stage least squares estimates appear in panel A, and panel
15

B displays corresponding OLS estimates for comparison. As with the treatment eﬀect estimates in
Table A9, the OLS decomposition results tend to be qualitatively similar and more precise than
the 2SLS results. Estimated match components are close to zero for proven providers in both time
periods, while match components for other charters are negative in both periods. This indicates that
the demographic composition of other charters reduces their eﬀectiveness, a result that is consistent
with Walters’ (2018) ﬁnding that disadvantaged students were less likely to apply to Boston charter
schools despite experiencing larger achievement beneﬁts in data prior to the reform.
In contrast, column (4) reveals positive match eﬀects for expansion charter schools. This pattern
is due to the fact that expansion charters enroll a lower-achieving set of students compared to other
charters (see Table 4). Since achievement gains are larger for this group, the match eﬀect reinforces
the eﬀectiveness of expansion charters. The magnitudes of these match eﬀects are relatively small,
however, accounting for roughly 4 percent and 8 percent of the TOT in math and ELA. Evidently,
changes in student characteristics increased the eﬀectiveness of new charter campuses but were not
the primary driver of the eﬀectiveness of expansion schools.

6.2

Fallback Schools

One potential explanation for the success of Boston charter school expansion, where other eﬀorts at
program replication have been less successful, is that students in expansion campuses face particularly poor alternatives if they do not attend a charter school. Chabrier, Cohodes, and Oreopolous
(2016) ﬁnd that poor fallback school options are one of the strongest predictors of charter school
eﬀectiveness. It also is possible that charter schools inﬂuence the counterfactual by diverting resources from district schools, as is the case in Arsen and Ni (2012); Bifulco and Reback (2014); Cook
(2018); Ladd and Singleton (2018). However Ridley and Terrier (2018) ﬁnd small gains in district
school ﬁnances (and test scores) in Massachusetts using the same charter expansion law.13 Expansion campuses in Boston may have located in areas where students’ counterfactual schools were
lower-performing. To see if low-quality fallback schools explain the success of expansion campuses,
we compare fallback school conditions across charter school types, both before and after charter
13
Other studies of competitive effects of charter schools on nearby district schools’ test scores generally find no
or small positive impacts (Booker et al., 2008; Cordes, 2018; Jinnai, 2014; Davis, 2013; Sass, 2006; Shin, Fuller, and
Dauter, 2017; Winters, 2012; Zimmer et al., 2009; Zimmer and Buddin, 2009). One exception is Imberman (2011)
which found a mix of neutral and negative effects. For reviews of this literature, see: Betts (2009); Gill and Booker
(2008); Gill (2016); Epple, Romano, and Zimmer (2016).

16

school expansion.
Table 8 shows average school-level value-added estimates for traditional public schools attended
by students that enroll in district schools as a result of losing a charter lottery (untreated compliers).14 Value-added estimates are OLS coeﬃcients from regressions of test scores on school
indicators, with controls for lagged test scores and demographics. Speciﬁcation tests reported by
Angrist et al. (2017) indicate that estimates from models of this type provide a reasonable proxy
for school eﬀectiveness. In both math and ELA, estimated value-added of the traditional public
school fallback alternatives attended by charter applicants does not diﬀer by charter school type,
and these fallback schools appear to be of roughly average quality among schools in BPS. Students’
fallback options therefore do not seem to be an important component of variation in eﬀects across
charter types or time periods.

7

School Practices

Our results so far show that changes in student characteristics and the quality of applicants’ fallback schools do not explain the eﬀectiveness of expansion charters. This suggests that successful
replication of the Boston charter model may be driven by attributes of the expansion schools themselves. We explore this hypothesis by providing a more detailed account of organizational practices
at parent and expansion charter schools in Boston. This portion of our analysis includes a qualitative overview of the mechanics of charter expansion based on interviews with school leaders (S.
Dunn, J. Clark, W. Austin, A. Hall, and D. Lehman, personal communication, May 2017), as well
as a quantitative assessment of teacher value-added that gives an indication of how heterogeneity
in teacher quality is managed in traditional public and charter schools.

7.1

Standardized School Models and Leadership

Proven provider charter schools sought to maintain ﬁdelity of their school models during expansion
by emphasizing adherence to the same educational practices at new campuses. Table 1 shows a
comparison of practices at parent and expansion charters based on information drawn from charter

14

We estimate untreated complier outcomes using methods from Abadie (2002).

17

school annual reports.15 Expansion schools typically have the same amount of instructional time
as their parent campuses, including identical length of the school day, time devoted to math and
reading instruction, and days in the school year.16 Expansion schools similarly implemented their
parent campuses’ No Excuses practices, tutoring, homework help, and Saturday school programs.
Expanding charter networks also tried to maintain similar pedagogical practices at old and new
campuses. Teachers co-planned curricula and teachers judged to be eﬀective were encouraged to
share their lesson plans across the network. This model of shared teaching resources was aimed at
supporting new, inexperienced teachers, who comprised two thirds of the new schools’ staﬀ. Survey
evidence from Boston charters indicates that such collaboration is common within the sector, with
59 percent of new teachers reporting co-planning the curriculum with their peers (Gabbianelli,
McGovern, and Wu, 2014). Recent evidence from other contexts shows that such collaboration can
increase student achievement (Jackson and Bruegmann, 2009; Ronfeldt et al., 2015; Papay et al.,
2016; Sun, Loeb, and Grissom, 2017) and that access to high quality lesson plans also boosts student
achievement (Jackson and Makarin 2018). Fryer (2014) found that charter practices, similar to those
used in Boston charters, can be successfully transfered to traditional public schools.
High teacher turnover rates are the norm at Boston charter schools. This is shown in Table 9,
which summarizes teacher mobility patterns at charter and traditional public schools. As a result,
some practices aimed at quickly training new teachers were in place prior to the 2010 reform. This
may have aided schools’ eﬀorts to bring inexperienced teachers at new campuses up to speed on
key practices. Two charter networks run their own teacher training programs and hired some of the
graduates as full-time teachers. Charter networks also centralized teacher recruitment and professional development, potentially saving on search costs and resulting in similar types of teachers hired
at new and old schools. Each network reported conducting some share of professional development
at the network level.
Growing charter networks had stable leadership throughout the scaling up process. Principals
in the new and original campuses did not change throughout the expansion period in this study.17
15

The Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education provided the 2012-13 annual reports
for each of the Boston charter middle schools at our request. The state requires charter schools to submit annual
reports and uses the reports when considering schools’ charter renewal applications.
16
Edward Brooke’s replication campus in East Boston is an exception, with six more days in its school year than
its parent campus.
17
We verified this in Education Personnel Information Management Systems (EPIMS), the educator database
available from the Department of Elementary and Secondary Education, which contains yearly staff level data for all

18

Furthermore, principals were trained internally: all of the principals at expansion campuses were
former teachers from the original campus. School leaders who oversaw their network’s expansion
stressed the value of selecting principals from within the network because they are familiar with
core school practices. Columns (3) and (6) of Table 9 show that roughly 4 percent of charter school
teachers were promoted to a leadership position from 2011 to 2014, compared to less than 1 percent
of BPS teachers.

7.2

Evidence on Teacher Productivity

The qualitative evidence above suggests that Boston charter schools limit teacher discretion by
emphasizing a standard set of pedagogical practices, which may facilitate eﬀorts to implement
similar school models at new campuses. We assess this quantitatively by studying variation in
teacher value-added at charter and district schools. Teacher value-added estimates come from the
following model for achievement of student i in grade g in calendar year t:

′
Yigt = αg + λt + Xigt
γ + βs(i,g) + θj(i,g)t + δc(i,g,t) + ξi + ǫigt .

(5)

The control vector Xigt includes student demographic characteristics and lagged test scores, as well
as classroom-level averages of these variables. We also include grade (αg ) and calendar year (λt )
ﬁxed eﬀects. The function s(i, g) labels the school that student i attends for grade g, j(i, g) describes
the identity of her grade g teacher, and c(i, g, t) denotes a speciﬁc classroom. Because classroomlevel averages of the observables are included as controls, (5) describes a “correlated random eﬀects”
model in which the mean of the teacher eﬀect distribution may depend on the characteristics of
students in the classroom (Mundlak, 1978; Chamberlain, 1982). In other words, we are not imposing
independence of teacher quality from student observables.
We also allow school and teacher eﬀects to depend on observed school and teacher characteristics.
The mean of the distribution ofschool eﬀects βs diﬀers for charter and traditional public schools.
The teacher eﬀects (which measure variation in teacher eﬀectiveness within school) are in turn
written:
θjt = θj0 + Wjt′ θw ,
employees in Massachusetts public schools.

19

where Wjt includes teacher j’s experience as of year t in one of three experience groups (novice, 1
to 4 years of experience, and greater than ﬁve years of experience) as well as interactions of charter
status with experience. Given the small number of charter teachers in the sample, we do not
separate teachers at proven providers, expansions, and other charters for the purposes of the valueadded model, nor do we estimate experience premia for each year.18 We model the school eﬀects βs ,
within-school teacher eﬀects θj0 , and classroom eﬀects δc as normally distributed conditional on Xigt ,
with variances that diﬀer in charter and traditional public schools. The student random eﬀect ξi
and idiosyncratic error ǫigt are also modeled as normally distributed. Random eﬀects speciﬁcations
of this sort are common in the literature on teacher value-added, and previous studies have argued
that such models generate estimates of teacher eﬀectiveness that exhibit little selection bias (Kane,
Rockoﬀ, and Staiger, 2008; Chetty, Friedman, and Rockoﬀ, 2014).19
As can be seen in Table 10, maximum likelihood estimation of model (5) produces two notable
ﬁndings. First, returns to teacher experience seem to beless pronounced in charter schools than
in BPS. Comparing teachers with 1 to 4 years of experience and teachers with 5 or more years
of experience to novices shows that more experienced teachers generally outperform new teachers.
However, the experience premium is larger in BPS (though the diﬀerences are not statistically
signiﬁcant), with teachers with 1 to 4 years of experience outperforming novice teachers in BPS by
about 0.09σ in both math and English. The corresponding experience premia for teachers in charter
schools equal 0.06σ and 0.04σ. For teachers with more than 5 years of experience, BPS teachers
maintain their edge relative to novices, but any premium for charter school teachers is small and not
statistically signiﬁcant. In short, either through selection of teachers or through training, charter
schools dampen one of the most persistent ﬁndings in the literature on teacher eﬀectiveness (Harris
2011; Papay and Kraft 2015; Clotfelter, Ladd, and Vigdor 2007; Rockoﬀ 2004) – that teachers make
signiﬁcant gains in their ﬁrst few years of teaching. Evidently, teachers at charter schools deliver
eﬀective education despite the high proportion of novice teachers and substantial teacher turnover.
We caution, however, that while our estimates of the diﬀerence in experience proﬁles between the
18

Data for the value-added model are from 2011-2015, the years in which it is possible to link students, teachers,
and classrooms in the state data.
19
Our findings are robust to variants of this model. We estimated versions where we used teacher random effects,
teacher and school random effects, teacher fixed effects, and school and teacher fixed effects. We also ran versions
that added student random effects, phased in controls, restricted to the sample to exclude students who attended
both Charter and BPS during middle school, and used finer years of experience indicators to similar findings.

20

two sectors are quantitatively large, we cannot reject the hypothesis that these parameters are equal
due to a lack of statistical precision.
The second notable ﬁnding from the value-added analysis is revealed by comparing variation in
school, teacher, and class eﬀects across the charter and traditional sectors. Both charter and district
schools have similar variation in school-level eﬀectiveness. At the teacher and classroom levels, we
ﬁnd less variation in eﬀectiveness in the charter sector. In math, the standard deviation of the
teacher random eﬀect θj0 is 0.12σ compared to 0.19σ in BPS, while the standard deviation of the
class eﬀect δc is 0.08σ compared to 0.15σ.20 This suggests that the charter sector reduces variation
in teacher eﬀectiveness within schools, which may be due to charters’ centralized management of
teachers and standardized instructional practices.21 Additionally, the charter hiring practices could
select teachers with less variation in their practices, though this would also be part of a management
strategy. The reduction in variation at the classroom level (which is typically attributed to random
events like construction noise on test day) suggests some of this variation is systematic and can be
reduced through standardized practices as well. Both conclusions from the value-added analysis are
consistent with the hypothesis that highly standardized management practices may contribute to
the successful replication of charter school eﬀects.

8

Conclusion

The replication and expansion of successful schools is one strategy to address persistent achievement
gaps in the United States. The eﬃcacy of this strategy requires schools selected for expansion
to maintain their success at new locations and with new student populations. Previous research
has shown that urban No Excuses charter schools boost test scores markedly for small groups of
applicants, suggesting the potential for transformational eﬀects on urban achievement if these gains
can be maintained at larger scales. We examine a recent policy change in Massachusetts that
doubled Boston’s charter sector over a short time period, allowing us to evaluate changes in the
20

The results found here—that charter value-added standard deviations are around 0.11 and district about 0.18—
indicate that charter schools in Boston are toward the minimum known range of teacher, value-added whereas Boston
district schools are in the middle of the distribution. Hanushek and Rivkin (2010) review the dispersion of teacher
value-added in 10 localities, and find that the standard deviation of teacher effects ranges between 0.11 and 0.36σ in
math and 0.10 and 0.26σ in reading.
21
Taylor (2018) and Jackson and Makarin (2018) also show a compression of the teacher value-added distribution when there are standardized instructional practices. In Taylor (2018), standardization comes from the use of
computer-aided instruction; in Jackson and Makarin (2018) from access to high-quality instructional materials.

21

eﬀects of No Excuses charters as these schools expanded to serve a larger share of the population.
Our results demonstrate that Boston’s No Excuses charters reproduced their eﬀectiveness at
new campuses. Lottery-based estimates show that schools selected for expansion produced larger
gains than other charters in the pre-reform period, indicating that Massachusetts’ accountability
regime successfully identiﬁed more successful schools. New expansion campuses generate test score
gains similar to those of their parent campuses despite a doubling of charter market share in middle
school.
The demographics of students served by expansion charters are similar to those of the Boston
population as a whole, suggesting that charter eﬀectiveness is not driven by unique peer environments. We ﬁnd that changing student populations and the quality of fallback traditional public
schools play only a small role in the eﬀectiveness of charter expansion, however. Both a qualitative analysis of organizational practices during expansion and a quantitative analysis of variation
in teacher value-added indicate that charter schools use a highly standardized model that limits
variation in practices across schools and classrooms. This standardized approach may facilitate
the portability of charter eﬀectiveness to new campuses. More broadly, the role of these and other
organizational practices in explaining successful replication of social programs is an important area
for future work.
This paper also brings evidence to bear on the best agent for replicating social programs. When
a program is successful, policymakers face the decision of whether to have the original implementer
continue to provide the program, or whether governments or other agencies should take over the
program at a larger scale. This paper shows that, in the charter school context, replicating existing
charters may be a better option than allowing new providers to enter the sector. This is consistent
with the ﬁndings of Bold et al. (2018), which shows that the successful Kenyan contract teacher
program evaluated in Duﬂo et al. 2011; 2015 was replicated with provision by the original provider,
but not with the government (despite an identical contract). The “proven provider” design of the
Massachusetts 2010 charter law is unique among the states with charter school laws, and it remains
to be seen if other states or charter authorizers adopt such policies. However, the share of charter
schools managed by charter school management organizations (independent, non-proﬁt organizations that manage two or more charter schools) has grown from 16 percent in 2009 (Furgeson et al.,
2011) to 23 percent in 2017 (David, 2018), indicating that the market may institute a replication
22

strategy even if authorizors do not.

23

24

!"

!#!$"

!#%"

!#%$"

!#&"

!#&$"

!#'"

!#'$"

()*+,-./-0,*"

1)203".-/+,"

4)*03".-/+,"

!"#$%&'()'*+,%-&%'./+001'23%0114&3-'"3'506-03

70-&6)'8+"6'9"#$%&':10-6'-+&'6+,%&'09'506-03'90$%-+;'6"<-+;',3='3"3-+'#%,=&'6-$=&3-6'&3%011&='"3'/+,%-&%'
6/+0016'>&-?&&3'@AA(BA@',3='@A(CB(D'6/+001'E&,%6F'8+&'#%,E'=,6+&='1"3&'=&30-&6'-+&'1,6-'6/+001'E&,%'>&90%&'
-+&'/+,%-&%'&<:,36"03':01"/E'?&3-'"3-0'&99&/-F

.+,%&'09'506-03'6-$=&3-6G

25

7+.&0)'84"0'1"#$%&'9-:0'.4&'6+,-."+/'+1'.4&'9";;6&'0,4++6',4-%.&%0'"/'2+0.+/<'"/,6$;"/#'0,4++60'.4-.'&=:-/;&;'>:%+?&/':%+?";&%0@<'/&A'
,4-%.&%'0,4++60'>&=:-/0"+/',4-%.&%0@<'-/;'+.4&%',4-%.&%0B'C-,4',+6+%';&/+.&0'-';"11&%&/.',4-%.&%'/&.A+%DB'

!"#$%&'()'*+,-."+/0'+1'2+0.+/'34-%.&%'5,4++60

;?

?

G

=D?
;DH
HD>
HDF
HD>
HDE
HD?
>D;

;CFDF
CDH
?=DC
FCDG
;DF
;HD=
R;GSC>;
;DH

123&.*/,.#
$%&'()'*
:><

>

;?D>
;DH
;DH
HDG
;DH
HDC
HDG
Q

;CGD>
CDH
@EDF
CCD?
>D>
;;DG
R;?SH@=
;DH

4(%)'#
$%&'()'*
:?<

@

;CHDH
GD>
E@D;
E>D=
;=D>
;;DG
R;CSGFF
;DH

5,*(,.#+67"/8#
98%,,"*
:@<

X,()*Y#T%/*#(&7")#0/*3"&B*#8%&'&8()'/*(/8*#K,'#8%&'()'#*8%,,"*#/.#(%)#&.&"B*/*#*&M3")#&",.L#V/(%#5,*(,.#+67"/8#98%,,"*#:5+9<#0/*('/8(#*8%,,"*#*)'-/.L#
M/00")#*8%,,"#L'&0)*D#A&(&#*,6'8)*#/.8"60)#8%&'()'#*8%,,"#&..6&"#')3,'(*S#*8%,,"#V)7*/()*S#O&**&8%6*)((*#A)3&'(M).(#,K#1")M).(&'B#&.0#
9)8,.0&'B#1068&(/,.#:O!#A191<#98%,,"#A/*('/8(#+',K/")*S#&.0#O!#A191#1068&(/,.#+)'*,..)"#Z.K,'M&(/,.#O&.&L)M).(#9B*()M#:1+ZO9<#0&(&D#
$%&'&8()'/*(/8*#&')#M)&*6')0#/.#(%)#=H;=Q=H;>#*8%,,"#B)&'D#+)'Q363/"#)23).0/(6')#/*#$+ZQ&0[6*()0#(,#=H;@#0,""&'*D#T%)#X,#1286*)*#/.0)2#/*#&.#
)N6&""BQV)/L%()0#&-)'&L)#,K#/.0/8&(,'*#)N6&"#(,#,.)#/K#(%)#K,"",V/.L#/()M*#&')#0/*86**)0#/.#&#*8%,,"\*#&..6&"#')3,'(Y#%/L%#)23)8(&(/,.*#K,'#
&8&0)M/8*S#%/L%#)23)8(&(/,.*#K,'#7)%&-/,'S#*('/8(#7)%&-/,'#8,0)S#8,"")L)#3')3&'&(,'B#86''/86"6MS#8,')#-&"6)*#/.#*8%,,"#86"(6')S#*)")8(/-)#()&8%)'#
%/'/.L#,'#/.8).(/-)#3&BS#)M3%&*/*#,.#M&(%#&.0#')&0/.LS#6./K,'M*S#%/')*#T)&8%#K,'#!M)'/8&#()&8%)'*S#T)&8%/.L#])"",V*S#,'#!M)'/$,'3*#M)M7)'*S#
&KK/"/&()0#V/(%#T)&8%#K,'#!M)'/8&#&"6M./S#0&(&#0'/-).#/.*('68(/,.S#&.0#')L6"&'#()&8%)'#K))07&8WD#

X#:*8%,,"*<

U)&'*#,3).#(%',6L%#=H;=Q=H;>
T6(,'/.L#
I,M)V,'W#%)"3#3',L'&M
9&(6'0&B#3',L'&MM/.L
98%,,"#7')&W#3',L'&MM/.L
X,#1286*)*#/.0)2
$,.(&8(#3&').(*#&(#")&*(#M,.(%"B
A/*(&.8)#K',M#3&').(#8&M36*#:M/")*<

!"#$%&7(&)2"-1$-&/62**%&62"-"61$-./1.6/
GD?
;;DH
;DH
;DH
HD?
HD>
HDF
HD@
HD@
HD@
HDE
HDE
HD@
HD@
Q
Q

!"#$%&'(&)*+,"-./*#&0.12&1-"3.1.*#"%&,45%.6&/62**%/
A&B*#3)'#B)&'
;C@DE
;C>DC
I,6'*#3)'#0&B
CD;
CD;
J#,K#()&8%)'*#"/8).*)0#/.#()&8%/.L#&**/L.M).(
?GD=
?@DG
J#,K#8,')#&8&0)M/8#8"&**)*#(&6L%(#7B#%/L%"B#N6&"/K/)0#()&8%)'*
GCDG
CCDE
!-)'&L)#B)&'*#,K#()&8%/.L#)23)'/).8)#/.#O!#K,'#()&8%)'*
=DF
=DE
9(60).(P()&8%)'#'&(/,
;;D=
;=D@
!-)'&L)#3)'Q363/"#)23).0/(6')
R;GSH?;
R;GSEHH
T/(")#;#)"/L/7")
;DH
;DH

!""#$%&'()'*
:;<

+',-).#
+',-/0)'*
:=<

T&7")#;Y#98%,,"#$%&'&8()'/*(/8*

NMCG
NMNE
AAMEH
ECGA

REQ$-')(3$%*P

S.*7>'.3'P

T')(3$U%(;7.K$7.$4+$"2V*7>$#>?%%*3

9$@J2**$=70'$5W27&)*'.,$=')>?'(3B

II

CMIQ

NMCI

NMNN

NMHI

+**
@CB
AMNN

FE

DMCG

NMCE

NMNN

NMHD

AA

CMCN

NMCQ

NMNN

NMQF

CC

CMCF

NMDI

NMNN

NMIF

8')&'$
9',:%(;
@FB
NMCG

FF

AMEE

NMFD

NMNN

NMIH

+**
@GB
AMNN

AE

DMEA

NMNH

NMNN

NMIG

DG

NMEF

NMHG

NMNN

NMIQ

/)0'$<(%0$
")('.,$/)0123 9':$=')>?'(
@HB
@IB
NMCF
NMGG

9%,'3X$=?73$,)V*'$P'3>(7V'3$>?)()>,'(73,7>3$%<$,')>?'(3$),$!%3,%.$>?)(,'($3>?%%*3$V'<%('$).P$)<,'($'61).37%.M$/%*20.$@AB$3200)(7Y'3$!%3,%.$"2V*7>$
#>?%%*3$@!"#B$,')>?'($>?)()>,'(73,7>3$7.$CNAALACM$/%*20.3$@CB$L$@FB$P731*)-$3,),73,7>3$<%($,')>?'(3$:%(;7.K$),$1(%&'.$1(%&7P'($>?)(,'(3$7.$,?'$CNANLCNAA$
3>?%%*$-')(M$/%*20.3$@GB$L$@IB$3?%:$3,),73,7>3$<%($,')>?'(3$:%(;7.K$),$'61).37%.$>?)(,'(3$P2(7.K$,?'$CNAALCNAC$3>?%%*$-')(M$9':$,')>?'($3,),23$7.$
/%*20.$@IB$73$P'<7.'P$)3$?)&7.K$*'33$,?).$%.'$-')($%<$'61'(7'.>'$,')>?7.K$7.$4)33)>?23',,3$"2V*7>$#>?%%*3M$+$30)**$.20V'($%<$'61).37%.$>?)(,'($
,')>?'(3$>)0'$<(%0$3>?%%*3$%,?'($,?).$,?'$1)('.,$>)0123$).P$,?'7($>?)()>,'(73,7>3$)('$3707*)($,%$,')>?'(3$7.$/%*20.$@HBM

NMDN

ODC$-')(3$%*P

J()>,7%.$7.$>),'K%(-

!"#$%&'()**
@AB
L

#,)-$),$")('.,$ 4%&'$,%$
/)0123
561).37%.
@DB
@EB
NMGC
NMAC

=')>?'(3$),$"(%&'.$"(%&7P'(3$7.$CNANLAA

=')>?'(3$),$561).37%.$/?)(,'(3$7.$J7(3,$
T')(

=)V*'$CX$#,)<<7.K$),$"(%&'.$"(%&7P'($).P$561).37%.$/?)(,'($#>?%%*3

:>
68>
6I>
6L;

>$,?$@,0),"$A)B/*")0$G.)&$H,))*(#$1??*(0

>$,?$@,0),"$A)B/*")0$G.)&$H,))*(#$,($J'.)C.0)$1??*(0

>$,?$@,0),"$A)B/*")0$2"(,CC."D$."$%&'()*(0

!44C.K'")0$4*($A*')

6LF

;>

=>

8>

E>

6LE

:>

<>

9>

1)&*($
%&'()*(0
597
F>

8LI

6=>

89>

6I>

9;>

!"#$%&'()*(
5:7

9L:

;>

6I>

:>

6E>

+(,-*"$
+(,-./*(0
5;7

8L8

E>

6;>

=>

234'"0.,"$
%&'()*(0
5<7
6E>

!?)*($%&'()*($234'"0.,"

:LI

:>

<>

9>

6F>

1)&*($
%&'()*(0
5=7

R,)*0O$M&.0$)'NC*$0BQQ'(.S*0$'44C.K').,"0$'"/$*"(,CCQ*")$?,($@,0),"$K&'()*($Q.//C*$0K&,,C0$."$)&*$'"'C#0.0$0'Q4C*$N*?,(*$'"/$'?)*($)&*$8I6IT66$K&'()*($
0*K),($*34'"0.,"L$M&*$0'Q4C*$,?$K&'()*(0$*3KCB/*0$0K&,,C0$0*(-."D$Q.//C*$0K&,,C$D('/*0$G.)&$4(.Q'(#$*")(#$4,.")0$4(.,($),$?.?)&$D('/*L$A)B/*")0$'(*$
."KCB/*/$.?$)&*#$*"(,CC*/$."$@,0),"$0K&,,C0$."$N,)&$?,B()&$'"/$0.3)&$D('/*L$%,CBQ"0$567T597$0&,G$0)').0).K0$?,($K,&,()0$,?$0)B/*")0$*")*(."D$?.?)&$D('/*$."$?'CC$
8IIF$,($8IIEL$%,CBQ"0$5:7T5=7$/.04C'#$0)').0).K0$?,($K,&,()0$*")*(."D$?.?)&$D('/*$."$?'CC$8I66T8I69L

6;>

>$,?$@,0),"$A)B/*")0$!44C#."D

!"#$%&'()*(
567

+(,-*"$
+(,-./*(0
587

@*?,(*$%&'()*($234'"0.,"

M'NC*$9O$%&'()*($P.//C*$AK&,,C$!44C.K').,"0$'"/$2"(,CCQ*")

AC799

AC?:@

AC99:

AC9;?

ACAA9

GH.4)

#IJ5.*./)*0(I%3H

$%K(.5H0E,%KI,K)0E),&%)&5

#2)3.,(0)*I3,4.'%

144)%*)*03H,&4)&0.%0;4H0K&,*)

7?@:;

99;A

AC7=>

AC77A

AC7A>

AC7>?

AC77;

AC>9=

AC7::

ACAA?

AC9=:

AC<?<

698
AC;@<

9>9;

AC:A:

AC99A

AC79A

AC7@7

AC77>

AC=?>

AC7>7

ACA7?

AC9:>

AC<=7

6:8
AC;?>

1((0TH,&4)&5
+,%*'-./)*0
$%&'(()*
122(.3,%450

@@<

AC7;?

ACA>;

ACA?7

AC7>;

AC7=<

AC>><

ACA<7

ACAA<

AC:=9

AC<>9

6;8
AC<A@

79=:

AC7<=

ACA;:

ACA@:

AC7?7

AC7=A

AC>;9

ACA;A

ACA79

AC9@<

AC=:?

6<8
AC;?<

"&'Q)%0"&'Q.*)&5
+,%*'-./)*0
$%&'(()*
122(.3,%450

?::A

L

L

ACAA7

AC9:=

AC;7A

AC>@9

AC7:A

ACA@=

AC;:<

AC:7:

6=8
AC;>=

$%&'(()*

!"#

9;>:

ACA=?

ACA:<

AC79A

AC7??

AC:9?

AC>@7

ACA?A

ACA97

AC:?;

AC;@A

6>8
AC;@<

;;>?

ACA9:

ACA97

ACA;A

AC9A9

AC:=:

AC?A9

ACA@9

ACA::

AC;A=

AC;;:

6?8
AC;@:

===

AC:<9

AC:<<

AC9?9

AC7<A

AC:9:

AC?:9

ACA;?

ACA7>

AC;<=

AC;<@

6@8
AC;?:

99<A

LACA7;

ACA9A

ACA9?

AC7@>

AC;79

AC?:<

ACA;>

ACA9<

AC;<:

AC;<A

67A8
AC;?;

"&'Q)%0"&'Q.*)&5
+,%*'-./)*0
$%&'(()*
122(.3,%450

1R4)&0TH,&4)&0$S2,%5.'%
1((0TH,&4)&50
+,%*'-./)*0
$%&'(()*
122(.3,%450

79::

LAC7:=

LAC7=;

ACA9;

AC7@>

AC:??

AC?9?

ACA<;

ACA9<

AC;A:

AC;@7

6778
AC<A:

9;7;

LACA@A

LACA=7

ACA7=

AC9A@

AC:@<

AC?:7

ACA<:

ACA:;

AC;:9

AC;<:

6798
AC;?=

$S2,%5.'%0TH,&4)&5
+,%*'-./)*0
$%&'(()*
122(.3,%450

M'4)5N0OH.504,J()05H'P50*)53&.24.Q)054,4.54.350R'&0!'54'%0-.**()053H''(054I*)%450J)R'&)0,%*0,R4)&04H)09A7AL7703H,&4)&053H''(05)34'&0)S2,%5.'%C0OH)05,-2()0.%3(I*)50,((054I*)%450PH'0,44)%*)*0!'54'%053H''(50.%0
;4H0K&,*)0,%*0<4H0'&0=4H0K&,*)0J)4P))%09AA;0,%*09A7:C0T'(I-%506780,%*06=805H'P054,4.54.350R'&054I*)%450PH'0*.*0%'40)%&'((0.%0,03H,&4)&053H''(0.%0<4H0'&0=4H0K&,*)C0T'(I-%50698U06;8U06>8U06@80,%*0677805H'P054,4.54.350
R'&054I*)%450PH'0)%&'(()*0.%0,03H,&4)&053H''(0.%0<4H0'&0=4H0K&,*)C0T'(I-%506:8U06<8U06?8U067A80,%*067980&)2'&4054,4.54.350R'&0&,%*'-./)*03H,&4)&053H''(0,22(.3,%45C0+,%*'-./)*0,22(.3,%450)S3(I*)05.J(.%K5U0
*.5VI,(.R.)*054I*)%45U0,%*0'I40'R0,&),0,22(.3,%45C0O)54053'&)50,&)054,%*,&*./)*04'0H,Q)0-),%0/)&'0,%*054,%*,&*0*)Q.,4.'%0'%)0.%0!'54'%0JW05IJX)34U0K&,*)0,%*0W),&C

M

L

ACA@:

15.,%

;4H0K&,*)0$%K(.5H053'&)

AC:<:

E,4.%'F,

L

AC;7?

!(,3D

;4H0K&,*)0-,4H053'&)

678
AC;>?

B)-,()

$%&'(()*

!"#

O,J()0;N0TH,&,34)&.54.350'R0!'54'%0Y.**()0#3H''(0#4I*)%45
!)R'&)0TH,&4)&0$S2,%5.'%

@

@
9:;<<>>>
39:91?5

9:419>>>
39:9115
4<64K

+*,-.*,&!/#0
315
9:14=>>>
39:9165
4<6;?
9:416>>>
39:9115

1'2'
365
9:116>>>
39:9165

@/%*$F&D8"$&%(EC*&#*L/#%$&J"#$%&$%()*M&#*,-.*,&J/#0M&(B,&1'2'&*$%"0(%*$&J/#&%8*&
J-CC&$(0LC*&/J&C/%%*#"*,&.8(#%*#&0",,C*&$.8//C$&(.#/$$&(CC&N*(#$&(B,&$.8//C$:&D8*&
*B,/)*B/-$&H(#"(EC*&"$&N*(#$&"B&(BN&.8(#%*#&$.8//C&(B,&%8*&"B$%#-0*B%&"$&(BN&
.8(#%*#&/JJ*#:&D8*&$(0LC*&$%(.O$&L/$%PC/%%*#N&%*$%&$./#*$&"B&)#(,*$&J"H*&%8#/-)8&
*")8%:&7/,*C$&./B%#/C&J/#&E($*C"B*&./H(#"(%*$&(B,&C/%%*#N&#"$O&$*%$:&'%(B,(#,&
*##/#$&(#*&.C-$%*#*,&EN&$%-,*B%:
&>$")B"J".(B%&(%&49QR&>>$")B"J".(B%&(%&?QR&>>>$")B"J".(B%&(%&4Q

AB)C"$8

7(%8

!"#$%&'%()*
345
9:;<=>>>
39:91?5

D(EC*&?F&GH*#(CC&I8(#%*#&AJJ*.%$

=>6=4

0&KC(*-

4B44
4;74:

4;7B9

6884

A=>=76

6887

67=;

=>4@:??
3=>=;85

67=7

686=

=>:4B
=>4:6

=>66B???
3=>=;:5

684:

=>:76
=>=;=

IP,%"'.-/",%"'012/&*(#&
6MNM
H#&A.-/",%"'
!"#$%&'
012/&*(#&'
<%/&
!"#$()%"*
.-/",%"*
385
395
3:5
A=>=;8
=>7:9???
=>76:???
3=>=;=5
3=>=;85

6846

=>8;=

=>46:??
3=>=985

68=9

=>=7=

+,-%"'
.-/",%"*
3;5
=>4B7???
3=>=995

H#,%*E'J-(*',/LC%'"%2#",*'6MNM'%*,(O/,%*'#P',-%'%PP%G,*'#P'G-/",%"'*G-##C'/,,%&)/&G%'#&',%*,'*G#"%*>'J-%'*/O2C%'*,/GQ*'2#*,AC#,,%"R',%*,'*G#"%*'(&'
K"/)%*'P($%',-"#DK-'%(K-,>'J-%'%&)#K%&#D*'$/"(/LC%*'/"%'G#D&,*'#P'R%/"*'*2%&,'(&',-%')(PP%"%&,'G-/",%"',R2%*'32"%A%12/&*(#&'2"#$%&'2"#$()%"*S'
2"%A%12/&*(#&'#,-%"'G-/",%"*S'2#*,A%12/&*(#&'2"#$%&'2"#$()%"*S'%12/&*(#&'*G-##C*S'/&)'2#*,A%12/&*(#&'#,-%"'G-/",%"*5>'J-%'(&*,"DO%&,*'/"%'
(OO%)(/,%'/&)'T/(,C(*,'C#,,%"R'#PP%"')DOO(%*'P#"'%/G-'*G-##C',R2%>''UOO%)(/,%'#PP%"'%FD/C*'#&%'P#"'/22C(G/&,*'#PP%"%)'*%/,*'#&',-%')/R'#P',-%'
C#,,%"R>'V/(,C(*,'#PP%"'%FD/C*'#&%'P#"'/22C(G/&,*'#PP%"%)'*%/,*'P"#O',-%'T/(,C(*,>'.#&,"#C*'(&GCD)%'C#,,%"R'"(*Q'*%,*S'/*'T%CC'/*'K%&)%"S'"/G%S'%,-&(G(,RS'
/'P%O/C%AO(&#"(,R'(&,%"/G,(#&S'*2%G(/C'%)DG/,(#&S'0&KC(*-'C/&KD/K%'C%/"&%"S'*DL*()(W%)'CD&G-'*,/,D*S'/&)'K"/)%'/&)'R%/"'(&)(G/,#"*>'M,/&)/")'
%""#"*'/"%'GCD*,%"%)'LR'*,D)%&,>'
?*(K&(P(G/&,'/,'4=XY'??*(K&(P(G/&,'/,'9XY'???*(K&(P(G/&,'/,'4X

46;;

H'3I22C(G/&,*5
H'3J#,/C'*G#"%*5

4=@;

=>768

!A$/CD%E'0FD/C*'2"#$%&'2"#$()%"
!A$/CD%E'0FD/C*'#,-%"'G-/",%"*

=>466???
3=>=7;5

=>=@8???
3=>=695

4B=B

4=B7

H'3I22C(G/&,*5
H'3J#,/C'*G#"%*5

46;B

=>===

!A$/CD%E'0FD/C*'2"#$%&'2"#$()%"
!A$/CD%E'0FD/C*'#,-%"'G-/",%"*

</,-

Z%P#"%'.-/",%"'012/&*(#&
6MNM
H#&A.-/",%"'
!"#$%&'
+,-%"'
<%/&
!"#$()%"*
.-/",%"*
345
365
375
=>44;
=>76=???
=>4@7???
3=>=7;5
3=>=6:5

J/LC%':E'.-/",%"'0PP%G,*'#&'J%*,'MG#"%*'Z%P#"%'/&)'IP,%"'.-/",%"'012/&*(#&

!3?@=9+A9B=5;CD;:E4E;F9;G9H63<4=<9I56;;@90GG=54:
Before Charter Expansion
Proven
Providers
(1)

!"!
/!0
23456

#$%%%&&&
,#$#-*.
#$%-#&&&
,#$#%#.
#$#'%
,#$##*.

89,:5;<=:.
!"!
/!0
23456

#$'()&&&
,#$#%#.
#$'(#&&&
,#$#%'.
#$##1
,#$##*.

89,:5;<=:.

!"!
/!0
23456

#$%>)&&&
,#$##*.
#$%>'&&&
,#$#'#.
#$##%
,#$##%.

89,:5;<=:.
!"!
/!0
23456
89,:5;<=:.

#$-+)&&&
,#$#'#.
#$-(#&&&
,#$#'#.
7#$##1
,#$##%.

After Charter Expansion
Proven
Providers
(3)

Other Charters
(2)

!"#$%&'(&)*&+$,-%.,
2346
#$'()&&&
#$%'*&&&
,#$#-#.
,#$#)#.
#$'*(&&&
#$%-'&&&
,#$#--.
,#$#)'.
7#$#'%
7#$##,#$##*.
,#$##(.
')*-1
0FQ@E:6
#$'##&&&
#$')>&&&
,#$#-#.
,#$#)%.
#$''*&&&
#$'11&&&
,#$#--.
,#$#)1.
7#$#'*&&
#$#'%
,#$##*.
,#$##(.
')*%!"#$%&/(&012&+$,-%.,
2346
#$-%1&&&
#$%#+&&&
,#$##*.
,#$#''.
#$-)(&&&
#$%#>&&&
,#$#'#.
,#$#''.
7#$#-%&&&
#$##'
,#$##%.
,#$##%.
(1-1>
0FQ@E:6
#$#*1&&&
#$-#%&&&
,#$#'#.
,#$#''.
#$'-)&&&
#$'*'&&&
,#$#''.
,#$#'-.
7#$#%'&&&
#$#'-&&&
,#$##%.
,#$##%.
(1-*#

Expansion
Charters
(4)

Other Charters
(5)

#$%)*&&&
,#$#)-.
#$%1)&&&
,#$#)%.
#$#'1&&&
,#$##).

#$'*+&&&
,#$#%+.
#$-#(&&&
,#$#%(.
7#$#''&&
,#$##).

#$-#+&&&
,#$#)'.
#$'*#&&&
,#$#)-.
#$#'>&&&
,#$##).

#$#*>&&
,#$#%*.
#$'#)&&&
,#$#1#.
7#$##*&
,#$##).

#$%->&&&
,#$#'1.
#$%'%&&&
,#$#'1.
#$#'%&&&
,#$##-.

#$--(&&&
,#$#''.
#$-1%&&&
,#$#''.
7#$#')&&&
,#$##-.

#$'>1&&&
,#$#'%.
#$'1*&&&
,#$#'%.
#$#')&&&
,#$##-.

#$-##&&&
,#$#'#.
#$-')&&&
,#$#'#.
7#$#')&&&
,#$##-.

8;4=:A9!6E:943?@=9J=5;CD;:=:9=:4EC34=:9;G9563<4=<9:56;;@94<=34C=F49=GG=54:9EF4;95;CD;F=F4:9
=KD@3EF=J93FJ9LF=KD@3EF=J9?M9:4LJ=F49563<354=<E:4E5:$9!6=:=9563<354=<E:4E5:93<=9G=C3@=N9?@35ON9
6E:D3FE5N9:L?:EJEP=J9@LF56N90FQ@E:69@3FQL3Q=9@=3<F=<N9:D=5E3@9=JL534E;FN93FJ9?3:=@EF=94=:49
:5;<=:$90:4EC34=:9EF9D3F=@9/95;C=9G<;C9-IRI9C;J=@:94<=34EFQ9M=3<:9;G9=F<;@@C=F49EF9=3569
563<4=<94MD=93FJ9M=3<:9EF93FM9563<4=<9EF4=<354=J9SE469:4LJ=F49563<354=<E:4E5:93:9=FJ;Q=F;L:N9
EF:4<LC=F4EFQ9SE469563<4=<9@;44=<M9;GG=<:93FJ946=E<9EF4=<354E;F:9SE469:4LJ=F49563<354=<E:4E5:$9
!6=:=9C;J=@:95;F4<;@9G;<9C3EF9=GG=54:9;G9:4LJ=F49563<354=<E:4E5:93FJ9@;44=<M9<E:O9:=4:N93FJ93<=9
=:4EC34=J9EF946=9:3CD@=9;G9<3FJ;CEP=J93DD@E53F4:$90:4EC34=:9EF9D3F=@9T95;C=9G<;C9
5;<<=:D;FJEFQ9"RI9C;J=@:9=:4EC34=J9EF946=9GL@@9:3CD@=9;G9T;:4;F9:4LJ=F4:$9!6=:=9C;J=@:9
=K5@LJ=9@;44=<M9<E:O9:=4:93FJ9EF5@LJ=95;F4<;@:9G;<93:E3FN9F;F7S6E4=9;46=<9<35=N9?3:=@EF=9563<4=<9
344=FJ3F5=N93FJ939G=C3@=7CEF;<E4M9EF4=<354E;F$
&:EQFEGE53F49349'#UV9&&:EQFEGE53F49349)UV9&&&:EQFEGE53F49349'U

32

33

D
F?@?49
3?@??A5

F?@?46
3?@??A5

?@???
3?@?475
B4C8

F?@??B
3?@?495

F?@??B
3?@?465

KL,%"'.-/",%"'012/&*(#&
!"#$%&'!"#$()%"* 012/&*(#&'.-/",%"* +,-%"'.-/",%"*
375
385
395
?@?6A
?@?4B
?@?6B
3?@?495
3?@?4B5
3?@?475
B4C8

D#,%*>'G-(*',/H<%'*J;;/"(Q%*'+RP'$/<J%F/))%)'%*,(;/,%*'L#"'*N-##<*'/,,%&)%)'HS'J&,"%/,%)'N-/",%"'<#,,%"S'N#;2<(%"*@':&,"%/,%)'
N#;2<(%"';%/&*'/"%'%*,(;/,%*'L"#;'6PRP'"%E"%**(#&*'#L'*N-##<'$/<J%F/))%)'(&,%"/N,%)'T(,-'/',"/)(,(#&/<'2JH<(N'*N-##<'(&)(N/,#"'
#&'/'*%,'#L'$/"(/H<%*'%UJ/<',#'#&%';(&J*'/,,%&)/&N%'/,'%/N-'N-/",%"',S2%V'(&*,"J;%&,%)'T(,-'N-/",%"'<#,,%"S'#LL%"*'/&)'N#&,"#<<(&E'
L#"')%;#E"/2-(N*'/&)'<#,,%"S'"(*O'*%,*@'PN-##<'$/<J%F/))%)'%*,(;/,%*'N#;%'L"#;'+RP'"%E"%**(#&*'#L',%*,'*N#"%*'#&'/'*%,'#L'*N-##<'
(&)(N/,#"'$/"(/H<%*V'N#&,"#<<(&E'L#"'</EE%)',%*,'*N#"%*'/&)'*,J)%&,')%;#E"/2-(N*@

D

:&,"%/,%)'.#;2<(%"'=%/&>'0&E<(*-

:&,"%/,%)'.#;2<(%"'=%/&>'=/,-

W%L#"%'.-/",%"'012/&*(#&
!"#$%&'!"#$()%"* +,-%"'.-/",%"*
345
365
?@??A
?@?49
3?@?4?5
3?@??C5

G/H<%'A>'I/<J%FK))%)'#L'M/<<H/NO'PN-##<*'L#"'.-/",%"'K22<(N/&,*

CD-E
->:

J"'/A"$*'(//9$9"&7")

CDBE
G=>

:<D>E

CD>E
:-C;

:-D;E

<DGE
<=>

;-D:E

BD=E

<:DGE
G-:

>D;E
-;

:<DCE

:CD;E

;<DBE
:BB

=D<E
<GB

;<D;E

BDFE

<CD-E
::;B

!/@"*L$%(3*$@&K9"$*NAA&)3O"*$@("$0/99/#34H$."&)P*$"A29/.A"4@$/0$4"#$&47$"12")3"4'"7$@"&'(")*$#(/$@&NH(@$34$;C:CQ;C:<$34$J/*@/4$
?NK93'$R'(//9*$+J?R5$&47$S(&)@")$*'(//9*D$

:FDBE

!

!

;GD<E
;:D<E
;<DFE
:B<<
<FB;
--FF
!"#$%&7(&8$."3%&0*+&.$"12$+-&.2".&%$"9$
:<D;E
:CD:E
::D:E

?")'"4@$9"&I"$@"&'(34H

?")'"4@$@"&'($&@$&4/@(")$*'(//9

?")'"4@$*@/2$@"&'(34H$&@$*'(//9

?")'"4@$)"A&34$@"&'(")*$&@$*'(//9

S(&)@")*

!"#$%"&'(")*$+,-$ 612")3"4'"7$
!"#$%"&'(")*$+,-$ 612")3"4'"7$
899
899
."&)*$/0$"12")3"4'"5 %"&'(")*
."&)*$/0$"12")3"4'"5 %"&'(")*
+:5
+;5
+<5
+=5
+-5
+>5
!"#$%&'(&)*+,&-."./-&*0&.$"12$+-&3#&0*%%*43#5&6$"+
BCDBE
BFDBE
B>D;E
>FD:E
B>D<E
>GD-E

J?R

%&K9"$GL$%"&'(")$M/I"A"4@

CDCG7EEE
1CDCCH3

!,#BB

6H628

CD272EEE
1CDCC73

CD2H7EEE
1CDC2C3

CD2C5EEE
1CDC283

CDCGHEE
1CDC5H3

CDCF5EEE
1CDC583

CDCCC

CDCCC

CD584

CD582

CD6GH

153

(*+#,-&./
!"#$%&$/0/'()

CDCH5EEE
1CDCCF3

CD2C4EEE
1CDC243

CDCFCEEE
1CDC423

CDC64
1CDC553

CDC5FE
1CDC453

163

!"#$%&$

76CG7

CD22GEEE
1CDCC73

CD2GHEEE
1CDCCF3

CD224EEE
1CDC273

CDCF8EEE
1CDC563

CDCF2EEE
1CDC563

173

'()

CDCC2

CDCCC

CD5HH

CD472

CD4C8

183

(*+#,-&./
!"#$%&$/0/'()

9=W,<B"

O?%&B./N"<B/%#P,&/B"?SB/%&#>"&$/+#,-&*#KK&K/#>$?BB/T&#$B/?@/&:;&$<&=>&/#=K/+#$<#=>&/<=/%&#>"&$/+#,-&*#KK&K/
#%/%"&/B>"??,U/%&#>"&$U/#=K/>,#BB$??L/,&+&,D/N"&B&/$&B-,%B/>?L&/@$?L/L#:<L-L/,<V&,<"??K/&B%<L#%<?=/?@/#/
$#=K?L/&@@&>%B/L?K&,/S<%"/=?$L#,,T/K<B%$<P-%&K/%&#>"&$U/B>"??,U/#=K/>,#BB$??L/&@@&>%BD/N"&/L?K&,/>?=%$?,B/
@?$/B%-K&=%/K&L?W$#;"<>B/#=K/,#WW&K/%&B%/B>?$&B/#B/S&,,/#B/>,#BB/#+&$#W&B/?@/%"&B&/+#$<#P,&BD/N"&/L&#=/?@/%"&/
B>"??,/&@@&>%/+#$<&B/S<%"/>"#$%&$/B%#%-BU/#=K/%"&/L&#=/?@/%"&/%&#>"&$/&@@&>%/+#$<&B/PT/&:;&$<&=>&/#=K/
&:;&$<&=>&/<=%&$#>%&K/S<%"/>"#$%&$/B%#%-BD/
EB<W=<@<>#=%/#%/2CXY/EEB<W=<@<>#=%/#%/7XY/EEEB<W=<@<>#=%/#%/2X

O

CD244EEE
1CDC243

CD255EEE
1CDC4H3

CDC52
1CDC573

CDC85EEE
1CDC463

143

123

N&#>"&$

J#=K?L/9@@&>%/(#$#L&%&$B./)M
)>"??,

7/?$/I?$&/A&#$B/?@/9:;&$<&=>&

9:;&$<&=>&/($?@<,&
2/*/6/A&#$B/?@/9:;&$<&=>&

'()

!"#$%&$

I#%"

N#P,&/2C./N&#>"&$/Q#,-&*RKK&K/9B%<L#%&B

References
Abadie, Alberto. 2002. “Bootstrap Tests for Distributional Treatment Eﬀects in Instrumental Variables Models.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 97 (457):284–292.
Abdulkadiroğlu, Atila, Joshua Angrist, Susan Dynarski, Thomas J. Kane, and Parag Pathak. 2011.
“Accountability and ﬂexibility in public schools: Evidence from Boston’s charters and pilots.” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (2):699–748.
Abdulkadiroğlu, Atila, Joshua D. Angrist, Peter Hull, and Parag A. Pathak. 2016. “Charters Without Lotteries: Testing Takeovers in New Orleans and Boston.” American Economic Review
106 (7):1878–1920.
Abdulkadiroğlu, Atila, Joshua D. Angrist, Yusuke Narita, and Parag A. Pathak. 2017. “Research Design Meets Market Design: Using Centralized Assignment for Impact Evaluation.” Econometrica
85 (5):1373–1432.
Angrist, Joshua, Parag Pathak, and Christopher Walters. 2013. “Explaining Charter School Eﬀectiveness.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5 (4):1–27.
Angrist, Joshua D., Sarah R. Cohodes, Susan M. Dynarski, Parag A. Pathak, and Christopher R.
Walters. 2016. “Stand and Deliver: Eﬀects of Boston’s Charter High Schools on College Preparation, Entry, and Choice.” Journal of Labor Economics 34 (2):275–318.
Angrist, Joshua D, Susan M. Dynarski, Thomas J. Kane, Parag A. Pathak, and Christopher R.
Walters. 2010. “Inputs and Impacts in Charter Schools: KIPP Lynn.” The American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings 100.
Angrist, Joshua D., Susan M. Dynarski, Thomas J. Kane, Parag A. Pathak, and Christopher R. Walters. 2012. “Who Beneﬁts from KIPP?” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 31 (4):837–
860.
Angrist, Joshua D., Peter D. Hull, Parag A. Pathak, and Christopher R. Walters. 2017. “Leveraging
Lotteries for School Value-added: Testing and Estimation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
132 (2):871–919.
Arsen, David and Yongmei Ni. 2012. “The eﬀects of charter school competition on school district
resource allocation.” Educational Administration Quarterly 48 (1):3–38.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Rukmini Banerji, James Berry, Esther Duﬂo, Harini Kannan, Shobhini Mukerji,
Marc Shotland, and Michael Walton. 2017. “From Proof of Concept to Scalable Policies: Challenges and Solutions, with an Application.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 31 (4):73–102.
URL http://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/jep.31.4.73.
Betts, Julian R. 2009. “The competitive eﬀects of charter schools on traditional public schools.”
Handbook of research on school choice :195–208.
Bifulco, Robert and Randall Reback. 2014. “Fiscal impacts of charter schools: lessons from New
York.” Education Finance and Policy 9 (1):86–107.
Blinder, Alan S. 1973. “Wage discrimination: reduced form and structural estimates.” Journal of
Human Resources 8 (4):436–455.

36

Bold, Tessa, Mwangi Kimenyi, Germano Mwabu, Justin Sandefur et al. 2018. “Experimental evidence on scaling up education reforms in Kenya.” Journal of Public Economics 168:1–20.
Booker, Kevin, Scott M Gilpatric, Timothy Gronberg, and Dennis Jansen. 2008. “The eﬀect of
charter schools on traditional public school students in Texas: Are children who stay behind left
behind?” Journal of Urban Economics 64 (1):123–145.
Borman, Geoﬀrey D., Robert E. Slavin, Alan C. K. Cheung, Anne M. Chamberlain, Nancy A.
Madden, and Bette Chambers. 2007. “Final Reading Outcomes of the National Randomized
Field Trial of Success for All.” American Educational Research Journal 44 (3):701–731.
Boston Municipal Research Bureau. 2008. “The Status of Charter Schools in Boston.” Available at
http://bmrb.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/Charter608.pdf.
Carter, Samuel Casey. 2000. No Excuses: Lessons from 21 High-Performing, High-Poverty Schools.
Washington, DC: Heritage Foundation.
Chabrier, Julia, Sarah Cohodes, and Philip Oreopoulos. 2016. “What Can We Learn from Charter
School Lotteries.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 30 (3):57–84.
Chamberlain, Gary. 1982. “Multivariate Regression Models for Panel Data.” Journal of Econometrics
18 (1):5–46.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, and Jonah E. Rockoﬀ. 2014. “Measuring the Impacts of Teachers I:
Evaluating Bias in Teacher Value-added Estimates.” American Economic Review 104 (9):2593–
2632.
Clotfelter, Charles, Helen Ladd, and Jacob Vigdor. 2007. “How and why do teacher credentials
matter for student achievement?” NBER Working Paper No 12828 .
Cohodes, Sarah R., Elizabeth M. Setren, Christopher R. Walters, Joshua D. Angrist, and Parag A.
Pathak. 2013. “Charter School Demand and Eﬀectiveness: a Boston Update.” Boston, MA: The
Boston Foundation, October.
Cook, Jason B. 2018. “The eﬀect of charter competition on unionized district revenues and resource
allocation.” Journal of Public Economics 158:48–62.
Cordes, Sarah A. 2018. “In pursuit of the common good: The spillover eﬀects of charter schools on
public school students in New York City.” Education Finance and Policy 13 (4):484–512.
David, Rebecca. 2018. “National Charter School Management Overview: 2016-17 School Year.”
Tech. rep., National Alliance for Public Charter Schools.
David, Rebecca, Kevin Hesla, and Susan Aud Pendergrass. 2017. “A Growing Movement: America’s
Largest Public Charter School Communitieis.” Tech. rep., National Alliance for Public Charter
Schools.
Davis, Jonathan, Jonathan Guryan, Kelly Hallberg, and Jens Ludwig. 2017. “The Economics of
Scale-Up.” Tech. Rep. Working Paper No. 23925, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Davis, Tomeka M. 2013. “Charter school competition, organization, and achievement in traditional
public schools.” education policy analysis archives 21:88.

37

Dobbie, Will and Roland Fryer. 2011. “Are High Quality Schools Enough to Increase Achievement
Among the Poor?” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3 (3):158–187.
———. 2013. “Getting Beneath the Veil of Eﬀective Schools: Evidence from New York City.”
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5 (4):28–60.
———. 2015. “The Medium-Term Impacts of High-Achieving Charter Schools.” Journal of Political
Economy 123 (5):985–1037.
Duﬂo, Esther, Pascaline Dupas, and Michael Kremer. 2011.
“Peer Eﬀects,
Teacher Incentives, and the Impact of Tracking:
Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation in Kenya.”
American Economic Review 101 (5):1739–74.
URL
http://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.101.5.1739.
———. 2015. “School governance, teacher incentives, and pupil–teacher ratios: Experimental evidence from Kenyan primary schools.” Journal of Public Economics 123:92–110.
Epple, Dennis, Richard Romano, and Ron Zimmer. 2016. “Charter schools: A survey of research
on their characteristics and eﬀectiveness.” In Handbook of the Economics of Education, vol. 5.
Elsevier, 139–208.
Fryer, Roland. 2014. “Injecting Charter School Best Practices Into Traditional Public Schools:
Evidence from Field Experiments.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (3):1355–1407.
Furgeson, Joshua, Brian Gill, Joshua Haimson, Alexandra Killewald, Moira McCullough, Ira
Nichols-Barrer, Bing-ru Teh, Natalya Verbitsky-Savitz, Melissa Bowen, Allison Demeritt et al.
2011. “The National Study of Charter Management Organization (CMO) Eﬀectiveness. CharterSchool Management Organizations: Diverse Strategies and Diverse Student Impacts.” Mathematica Policy Research, Inc. .
Gabbianelli, Leslie, Kate McGovern, and Melissa Wu. 2014. “Greenhouse Schools in Boston: School
Leadership Practices Across a High-Performing Charter Sector.” Tech. rep., The New Teacher
Project.
Gill, Brian. 2016. “The eﬀect of charter schools on students in traditional public schools: A review
of the evidence.” Education Next .
Gill, Brian and Kevin Booker. 2008. “School competition and student outcomes.” Handbook of
research in education finance and policy :183–200.
Hanushek, Eric A. and Steven G. Rivkin. 2010.
“Generalizations about Using ValueAdded Measures of Teacher Quality.” American Economic Review 100 (2):267–71. URL
http://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.100.2.267.
Harris, Doug. 2011. “Teacher training, teacher quality and student achievement.” Journal of Public
Economics 95 (7-8):798–812.
Heckman, James, Seong Hyeok Moon, Rodrigo Pinto, Peter A. Savelyev, and Adam Yavitz. 2010.
“Analyzing Social Experiments as Implemented: A Reexamination of the Evidence from the High/
Scope Perry Preschool Program.” Quantitative Economics 1 (1):1–46.
Heckman, James, Rodrigo Pinto, and Peter Savelyev. 2013. “Understanding the Mechanisms
Through Which an Inﬂuential Early Childhood Program Boosted Adult Outcomes.” American
Economic Review 103 (6):2052–2086.
38

Imberman, Scott A. 2011. “The eﬀect of charter schools on achievement and behavior of public
school students.” Journal of Public Economics 95 (7-8):850–863.
Jackson, C. Kirabo and Elias Bruegmann. 2009. “Teaching Students and Teaching Each Other: The
Importance of Peer Learning for Teachers.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics
1 (4):85–108. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/25760183.
Jackson, C. Kirabo and Alexey Makarin. 2018. “Can Online Oﬀ-The-Shelf Lessons Improve Student
Outcomes? Evidence from A Field Experiment.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy
10 (3). Https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/pol.20170211.
Jepsen, Christopher and Steven Rivkin. 2009. “Class Size Reduction and Student Achievement: The
Potential Tradeoﬀ between Teacher Quality and Class Size.” The Journal of Human Resources
44 (1):223–250.
Jinnai, Yusuke. 2014. “Direct and indirect impact of charter schools’ entry on traditional public
schools: New evidence from North Carolina.” Economics Letters 124 (3):452–456.
Kane, Thomas J., Jonah E. Rockoﬀ, and Douglas O. Staiger. 2008. “What Does Certiﬁcation Tell
Us About Teacher Eﬀectiveness? Evidence from New York City.” Economics of Education Review
27:615–631.
Krueger, Alan. 1999. “Experimental Estimates of Education Production Functions.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 114 (2):497–532.
Ladd, Helen and John D. Singleton. 2018. “The Fiscal Externalities of Charter Schools: Evidence
from North Carolina.” Tech. Rep. Working Paper 182, National Center for Analysis of Longitudinal Data in Education Research.
Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education. 2015.
“Education Laws and Regulations 603 CMR 1.00:
Charter Schools.”
Available at
http://www.doe.mass.edu/lawsregs/603cmr1.html.
———. 2016.
“Massachusetts Charter Schools
http://www.doe.mass.edu/charter/factsheet.pdf.

Fact

Sheet.”

Available

at

Massachusetts State Legislature. 2010. “An Act Relative to the Achievement Gap.” Chapter 12.
Mundlak, Yair. 1978. “On the Pooing of Time Series and Cross Section Data.” Econometrica
46 (1):69–85.
New York State Department of Education. 2019. “New York Charter School Fact Sheet.”
http://www.p12.nysed.gov/psc/facts/nyscsfactsheet1042019.pdf.
Oaxaca, Ronald. 1973. “Male-female wage diﬀerentials in urban labor markets.” International
Economic Review 14 (3):693–709.
Papay, John and Matt Kraft. 2015. “Productivity returns to experience in the teacher labor market:
Methodological challenges and new evidence on long-term career improvement.” Journal of Public
Economics 130:105–119.

39

Papay, John P., Eric S. Taylor, John H. Tyler, and Mary Laski. 2016.
“Learning Job
Skills from Colleagues at Work: Evidence from a Field Experiment Using Teacher Performance Data.” Working Paper 21986, National Bureau of Economic Research. URL
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21986. DOI: 10.3386/w21986.
Puma, Michael, Stephen Bell, and Camilla Heid. 2012. “Third Grade Follow-up to the Head Start
Impact Study.” OPRE Report 2012-45. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Washington, DC, October.
Quint, Janet, Pei Zhu, Rekha Balu, Shelley Rappaport, and Micah DeLaurentis. 2015. “Scaling Up
the Sucess for All Model of School Reform.” MDRC Report, September.
Ridley, Matthew and Camille Terrier. 2018. “Fiscal and Education Spillovers from Charter School
Expansion.” Tech. Rep. SEII Discussion Paper 2018.02, School Eﬀectiveness and Inequality Initiative.
Rockoﬀ, Jonah. 2004. “The impact of individual teachers on student achievement. Evidence from
panel data.” American Economic Review 94 (2):247–252.
Ronfeldt, Matthew, Susanna Owens Farmer, Kiel McQueen, and Jason A. Grissom. 2015. “Teacher
Collaboration in Instructional Teams and Student Achievement.” American Educational Research
Journal 52 (3):475–514. URL https://doi.org/10.3102/0002831215585562.
Sass, Tim R. 2006. “Charter schools and student achievement in Florida.” Education Finance and
Policy 1 (1):91–122.
Setren, Elizabeth M. 2016. “Special Education and English Language Learner Students in Boston
Charter Schools: Impact and Classiﬁcation.” School Eﬀectiveness & Inequality Initiative Working
Paper 2016.06, October.
Shin, Hyo Jeong, Bruce Fuller, and Luke Dauter. 2017. “Heterogeneous Eﬀects of Charter Schools:
Unpacking Family Selection and Achievement Growth in Los Angeles.” Journal of School Choice
11 (1):60–94. URL https://doi.org/10.1080/15582159.2016.1238278.
Sun,
Min,
Susanna
Loeb,
and
Jason
A.
Grissom.
2017.
“Building
Teacher Teams:
Evidence of Positive Spillovers From More Eﬀective Colleagues.”
Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 39 (1):104–125.
URL
http://journals.sagepub.com.ezproxy.cul.columbia.edu/doi/abs/10.3102/0162373716665698.
Taylor, Eric S. 2018. “New Technology and Teacher Productivity.” Tech. rep., Harvard University.
Unpublished manuscript.
Thernstrom, Abigail and Stephen Thernstrom. 2003. No Excuses: Closing the Racial Gap in Learning. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Tuttle, Christina Clark, Brian Gill, Philip Gleason, Virginia Knechtel, Ira Nichols-Barrer, and
Alexandra Resch. 2013. “KIPP Middle Schools: Impact on Achievement and Other Outcomes.”
Mathematica Policy Research Report 06441.910, February.
Tuttle, Christina Clark, Philip Gleason, Virginia Knechtel, Ira Nichols-Barrer, Kevin Booker, Gregory Chojnacki, Thomas Coen, and Goble Lisbeth. 2015. “Understanding the Eﬀect of KIPP as it
Scales: Volume I, Impacts on Achievement and Other Outcomes.” Mathematica Policy Research
Report .
40

Walters, Christopher R. 2018. “The Demand for Eﬀective Charter Schools.” Journal of Political
Economy 126 (6).
Winters, Marcus A. 2012. “Measuring the eﬀect of charter schools on public school student achievement in an urban environment: Evidence from New York City.” Economics of Education review
31 (2):293–301.
Ziebarth, Todd and Louann Bierlein Palmer. 2018. “Measuring up to the model: A ranking of state
public charter school laws.” Tech. rep., National Alliance for Public Charter Schools.
Zimmer, Ron and Richard Buddin. 2009. “Is charter school competition in California improving the
performance of traditional public schools?” Public Administration Review 69 (5):831–845.
Zimmer, Ron, Brian Gill, Kevin Booker, Stephane Lavertu, and Tim R Sass. 2009. Charter schools in
eight states: Effects on achievement, attainment, integration, and competition. Rand Corporation.

41

Data Appendix
We use lottery records, student demographic and enrollment data, state standardized test scores,
and school personnel ﬁles in this article. Lottery records collected from individual schools contain
the list of applicants, oﬀer status, and factors that aﬀect an applicant’s lottery odds, including
sibling status, disqualiﬁcations, late applications, and applying from outside of Boston. The Student
Information Management Systems (SIMS) dataset contains enrollment and demographic data for
all public school students in Massachusetts. Student standardized test scores come from the state
database for the Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessment System (MCAS). The Massachusetts
Education Personnel Information Management Systems (EPIMS) database provides school staﬀ
information. Next we describe these datasets, the matching process, and sample construction.

Lottery records
Massachusetts legally requires charters to admit students via lottery when more students apply
to a charter school than the number of available seats for a given grade. Our paper uses records
from charter lotteries conducted between spring 2004 to spring 2013 for 14 charter schools accepting
students in 5th or 6th grade. Each of the 14 schools contributes oversubscribed lottery data.22
Schools vary in the grades they serve and in years of operation. Table A1 lists this information and
the years each school contributes to the analysis. We exclude one school that did not provide lottery
records (Smith Leadership Academy) and two schools that closed before the charter expansion
(Uphams Corner Charter School in 2009 and Fredrick Douglas Charter School in 2005). Lottery
data typically includes applicants’ names, dates of birth, and lottery and waitlist oﬀer status. Oﬀers
to attend charter schools either occur on the day of the lottery (referred to as immediate of f er)
or after the day of the lottery when students receive oﬀers from the randomly sequenced waitlist as
seats become available. In three out of the 65 lotteries in the study, the schools gave all applicants
oﬀers or did not give waitlist oﬀers to non-siblings. Four lotteries did not distinguish the timing of
the oﬀers so we code the immediate oﬀer variable to equal zero for these cohorts.
The Uncommon Schools/Roxbury Preparatory charter network held a single lottery for its three
22

We do not have Spring 2004 lottery records for Brooke Roslindale, Boston Prep, and Academy of the Pacific Rim
or Spring 2005 records for Brooke Roslindale. Brooke Roslindale does not have lotteries in after charter expansion
because their elementary school students filled the middle school seat. All other schools and years have oversubscribed
lottery data.

42

campuses in the Spring 2012 and Spring 2013 lotteries. When the school called a students lottery
number, the student could pick from the campuses that still had open seats. Our lottery records
show which campus they picked at the time of the lottery. We ﬁnd the last lottery number for each
campus and code all students with better lottery numbers as having oﬀers from that campus.
Uncommon Schools oﬀered seats from the waitlist as they became available for individual campuses. Parents chose to accept or decline waitlist oﬀers for single schools. If they declined, they
were taken oﬀ the waitlist and would not be considered for seats at the other campuses.

Enrollment and demographics
The SIMS data contains individual level data for students enrolled in public schools in Massachusetts from 2003-2004 through 2013-2014. The data contains snapshots from October and the
end of the school year. Each student has only one observation in each time period, except when
students switch grades or schools within year. Fields include a unique student identiﬁer, grade level,
year, name, date of birth, gender, ethnicity, special education status, limited English proﬁciency
status, free or reduced price lunch status, school attended, suspensions, attendance rates, and days
truant.
We code students as charter attendees in a school year if they attended a charter at any point
during a year. Students who attend more than one charter school in a year are assigned to the
charter they attended the longest. Students who attend more than one traditional public school
and no charter schools in a year are assigned to the school they attended the longest. We randomly
choose between schools if students have attendance ties between the most attended schools.

Test scores
This paper uses individual student math and English Language Arts (ELA) Massachusetts
Comprehensive Assessment System (MCAS) test scores from 2003-2004 through 2013-2014. Massachusetts public school students take the exam each year in grades grades 5 through 8. Data
includes the unique student identiﬁer. We standardize the raw scores to to have a mean of zero
within subject-grade-year in Boston.

Staff records
The Education Personnel Information Management Systems (EPIMS) contains yearly staﬀ level
data for all employees in Massachusetts public schools. We use data collected in October of the
43

2007-08 through the 2013-14 school years. Data includes job position, school, full time equivalency,
date of birth, date of hire for ﬁrst public school job in Massachusetts, license status, and highly
qualiﬁed status. We use the full time equivalency of all staﬀ and teachers. If one school has two
half time teachers, they are counted as one full time equivalent teacher. A teacher who teaches at
multiple schools counts towards the staﬀ statistics at each school.

Matching data
We use applicants’ names, date of birth, grade, and year to match their lottery records to the
state enrollment data. The applicants who uniquely and exactly match the grade, year, name,
and date of birth (if available) in the state records are assigned to the matched unique student id.
After this initial match, we strip names in the lottery and enrollment data of spaces, surnames,
hyphens, and apostrophes. Unique matches after this cleaning are assigned to the matched unique
student id. Then, we use reclink, a fuzzy matching STATA program, to suggest potential matches
for the remaining students. This matches students with slight spelling diﬀerences and those who
appear in one grade older or younger than the charter application grade. We hand check these
suggested matches for accuracy. We search for the remaining unmatched students by hand in the
data. Typically this last group contains name truncations, name misspellings, or ﬁrst and last
names in the wrong ﬁeld.
The matching process assigns 95 percent of applicants to the state administrative records (see
Table A3). Students who do not match either enroll in private, parochial, or out-of-state schools,
have names and birthdates too common to match, or have spelling errors too extreme to match with
conﬁdence. Receiving a charter oﬀer makes students 3.8 more likely to match to the data, as shown
in Table A3. As a result, our ﬁndings show causal estimates for the set of students who enroll in
Massachusetts Public Schools.
We match the enrollment and demographic data to the student test scores using the unique
student identiﬁer. Students who attend out of state, private, or parochial schools do not have test
score outcomes for their years outside of Massachusetts public schools.

Sample restrictions
We exclude applicants who receive higher or lower preference in the lottery. Late applicants,
those who apply to the wrong grade, out-of-area applicants, and siblings fall into these categories

44

and typically have no variation in oﬀer status. When students have duplicate applications within
an individual school’s lottery, we keep only one application. If students apply to charter schools in
diﬀerent years, we use only the ﬁrst application year. We restrict the sample to students with baseline demographics data, excluding students applying from outside of Massachusetts public schools.
With these restrictions imposed, the original raw sample of applications narrows from 20,981 to
8,473.

45

46

9E77%D%79
9E79%D%7:
9E77%D%79
9E79%D%7:
9E79%D%7:
9E79%D%7:
9E77%D%79

7CCL%D%CG
7CCG%D%CC
9EEH%D%EF

9EE:%D%EH
9EEE%D%E7
9EE9%D%E:

+,-.&*(#&'/0."1%"*
;/<=,$4%>$"'#$#-/$4?%Q,.4%O-/("%B#0',+
;/<=,$4%>$"'#$#-/$4?%R/$.P"+-"$%B#0',+
I$//J"%@#--#'#(
I$//J"%M#+-%I/+-/(
M<."3%&$5"(-%A"5SP-+
T1>>
U>%2.#)"04%I/+-/(

210%"'/0."1%"*
2.#)"04%/V%-P"%>#.5V5.%;50
I/+-/(%B/33"S5#-"
I/+-/(%>$"'

3#1'4&567)%)'(&'817)9
A"3"(%R#W5+%Q"#)"$+P5'%2.#)"04
X$")"$5.J%R/,S3#+%BP#$-"$
U'P#0+%B/$("$%BP#$-"$

K%D%G
K%D%7E
F%D%G

F%D%79
F%D%79
K%D%79

F%D%G
F%D%L%6G8
F%D%G
F%D%L%6G8
F%D%L%6G8
F%D%L%6G8
K%D%G

F%D%G%6798
F%D%G
F%D%C%6798
K%D%G

*$#)"+
698

)".35(")%-/%'#$-5.5'#-"
.3/+")%5(%9EEHDEF
.3/+")%5(%9EEGDEC

9EEFDEK%D%9E7:D7H
9EEHDEF%D%9E7:D7H
9EEFDEK%D%9E7:D7H

9E77D79%D%9E7:D7H
9E79D7:%D%9E7:D7H
9E77D79%D%9E7:D7H
9E79D7:%D%9E7:D7H
9E79D7:%D%9E7:D7H
9E79D7:%D%9E7:D7H
9E77D79%D%9E7:D7H

9EEHDEF%%D%9E7:D7H
9EEKDEL%D%9EECD7E
9EEGDEC%D%9E7:D7H
9EEGDEC%D%9E7:D7H

&,-./0"%!"#$+%1(%
2(#34+5+
6:8

Y/-"+?%NP5+%-#=3"%35+-+%I/+-/(%05))3"%+.P//3%.P#$-"$%+.P//3+%=4%+.P//3%-4'"Z%/'"(5(S%4"#$Z%S$#)"%3"W"3+Z%#()%
/,-./0"%4"#$+%5(.3,)")%5(%-P"%#(#34+5+[%*$#)"%3"W"3+%+P/\(%5(%'#$"(-P"+"+%5()5.#-"%'3#((")%"($/330"(-%
S$#)"+%\P5.P%\"$"%(/-%'$"+"(-%#-%-P"%-50"%/V%#(#34+5+[

7CCC%D%9EEE
9EE9%D%E:
9EE:%D%EH
9EEG%D%EC

!"#$%&'!"#$()%"*
;/<=,$4%>$"'#$#-/$4?%@5++5/(%A533%B#0',+
I$//J"%;/+35()#3"
M<."3%M#+-%I/+-/(
@2NBA%@5))3"%O.P//3

!"#$%&'"(")
678

N#=3"%27?%%BP#$-"$%@5))3"%O.P//3+%5(%I/+-/(

.//0
706
706
70/
70/
7//
.22
.22
.22
.21
632

.//1
375
374
374
377
233
270
263
263
1.7
74.

.//2
567
566
5/5
5//
472
4/6
33/
33/
142
073

.//3
6607
6671
6671
66.7
6/.6
6///
52.
52.
32/
136

.//4
60..
60/0
6727
6717
6..7
6646
6/57
6/57
424
235

.//5
6151
6150
6122
6104
60/4
6734
6.4.
6.4.
527
3..

./6/
6023
6000
6753
6735
6.05
6635
6/74
6/74
46.
2.7

./66
0.47
0.37
0627
0/50
7314
72.3
77/4
77/4
./11
635/

./6.
076.
07/1
0652
0/36
732/
7137
.52.
.52.
6361
6055

./67
0322
032/
0147
0167
07./
0/62
7025
7014
65//
6150

N&,">L%%9C*>%,#<)"%>:;;#$*O">%,C"%>#;()"%$">,$*+,*&->%*;(&>"=%'&$%,C"%)&,,"$H%#-#)H>*>P%Q*>B:#)*'*"=%#(()*+#,*&->%#$"%=:()*+#,"%$"+&$=>%#-=%#(()*+#,*&->%,&%,C"%R$&-A%A$#="P%

!"#$%&'%#(()*+#,*&9&,#)%-:;<"$%&'%$"+&$=>
?@+):=*-A%=*>B:#)*'"=%#(()*+#,*&->
?@+):=*-A%)#,"%#(()*+#,*&->
?@+):=*-A%&:,%&'%#$"#%#(()*+#,*&->
?@+):=*-A%>*<)*-A>
?@+):=*-A%$"+&$=>%-&,%;#,+C"=%,&%DEFD
G""(%&-)H%'*$>,%H"#$%&'%+C#$,"$%#(()*+#,*&?@+):=*-A%$"("#,%#(()*+#,*&->
I">C#(*-A%,&%&-"%$"+&$=%("$%>,:="-,
J#>%<#>")*-"%=";&A$#(C*+>%#-=%*-%K&>,&-%#,%<#>")*-"

9#<)"%8.L%M&,,"$H%I"+&$=>
8))
./546
./5/1
./75/
.//10
6411.
63211
61323
61312
6/003
4037

M/$,%'*@L'4/0.5')&(#':(00%&9'V/0/'0('*6#-1-20&/0-O%'V/0/
W%R&%22-(1''()'4/0.5'(1'8))%&

:(00%&9';%/&
?BBA

!"#$%&'()'
*++,-./0-(12
<=>
?CD

3&(+(&0-(1'
4/0.5%6
<?>
BEFDF

?BBI

C=C

BEFDH

?BBC

HA?

BEFF=

?BBH

F?A

BEFDA

?BBD

=B=D

BEFIH

?BBF

==BC

BEFHH

?B=B

=BA=

BEF?A

?B==

?C=A

BEFIA

?B=?

?IB@

BEF@F

?B=@

?H=?

BEFB?

*,,'K(5(&02

=IAD?

BEFAF

7##%6-/0%'8))%&
<@>
GBEBBC
<BEB?C>
G
G
G
G
BEB=FJJ
<BEBBD>
BEBA?JJJ
<BEB=@>
BEBBA
<BEB==>
BEBCIJJJ
<BEB=C>
BEB=DJJJ
<BEBBH>
BEBB=
<BEB==>
BEBAIJJJ
<BEB=?>
BEB?@JJJ
<BEBB@>

*19'8))%&
<A>
GBEBBH
<BEB=@>
BEBB?
<BEB=@>
BEBBA
<BEB=C>
BEB@AJJJ
<BEB=@>
BEBC=JJJ
<BEB=F>
BEB==
<BEB=B>
BEBH=JJJ
<BEB=H>
BEB?IJJJ
<BEBBH>
BEB@@JJJ
<BEB==>
BEBHDJJJ
<BEB=I>
BEB@DJJJ
<BEBBA>

!(0%2L'M5-2'0/$,%'2"##/&-N%2'05%'#/0.5')&(#'05%',(00%&9'&%.(&62'0('/6#-1-20&/0-O%'
20"6%10'6/0/E'M5%'2/#+,%'%P.,"6%2',/0%'/++,-./102Q'2-$,-1R2Q'6-2S"/,-)-%6'/++,-./102Q'
6"+,-./0%'1/#%2Q'/16'("0G()G/&%/'/++,-./102E'K(,"#12'<@>'/16'<A>'&%+(&0'.(%))-.-%102')&(#'
&%R&%22-(12'(1'/'6"##9')(&'/'2"..%22)",'#/0.5'(1'-##%6-/0%'/16'/19'.5/&0%&'())%&'
6"##-%2E'*,,'&%R&%22-(12'.(10&(,')(&'2.5((,G$9G9%/&'6"##-%2E'
J2-R1-)-./10'/0'=BTU'JJ2-R1-)-./10'/0'ITU'JJJ2-R1-)-./10'/0'=T'

48

49

C

C

=>6=4

=>4:6???
3=>=875

365
=>77;???
3=>=875

=>=B4???
3=>=685

375
=>6=4???
3=>=695

4;74:

@=>=76

=>499?
3=>=AB5

=>6=6??
3=>=B85

TM,%"'.-/",%"'012/&*(#&
6JKJ
!"#$%&'
C#&@.-/",%"'
012/&*(#&'
!"#$()%"*
<%/&
.-/",%"*
385
395
3:5
@=>=;8
=>748???
=>64A??
3=>=A;5
3=>=B65
4;7B9

=>4=9??
3=>=885

3;5
=>6=;???
3=>=885

+,-%"'
.-/",%"*

C#,%*F'G-(*',/HE%'"%2#",*',-%'I/(&'6JKJ'"%*LE,*'M"#I'G/HE%':N'HL,'L*(&D'/E,%"&/,($%'O-/",%"'*O-##E',P2%'O/,%D#"(Q/,(#&*>'R&'
,-(*'"#HL*,&%**'O-%OSN'<TG.U'<())E%'JO-##EN'V!'TO/)%IP'W#*,#&N'/&)'XR!!'W#*,#&'/"%'O#&*()%"%)'#,-%"'O-/",%"*>'
?*(D&(M(O/&,'/,'4=YZ'??*(D&(M(O/&,'/,'9YZ'???*(D&(M(O/&,'/,'4Y

0&DE(*-

</,-

345
=>44;

W%M#"%'.-/",%"'012/&*(#&
6JKJ
!"#$%&'
+,-%"'.-/",%"*
C#&@.-/",%"'
!"#$()%"*
<%/&

G/HE%'T8F'TE,%"&/,($%'[%M(&(,(#&'#M'!"#$%&'!"#$()%"'\']%2E(O/,%

N/F5%'C<M'.#$/"(/,%'?/5/&4%
?%I#"%'.-/",%"'012/&*(#&

=%>/5%
?5/4@
A/,(&#B/
C*(/&
D-(,%
3EF*()(G%)'AE&40&H5(*-'A/&HE/H%'A%/"&%"*
32%4(/5'0)E4/,(#&
C,,%&)%)'4-/",%"'F%I#"%'/225J(&H
?/*%5(&%'>/,-'*4#"%
?/*%5(&%'0&H5(*-'*4#"%
K'6#II%"%)8
!L$/5E%

CI,%"'.-/",%"'012/&*(#&

!"#$%&'
!"#$()%"*
678
0.000
(0.034)
-0.026
(0.032)
0.027
(0.031)
-0.014
(0.009)
0.016
(0.011)
0.015
(0.029)
-0.005
(0.023)
-0.005
(0.027)
0.010
(0.019)
-0.024
(0.071)
-0.036
(0.071)
1009

+,-%"'
.-/",%"*
698
-0.004
(0.028)
0.007
(0.027)
0.000
(0.022)
0.007
(0.008)
-0.003
(0.024)
0.010
(0.027)
-0.001
(0.014)
0.005
(0.022)
-0.008
(0.020)
-0.022
(0.053)
0.000
(0.052)
1309

!"#$%&'
!"#$()%"*
6:8
-0.005
(0.027)
-0.027
(0.027)
-0.001
(0.027)
0.008
(0.010)
0.007
(0.010)
-0.011
(0.020)
-0.004
(0.027)
0.002
(0.021)
-0.015
(0.010)
0.058
(0.050)
0.048
(0.053)
1466

0.594

0.891

0.526

012/&*(#&'
+,-%"'.-/",%"*
34-##5*
6;8
6<8
0.011
0.020
(0.027)
(0.028)
-0.025
-0.015
(0.026)
(0.028)
0.005
-0.010
(0.026)
(0.027)
0.010
0.000
(0.011)
(0.009)
0.001
0.018
(0.012)
(0.017)
-0.016
-0.016
(0.019)
(0.023)
-0.039
-0.027
(0.026)
(0.025)
0.013
0.018
(0.022)
(0.022)
-0.015*
-0.003
(0.008)
(0.014)
-0.033
-0.004
(0.051)
(0.055)
0.037
0.011
(0.051)
(0.055)
1825
1142
0.136

0.979

K#,%*M'N-(*',/F5%'"%2#",*'4#%II(4(%&,*'I"#>'"%H"%**(#&*'#I'F/*%5(&%'4-/"/4,%"(*,(4*'#&'4-/",%"'#II%"*O'4#&,"#55(&H'
I#"'5#,,%"J'"(*@'*%,'(&)(4/,#"*P'!L$/5E%*'/"%'I"#>',%*,*'#I',-%'-J2#,-%*(*',-/,'/55'4#%II(4(%&,*'/"%'G%"#P'
Q*(H&(I(4/&,'/,'7RST'QQ*(H&(I(4/&,'/,'<ST'QQQ*(H&(I(4/&,'/,'7S

50

!

!

EFG>A

EFE<G
;EFE<C=

EFE?@HH
;EFE<A=

EFGBI
>E<E>

EFEE<
;EFE<A=

EFE<<
;EFE<B=

$EFE>A
;EFE<G=

M%1&')870'1&')9:.0#54"#
6%%&')X4%%&'&#140+
!"#$"%%&'&()
2'"3&#)
9:.0#54"#)
617&')
*"++",-.)/01&
2'"34(&'5
870'1&'5
870'1&'5
;@=
;A=
;B=
;C=
EFGBI
EFEEE
EFE<?
$EFE>?
;EFE<A=
;EFE<B=
;EFE<G=
>E<E>

!"1&5N)K745)10L+&)4#3&514J01&5)011'414"#)%"')'0#("O4P&()Q70'1&')5Q7""+)+"11&'R)0..+4Q0#15F)8"+-O#5);<=)0#();@=)'&."'1)
%'0Q14"#5)"%)%"++",$-.)1&51)5Q"'&5)4#)J'0(&5)%43&)17'"-J7)&4J71)1701)0'&)"L5&'3&()%"')51-(&#15)#"1)"%%&'&()5&015F)
8"+-O#5);>=$;?=)0#();A=$;C=)'&."'1)Q"&%%4Q4&#15)%'"O)'&J'&554"#5)"%)0)%"++",$-.)4#(4Q01"')"#)0)+"11&'R)"%%&')4#(4Q01"')
;4OO&(401&)"'),041+451=)0#()51-(&#15)#"1)"%%&'&()5&015F)/&J'&554"#5)Q"#1'"+)%"')+"11&'R)'45S)5&15T)05),&++)05)J&#(&'T)
&17#4Q41RT)0)%&O0+&$O4#"'41R)4#1&'0Q14"#T)5.&Q40+)&(-Q014"#T)9#J+457)+0#J-0J&)+&0'#&'T)5-L54(4P&()+-#Q7)5101-5T)0#()
J'0(&)0#()R&0')4#(4Q01"'5F)U10#(0'()&''"'5)0'&)Q+-51&'&()LR)51-(&#1F
H54J#4%4Q0#1)01)<EVW)HH54J#4%4Q0#1)01)AVW)HHH54J#4%4Q0#1)01)<V

9#J+457

D017

Y&%"'&)870'1&')9:.0#54"#
6%%&')X4%%&'&#140+
!"#$"%%&'&()
2'"3&#)
617&')
*"++",-.)/01&
2'"34(&'5
870'1&'5
;<=
;>=
;?=
EFG?@
EFE<G
EFE?>HH
;EFE<G=
;EFE<A=

K0L+&)MBN)M11'414"#

0=3:2>>>
0=:27>>>
/:=:671
/:=:521
0277

0=556>>>
/:=:471
0900

:=985>>>
/:=:601

:=792>>>
/:=:541
23:7

:=398>>>
/:=:481

Z+FM#C(Z+FM%$#+.
!""#$%&'#( ,&%'-%.'(
)**#+
)**#+
/51
/61
:=795>>>
:=4::>>>
/:=:541
/:=:481
23:3
:=66:>>>
/:=:461
242:

:=345>>>
/:=:4:1

@*'#+(S<&+'#+(DOA&C.%FC
DOA&C.%FC(S<&+'#+.
!""#$%&'#( ,&%'-%.'(
)**#+
)**#+
/71
/81
:=659>>>
:=348>>>
/:=:461
/:=:401
2406

:=93:>>>
/:=:521
2402

:=853>>>
/:=:701

)'<#+(S<&+'#+.
!""#$%&'#( ,&%'-%.'(
)**#+
)**#+
/91
/0:1
:=93:>>>
:=853>>>
/:=:521
/:=:701
24:5

?F'#.G(H<%.('&I-#($%.A-&J.(*%+.'(.'&E#(#**#B'.(F*(B<&+'#+(-F''#+J(F**#+.(FC(J#&+.(F*(#C+F--"#C'(%C(B<&+'#+(.B<FF-.=(H<#(.&"A-#(.'&BK.(AF.'L-F''#+J('#.'(
.BF+#.(%C(E+&$#.(*%M#('<+FNE<(#%E<'=(H<#(#C$FE#CFN.(M&+%&I-#.(&+#(BFNC'.(F*(J#&+.(.A#C'(%C('<#($%**#+#C'(B<&+'#+('JA#.(/A+#L#OA&C.%FC(A+FM#C(
A+FM%$#+.P(A+#L#OA&C.%FC(F'<#+(B<&+'#+.P(AF.'L#OA&C.%FC(A+FM#C(A+FM%$#+.P(#OA&C.%FC(.B<FF-.P(&C$(AF.'L#OA&C.%FC(F'<#+(B<&+'#+.1=(!""#$%&'#(F**#+(
#QN&-.(FC#(*F+(&AA-%B&C'.(F**#+#$(.#&'.(FC('<#($&J(F*('<#(-F''#+J=(,&%'-%.'(F**#+(#QN&-.(FC#(*F+(&AA-%B&C'.(F**#+#$(.#&'.(*+F"('<#(R&%'-%.'=(SFC'+F-.(
%CB-N$#(-F''#+J(+%.K(.#'.P(&.(R#--(&.(E#C$#+P(#'<C%B%'JP(&(*#"&-#L"%CF+%'J(%C'#+&B'%FCP(.A#B%&-(#$NB&'%FCP(DCE-%.<(-&CEN&E#(-#&+C#+P(.NI.%$%T#$(-NCB<(
.'&'N.P(&C$(E+&$#(&C$(J#&+(%C$%B&'F+.=(U'&C$&+$(#++F+.(&+#(B-N.'#+#$(IJ(.'N$#C'=(
>.%EC%*%B&C'(&'(0:VW(>>.%EC%*%B&C'(&'(5VW(>>>.%EC%*%B&C'(&'(0V

?(/@AA-%B&C'.1

DCE-%.<

?(/@AA-%B&C'.1

;&'<

X#*F+#(S<&+'#+(DOA&C.%FC
Z+FM#C(Z+FM%$#+.
)'<#+(S<&+'#+.
!""#$%&'#( ,&%'-%.'( !""#$%&'#( ,&%'-%.'(
)**#+
)**#+
)**#+
)**#+
/01
/21
/31
/41
0=3:4>>>
0=:27>>>
0=554>>>
:=984>>>
/:=:671
/:=:5:1
/:=:471
/:=:601
0279
09:9

H&I-#(@7G(Y%+.'(U'&E#(D.'%"&'#.

53

;<49@???
3;<;885

;<;A9???
3;<;7>5

;<;>A
3;<;875

;<;A7??
3;<;895

;<;9>
3;<;8=5

QK,%"'.-/",%"'012/&*(#&
!"#$%&'
+,-%"'
012/&*(#&'
!"#$()%"*
.-/",%"*
.-/",%"*
375
385
395
;<49@???
;<44A??
;<4;6??
3;<;8>5
3;<;8>5
3;<;945

D#,%*E'F-(*',/GC%'*-#H*'"%)IJ%)'K#"L'%*,(L/,%*'#K',-%'%KK%J,*'K#'J-/",%"'C#,,%"M'
#KK%"*'#&'L/,-'/&)'0&BC(*-'*J#"%*<'N%%'F/GC%'>'K#"')%,/(C%)'"%B"%**(#&'
*2%J(K(J/,(#&'&#,%*<'
?*(B&(K(J/&,'/,'4;OP'??*(B&(K(J/&,'/,'9OP'???*(B&(K(J/&,'/,'4O

0&BC(*-

:/,-

R%K#"%'.-/",%"'012/&*(#&
!"#$%&'
+,-%"'
!"#$()%"*
.-/",%"*
345
365
;<7=>???
;<48>???
3;<;8@5
3;<;7A5

F/GC%'Q=E'S%)IJ%)'T#"L'.-/",%"'0KK%J,*'#&'F%*,'NJ#"%*

54

74686
@86B=

=>4@9???
3=>=465

=>4:4???
3=>=475

TP,%"'.-/",%"'012/&*(#&
+MN
!"#$%&'
012/&*(#&'
!"#$()%"*
.-/",%"*
395
3:5
=>6BB???
=>766???
3=>=445
3=>=485

=>4@4???
3=>=4=5

+,-%"'
.-/",%"*
3;5
=>646???
3=>=4=5

C#,%*H'I-(*',/JG%'"%2#",*'#")(&/"K'G%/*,'*LD/"%*'3+MN5'%*,(O/,%*'#P',-%'%PP%E,*'#P',(O%'*2%&,'(&'E-/",%"'*E-##G*'#&'
O/,-'/&)'0&FG(*-'*E#"%*'P#"'*,D)%&,*'Q-#'/,,%&)'/'*E-##G'(&'R#*,#&'(&',-%'P#D",-'F"/)%>'I-%'*/O2G%'*,/ES*'*E#"%*'(&'
F"/)%*'P($%',-"#DF-'%(F-,'P#"'/GG'R#*,#&'*,D)%&,*>'TGG'"%F"%**(#&*'E#&,"#G'P#"'P#D",-'F"/)%'O/,-'/&)'0&FG(*-'*E#"%*U'
/*'Q%GG'/*'F%&)%"U'%,-&(E(,KU'/'P%O/G%AO(&#"(,K'(&,%"/E,(#&U'*2%E(/G'%)DE/,(#&U'0&FG(*-'G/&FD/F%'G%/"&%"U'*DJ*()(V%)'
GD&E-'*,/,D*'/&)'F"/)%'/&)'K%/"'(&)(E/,#"*>
?*(F&(P(E/&,'/,'4=WX'??*(F&(P(E/&,'/,'9WX'???*(F&(P(E/&,'/,'4W

C'3*,D)%&,*5
C'3*E#"%*5

=>=@@???
3=>=445

A=>=76

=>6:@???
3=>=4=5

0&FG(*-

=>==B

7464@
@868:

C#&A.-/",%"'
<%/&
385
A=>=9B

C'3*,D)%&,*5
C'3*E#"%*5

</,-

R%P#"%'.-/",%"'012/&*(#&
+MN
!"#$%&'
+,-%"'
C#&A.-/",%"'
!"#$()%"*
.-/",%"*
<%/&
345
365
375
=>==8
=>799???
=>66@???
3=>=4=5
3=>=4=5

I/JG%'TBH'+")(&/"K'M%/*,'NLD/"%*'0*,(O/,%*'#P'.-/",%"'0PP%E,*

>?64;@@
3>?4>75
:=7

H2%C(/G'0)LC/,(#&

>?79:@@@
3>?>9;5
48<<

>?787@@@
3>?>795
678<

W%G#PAJ%/&'F/*%G(&%'
*C#"%
B'3*C#"%*5

UF#$%AJ%/&'
F/*%G(&%'*C#"%
B'3*C#"%*5
>?4:4@@@
3>?>6:5
8>67

>?67=@@@
3>?>875
6>;6

>?4<8@@@
3>?>6=5
8=4;

>?49:@@
3>?>:85
44;<

>?4=6@@@
3>?>6;5
9:8>

>?6>;@@@
3>?>;=5
648:

>?8<8@@@
3>?>=85
649>

>?8>;@@@
3>?>;75
78;7

>?686
3>?4<=5
<67

>?696@@@
3>?>=75
69:;

>?6<>@@@
3>?>;65
68=8

>?8<4@@@
3>?4>85
66:9

>?6;>@@@
3>?><65
7<6=

>?:6<@@@
3>?4;;5
=7>

>?778@@@
3>?><65
6=99

>?68>@@@
3>?>9;5
6894

>?4<4@@
3>?>;75
4=>4

>?4=>@@@
3>?>:>5
79=8

>?4<>
3>?6465
;9<

>?489@@
3>?>:;5
7>;;

+,-%"'
.-/",%"*
395
>?76=@@@
3>?44<5
46;9

>?4<4@@@
3>?>765
6878

>?48<@@
3>?>:<5
476>

>?49<@@@
3>?>7:5
7>;4

>?>7=
3>?44;5
:<7

>?46;@@@
3>?>7<5
76<:

>?><>@@@
3>?>675
864=

>?446@@
3>?>9>5
4<:9

>?>=4@@@
3>?>6;5
8=47

>?44=@
3>?>:65
44;4

>?>=;@@@
3>?>695
9:7>

W%K#"%'%12/&*(#&
!"#$%&'
+,-%"'
!"#$()%"*
.-/",%"*
3:5
3;5
>?4:9
A>?698@
3>?4>45
3>?47<5
8:<
898

>?>4;
3>?><75
6778

>?768@@@
3>?4><5
4=:8

>?676@@@
3>?>;:5
78<>

>?47>
3>?6>85
<4<

>?>=>
3>?>=;5
69:9

>?4<>@@
3>?>;;5
699<

>?764@@@
3>?>=<5
6644

>?664@@@
3>?><>5
7<77

>?7>4
3>?6>65
=7:

>?686@@@
3>?><85
6=:6

0&MG(*-'*C#"%*
UK,%"'%12/&*(#&
!"#$%&'
012/&*(#&'
!"#$()%"*
.-/",%"*
3<5
3=5
>?778@@@
>?66>
3>?4><5
3>?48:5
4;77
4<>;

>?476@@
3>?>:>5
6:7:

>?4:9@
3>?><;5
4;6;

>?4>=@
3>?>9<5
7:>>

>?4:9
3>?66;5
;:7

>?>=6
3>?>:85
7><8

+,-%"'
.-/",%"*
34>5
>?677@
3>?46>5
46;=

B#,%*D'E-(*',/FG%'"%2#",*'6HIH'%*,(J/,%*'#K',-%'%KK%C,*'#K'C-/",%"'*C-##G'/,,%&)/&C%'#&',%*,'*C#"%*'K#"'*LFM"#L2*'#K'*,L)%&,*?'E-%'*/J2G%'*,/CN*'2#*,AG#,,%"O',%*,'
*C#"%*'(&'M"/)%*'K($%',-"#LM-'%(M-,?'E-%'%&)#M%&#L*'$/"(/FG%*'/"%'C#L&,*'#K'O%/"*'*2%&,'(&',-%')(KK%"%&,'C-/",%"',O2%*?'E-%'(&*,"LJ%&,*'/"%'(JJ%)(/,%'/&)'
P/(,G(*,'G#,,%"O'#KK%"')LJJ(%*'K#"'%/C-'*C-##G',O2%?'.#&,"#G*'(&CGL)%'G#,,%"O'"(*N'*%,*Q'/*'P%GG'/*'M%&)%"Q'%,-&(C(,OQ'/'K%J/G%AJ(&#"(,O'(&,%"/C,(#&Q'*2%C(/G'
%)LC/,(#&Q'0&MG(*-'G/&ML/M%'G%/"&%"Q'*LF*()(R%)'GL&C-'*,/,L*Q'/&)'M"/)%'/&)'O%/"'(&)(C/,#"*?
@*(M&(K(C/&,'/,'4>ST'@@*(M&(K(C/&,'/,'9ST'@@@*(M&(K(C/&,'/,'4S

>?78:@@@
3>?>7=5
7487

B#,'H2%C(/G'
0)LC/,(#&

B'3*C#"%*5

>?77>@@@
3>?>8>5
77:<

B#,'0&MG(*-'
I/&ML/M%'I%/"&%"
B'3*C#"%*5

W%K#"%'%12/&*(#&
!"#$%&'
+,-%"'
!"#$()%"*
.-/",%"*
345
365
0&MG(*-'I/&ML/M%'
>?6<<@@@
A>?4=8
I%/"&%"
3>?><<5
3>?49;5
B'3*C#"%*5
8:<
899

V/,-'*C#"%*
UK,%"'%12/&*(#&
!"#$%&'
012/&*(#&'
!"#$()%"*
.-/",%"*
375
385
>?9>9@@@
>?6<8@
3>?4>45
3>?48<5
4;6=
4<>8

E/FG%'U4>D'.-/",%"'HC-##G'0KK%C,*'K#"'HLFM"#L2*

