NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REDUCING CRIME THROUGH ENVIRONMENTAL DESIGN:
EVIDENCE FROM A RANDOMIZED EXPERIMENT OF STREET LIGHTING IN NEW YORK CITY
Aaron Chalfin
Benjamin Hansen
Jason Lerner
Lucie Parker
Working Paper 25798
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25798

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 01238
We are grateful to the New York City Police Department for making available the data upon we
used. The data were provided by and belong to the NYPD. Any further use of these data must
be approved by the NYPD. We are also grateful to the New York City Mayor's Office of
Criminal Justice for coordinating this study and to the New York City Housing
Authority for coordinating logistics, providing invaluable data and facilitating communication
with residents. We are also grateful to the Laura and John Arnold Foundation for its
generous support of the University of Chicago Crime Lab and for this project. We would
like to thank Valentine Gilbert, Melissa McNeill and Anna Solow-Collins for exceptional
research assistance. We also thank Roseanna Ander, Robert Apel, Monica Bhatt, Monica
Deza, Jennifer Doleac, Katy Falco, Justin Gallagher, David Haftez, Zubin Jelveh, Jacob
Kaplan, Max Kapustin, Mike LaForest, Jens Ludwig, John MacDonald, Vikram Maheshri,
Aurelie Ouss, Greg Ridgeway and Nick Sanders for providing helpful comments on
earlier versions of the manuscript. Points of view and opinions contained within this
document are those of the authors. They do not necessarily represent those of the Laura and
John Arnold Foundation, nor do they necessarily represent the official position or
policies of the New York City Police Department. Please address correspondence to: Aaron
Chalfin, Department of Criminology, 558 McNeil Building, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104. E-Mail: achalfin@sas.upenn.edu. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not
been peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that
accompanies official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Aaron Chalfin, Benjamin Hansen, Jason Lerner, and Lucie Parker. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Reducing Crime Through Environmental Design: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment
of Street Lighting in New York City
Aaron Chalfin, Benjamin Hansen, Jason Lerner, and Lucie Parker
NBER Working Paper No. 25798
May 2019
JEL No. H40,H7,I1,K42
ABSTRACT
This paper offers experimental evidence that crime can be successfully reduced by changing the
situational environment that potential victims and offenders face. We focus on a ubiquitous but
surprisingly understudied feature of the urban landscape – street lighting – and report the first
experimental evidence on the effect of street lighting on crime. Through a unique public
partnership in New York City, temporary streetlights were randomly allocated to public housing
developments from March through August 2016. We find evidence that communities that were
assigned more lighting experienced sizable reductions in crime. After accounting for potential
spatial spillovers, we find that the provision of street lights led, at a minimum, to a 36 percent
reduction in nighttime outdoor index crimes.
Aaron Chalfin
University of Pennsylvania
achalfin@sas.upenn.edu
Benjamin Hansen
Department of Economics
1285 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403
and NBER
bchansen@uoregon.edu

Jason Lerner
University of Chicago Crime Lab
33 North LaSalle Street
Suite 1600
Chicago, IL 60602
jdlerner@uchicago.edu
Lucie Parker
University of Chicago Crime Lab
291 Broadway
New York, NY 10007
laparker@uchicago.edu

1

Introduction

For decades social scientists have debated the relative importance of the characteristics of
the individual—formed by the combination of genes and environmental exposures during
childhood and adolescence—versus situational aspects of the environment in which judgments, decisions and behaviors are made. That is, to what degree is behavior driven by, in
the words of Lee Ross and Richard Nesbitt, “the person versus the situation?”
A large research literature in behavioral economics and psychology suggests that small
changes to the environment (“the situation”) can have surprisingly large effects on human
behavior. This principle can be seen in the eye-opening findings of Stanley Milgram’s classic obedience studies and, more recently, in a host of policy-relevant applications involving
“nudges” (see Bertrand, Mullainathan and Shafir 2006).1 Low-cost interventions that leverage seemingly small environmental changes are particularly attractive as they have the potential to change costly behaviors without the need for resource-intensive interventions which
can be invasive, infeasible and difficult to scale. There is perhaps no area in which low-cost
interventions are more needed than criminal justice, a domain in which unwanted behaviors
lead to enormous social costs, perhaps as high as $1 trillion per year (Chalfin 2015), and
in which the primary intervention, incapacitation, has been used with such intensity that
1

Nudges in behavioral economics vary in scope but the underlying idea is that small yet costly cognitive
errors — or other externalities — can potentially be abated by thoughtful and sometimes seemingly small
situational changes. For example, minor tweaks to a default rule can have dramatic effects on retirement
savings (Madrian and Shea 2001; Benartzi and Thaler 2013), organ donation (Johnson and Goldstein 2003)
and the purchase of insurance (Johnson et al. 1993). Likewise, behavioral nudges have been found to reduce
theft from public parks (Cialdini, 1993), littering (Thaler and Sunstein 2008) and energy usage (Schultz
2007). In the realm of criminal justice, text-message based reminders have been found to reduce an arrestee’s
failure to appear at future court appearances (Fishbane, Ouss and Shah 2018). The capacity of behavioral
economics to identify behavioral bottlenecks in the quest for human progress captured the attention of the
broader public with the publication of Nudge by Richard Thaler and Cass Sunstein in 2008 and has led to the
proliferation of public sector “nudge units,” in particular the Obama administration’s Social and Behavioral
Sciences Team and the Behavioural Insights Team in the United Kingdom.

1

the United States now has the highest incarceration rate in the world. Beyond the large
financial cost to the government, collateral harms associated with the use of incarceration,
including direct economic and social impacts as well as effects on families and communities,
fall disproportionately on low income, racially segregated neighborhoods (Western, Kling
and Weiman 2001; Aizer and Doyle 2015; Mueller-Smith 2016).
Can crime, in fact, be shifted by a relatively small situational change? Public policy has
largely dismissed this idea, focusing either on costly enforcement actions or, alternatively, on
resource-intensive social programs which can be both difficult to evaluate and scale.2 However, two well-documented empirical regularities offer surprising room for optimism. First,
the substantial geographic concentration of crime, particularly violent crime, suggests that
the social and physical features of the urban landscape might potentially play an important
role in the crime production function (Weisburd 2015).3 Second, a litany of evidence from
both psychology and economics suggests that offenders are myopic and tend to have high
social discount rates (Lee and McCrary 2017). In a world in which potential offenders are
myopic, small environmental design changes experienced in the present may well have an
outsized impact on behavior relative to the uncertain prospect of prison sentences that, if
experienced, will accrue sometime in the future. Finally, the importance of the environment
is implicit in research on the importance of peer effects which have been shown to be a salient

2

This idea that crime is difficult to abate through light-touch interventions is perhaps best captured
by Robert Magnus Martinson’s seminal Public Interest essay, “What Works” in 1974, which suggested that
criminal behavior is difficult to change, as evidenced by high recidivism rates among offenders and the failure
of rehabilitative efforts to substantially reduce return to prison. Martinson’s essay received substantial public
attention, including coverage on 60 Minutes and in People magazine and, as crime continued to climb during
the 1970s and 1980s, mass incarceration seemed, to many, like the only viable solution to rising crime.
3
The idea that the environment matters is likewise implicit in the seminal Moving to Opportunity research
of the early 2000s (Katz, Kling and Ludwig 2005) and continues to be hotly debated today (Sampson 2008;
Chetty, Hendren and Katz 2016; Chyn 2017).

2

driver of offending, particularly among youthful offenders (Bayer, Hjalmarrson and Pozen
2009; Stevenson 2017).
With public safety in mind, cities have recently expressed renewed interest in making
changes to the physical design of public space. In support of this idea, a small research
literature notes that certain property crimes can be surprisingly responsive to environmental factors such as the supply of available criminal opportunities (Ayres and Levitt 1998;
Cook and MacDonald 2011) and physical disorder, as is evidenced by an influential article in
Science that reports compelling experimental evidence that physical disorder begets further
disorder (Keizer, Lindberg, and Steg 2008). What remains far less well understood is the
extent to which changes to the physical environment can be successful in reducing serious
crimes, especially crimes involving violence, which drive the majority of the social costs.4 As
such, the key questions of whether and how violence can be successfully reduced by environmental design changes remain entirely unsettled. We offer the first experimental evidence
that a small change in environmental design can reduce violence.
We study one of the most ubiquitous — and, surprisingly, understudied —environmental
design changes that cities have relied on to maintain public safety for more than two hundred years: street lighting. While many communities cannot convert vacant lots into parks
or repair abandoned buildings, every city, regardless of size, faces darkness each and every
night. By enhancing visibility, lighting has the potential to change crime through many channels, including by empowering potential victims to better protect themselves and by making
potential offenders more aware that a public space has witnesses or that police are present.
4

While there is some evidence that strategies such as increasing the availability of trees and green space
(Branas et al. 2011; Kondo et al. 2016), and securing abandoned buildings (Branas et al. 2016) may lead to
important reductions in violence, the evidence for effects on violence is non-experimental and mixed (Bogar
and Beyer 2016).

3

That is, lighting, like many traditional behavioral interventions, provides participants in
the market for crime with information — in this case, information that is usually masked
by a veil of darkness. We further note that lights may also complement more traditional
deterrence-based strategies, such as police patrols (Sherman and Weisburd 1995; Evans and
Owens 2006), surveillance cameras (Priks 2015) and “eyes on the street” (Carr and Doleac
2017), thus potentially driving down crime through an array of additional mechanisms.5
Surprisingly, despite wide interest in street lighting among scholars, policymakers, and the
public at large, there has not been a randomized experiment that studies the effectiveness
of street lighting in controlling crime. This study, made possible by a unique partnership
between the New York City Mayor’s Office for Criminal Justice (MOCJ), the New York City
Police Department (NYPD), and New York City Housing Authority (NYCHA), offers the
first and only experimental evidence on the effectiveness of street lights in controlling street
crime, especially violent crime.
Our field experiment was conducted in 2016 in NYC, where crime has declined precipitously over the last three decades, coinciding with a series of well-documented and cutting
edge innovations in policing — a number of which have become a model for law enforcement
agencies around the world (Zimring 2012). However, despite the prominent decline in crime
throughout most of the city, violent crime remains disproportionately high in public housing.
As such, NYC’s public housing communities were selected as the preferred setting for the
intervention.
With any place-based experiment, there are two core research challenges that must be
5

For example, if peer effects are present, then even if only a few individuals directly modify their behavior
due to the presence of lights, the resulting spillovers could magnify their overall impact (Bayer, Hjalmarrson
and Pozen 2009; Stevenson 2017).

4

addressed. The first is statistical power. Intervening on a place, particularly a large place
like a housing project, is enormously costly. While more than 80,000 people live in the areas
we study, only a small number of locations can be treated. Compounding this difficulty, the
principal outcome of interest, index crimes, while elevated in these areas, are still relatively
rare and thus highly variable. It is not uncommon for the number of index crimes to fluctuate
by several hundred percent on a monthly basis. In order to maximize statistical power, we
go beyond a simple treatment-control design by randomizing the dosage of lighting received
by each community in a block randomized design. Because there is greater variation in a
continuous dosage variable than in an indicator variable for treatment, this design maximizes
statistical power.
A second and related challenge is the inevitable sensitivity of treatment effects to reasonable differences in modeling assumptions. While a large experiment can be straightforwardly
evaluated using a t-test, which makes minimal assumptions and offers few researcher degrees
of freedom, small experiments require that researchers condition on control variables, both to
reduce residual variance as well as to guard against finite sample bias due to imperfect randomization (Angrist and Pischke 2008; Imbens 2009). While we have rich data upon which
to condition, the large number of potential covariates relative to the number of observations
means that there are many reasonable models that can be used to estimate treatment effects. This issue is compounded by the lack of theory in selecting the functional form of
available covariates—for instance, should we control for population or its natural log? In order to select a model in a principled way, we appeal to a growing literature in statistics and
econometrics that leverages lessons from machine learning to improve the practice of causal
inference (Belloni, Chernozhukov and Hansen 2014; Varian 2014; Athey and Imbens 2015).
5

In particular, we use LASSO regression (Tibshiriani 1996) to select predictors that have the
greatest out-of-sample predictive power, thereby automating away researcher discretion.
We estimate that the introduction of marginal lighting reduced outdoor nighttime index crimes by approximately 60 percent and, by at least 36 percent, once potential spatial
spillovers are accounted for. These findings provide the first evidence that the physical environment of cities and communities is a key determinant of serious crime.

2

Background

2.1

Street Lighting

Street lighting was introduced in the United States by Benjamin Franklin, who designed
his own candle-based street light, first used in Philadelphia as early as 1757. Newport, RI
become the first U.S. city to introduce gas lighting in 1803 and, after the invention of the
electric light bulb, Wabash, IN became the first U.S. city to use electric street lighting in
1880. Today, street lights can be found in varying degrees of abundance in every city in the
United States and throughout the rest of the developed and developing world.
In addition to being ubiquitous, lighting is also popular among community residents.6
In our study location — public housing communities in New York City — a recent survey
conducted by the NYC Mayor’s Office found that only 21 percent of public housing residents felt safe walking around their neighborhood at night, compared to 50 percent who felt
safe during the daytime. More broadly, from 2010 to 2016, complaints about street lighting

6

See prior studies from Painter (1989), Atkins, Husain and Storey (1991), Herbert and Davidson (1995),
and Painter (1996) for evidence on reactions among residents to increases in street lighting.

6

outages were the third most common complaint to the city’s 311 system, indicating that
residents notice and register concern when lights are not functional.7
The academic literature on street lighting—produced predominantly by criminologists—
is ably described in a 2008 meta-analysis by Welsh and Farrington, who report that, among
thirteen studies in the U.S. and U.K., the addition of street lighting reduces crime by 27
percent. However, all of the prior research is non-experimental and relies either on sometimes
questionable comparison groups or pre-post comparisons of community-level interventions.
While suggestive of a causal relationship, these comparisons may be biased due to seasonality,
secular trends in crime and the strategic placement of street lights by city planners (LaLonde
1986).8 Similarly, the most promising findings are over forty years old and many consider
the effect of lighting on vehicle theft from garages, not the type of street crimes that are of
central concern to policymakers. Despite the plethora of positive findings, the state of the
literature ultimately led a 1997 National Institute of Justice report to the U.S. Congress to
conclude that “we can have very little confidence that improved lighting prevents crime.”
The strongest evidence to date that ambient lighting has appreciable effects on street
crimes comes from a natural experiment motivated by Doleac and Sanders (2015) who study
variation in lighting induced by daylight savings time. Using both a differences-in-differences
and regression discontinuity approach, they find evidence that DST reduces crime, particularly robbery.9 While their findings suggest a role for ambient lighting, experimental
evidence remains critically important for several reasons. First, Doleac and Sanders use mi7

This is the author’s computation based on publicly available microdata accessed from NYC’s Open Data
Portal.
8
While the review refers to treatment groups as “experimental and “control groups, all of these studies
are actually quasi-experimental.
9
Research by Dominguez and Asahi (2017) finds similar effects in Chile.

7

crodata from the National Incident-Based Reporting System, which has poor coverage of
urban areas in the United States, limiting external validity for large cities. Second, an hour
of additional natural light is a fundamentally different — and considerably more intensive
— treatment than artificial lighting provided by enhanced street lighting. In particular, potential victims may find it difficult to adjust their behavior during the 6:00 to 7:00pm hour,
whereas time spent outside during the entire evening may be more discretionary. Finally,
street lighting is a policy that communities can directly influence and potentially use to
target high-crime areas in which the majority of a city’s crimes are clustered.

2.2

Field Experiment

The field experiment described in this paper was conducted in the Spring and Summer of
2016 in NYC. Through a unique partnership between NYPD and MOCJ, we randomized the
provision of street lights to the city’s public housing developments, allowing us to avoid the
potential challenges that could result due to spurious time trends as well as selection bias.
Managed by NYCHA, NYC’s public housing developments are officially home to more than
400,000 New Yorkers (and perhaps an additional 100,000 non-official residents), making
NYCHA the second largest landlord in the United States after the U.S. military. NYC’s
official public housing population is indeed large enough to place it among the forty largest
cities in the United States, making it an ideal setting to study the effect of street lighting in
urban areas.
Given the cost of providing enhanced street lighting at scale, the city wanted to launch
a pilot study to investigate the extent to which increased lighting would be effective in

8

reducing serious crime. We worked closely with the City for nearly two years to develop the
field experiment described in this paper. The intervention deployed temporary lighting towers
to housing developments across NYC. These towers emit approximately 600,000 lumens—a
measure of brightness—making them extraordinarily luminous. Towers were equipped with
an automatic timer set to switch on at sunset and off upon sunrise. A schematic photo of an
Allmand™ lighting tower as well as a photo of towers in the field can be found in Appendix
Figure 1.
In order to select developments for the study, NYPD provided a list of 80 high-priority
developments based upon their elevated crime rates and perceived need for additional lighting from among the 340 NYCHA developments in NYC. From this list, we randomized 40
developments into a treatment condition that would receive new lights and 40 developments
into a control condition via paired random sampling, stratifying on each development’s outdoor nighttime index crime rate and size in the two years prior to the intervention; treatment
developments were then randomly assigned a lighting dosage.10
In order to maximize statistical power, we also randomly assigned the dosage of lighting
among the treatment group. Three hundred and ninety-seven lighting towers were available to be randomly assigned amongst the treatment group. For operational reasons, the
City decided that two light towers would be allocated to each campus, regardless of square
footage. The remaining 319 lighting towers were assigned to the 39 developments according
to a random number drawn from a uniform distribution linked to the square footage of the
10

In practice, one development (East River) was randomized into the control group but subsequently
received a randomized dosage of lights because of operational considerations, requiring us to remove this
development and its paired treatment development — which received no lights — from the study. Additionally, one control development (Smith) received some lights post-dosage randomization, and is consequently
removed from a placebo analysis in which the control group is used.

9

developments. This created exogenous variation in the the number of lights per square feet
across the developments.11 The average dosage among the treated developments was seven
light towers over an area of approximately 700,000 square feet. Light towers were deployed in
the field between February 29, 2016 and March 7, 2016; the lights remained illuminated during all nighttime hours for the following six months. 12 Control group developments received
no additional outdoor lighting (“business-as-usual”).

3

Data

To measure crime in the study locations, we use NYPD criminal complaints from March 2011
through August 2016. These incident-level data were provided directly by the NYPD and
include the date, time, and type of offense, as well as whether the incident occurred indoors or
outdoors.13 We focus on index crimes, which conform with the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reports
“Part I” crimes and include murder and non-negligent manslaughter, robbery, felony assault,
burglary, grand larceny, and motor vehicle theft, but due to data constraints, do not include
rape or arson. We focus on index crimes for two reasons. First, these are the most serious
crimes and drive the vast majority of social costs (Chalfin and McCrary 2017). Second,
relative to less serious crimes, index crimes are thought to be especially well-measured both
because these crimes are more likely to be reported to law enforcement and because when

11

In response to feedback from residents, the allocated dosage was slightly adjusted and so differs from the
randomly assigned dosage. As is shown in Appendix Figure 2, the assigned and allocated dosages were very
similar. To protect against bias, we report intention-to-treat estimates, using each development’s assigned
dosage.
12
During the study period, only seven lighting outages were reported. All outages involved the operational
failure of a single light tower and were addressed by the vendor within twenty-four hours.
13
For privacy purposes, the exact location coordinates have been displaced and each complaint is “midblocked” — that is, assigned the X-Y coordinate of the middle of the block in which it occurred.

10

reported, the time stamps are more reliable allowing us to correctly assign crimes to either
daytime or nighttime hours. Among index crimes, the most common crime types are felony
assault and robbery, which together comprise 72 percent of the index crimes that occurred
outdoors during nighttime hours within the treated campuses during the 2011-2016 period.14
In addition to crime data, we use administrative data from several alternative sources
to test covariate balance and to construct controls. NYCHA provided the square footage,
official population, height of the average building, the number of residents per unit, the
number of entrances per building, and whether the development has an elevator. Second,
we use census block data from the U.S. Census Bureau to construct an unofficial measure
of the age and gender composition of the development.15 Finally, we obtained auxiliary
NYPD data that serves as a proxy for the density and type of police activity in each of
the campuses.16 Estimates are robust to the inclusion of police activity controls, suggesting
that results are not an artifact of post-treatment bias due to the re-allocation of police in
response to enhanced lighting.

14

In order to determine whether a complaint occurred during daytime or nighttime hours, we use daily
data on civil twilight hours — those hours in which natural sunlight is present. Civil twilight generally begins
approximately half an hour after the official sunset and ends approximately half an hour before the sunrise.
15
Because there may be as many as 100,000 unofficial NYCHA residents, demographic measures of official
NYCHA residents may undercount certain populations.
16
Specific variables include the date and location of 1) large-scale gang take-downs, 2) home visits conducted by NYPD, and 3) “vertical patrols” conducted by officers within public housing stairwells.

11

4

Models and Results

4.1

Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 reports covariate means for the randomized treatment and control groups as well
as a p-value from a t-test on the difference between those means.17 Past nighttime crimes
are expressed as the average count of each type of crime over the 2011-2015 pre-intervention
period, limiting the period to the months between March and August of each year. While
outdoor nighttime crimes on public housing campuses may seem relatively rare — pooling
the treatment and control groups, there are approximately 3.3 outdoor nighttime index
crimes over a six-month period at these developments — this is nevertheless consistent with
an overall crime rate of approximately 7,500 per 100,000 population annually, more than
double the rate of the highest-crime U.S. state.
The next panel considers four different measures of population structure: the development’s official population, its population density (population per 1,000 square feet), average
household size, and share of the official population that is male and between the ages of
15-24, which generally comprises peak crime ages. Most developments in the sample are
large, housing on average 2,400 residents in an area of roughly 700,000 square feet. Finally,
we report covariate means for three measures that capture a development’s physical layout:
the number of entrances per building, whether the building has an elevator or not, and the
development’s total square footage.

17

Because our sample is small, asymptotic critical values may provide a poor approximation to the true
sampling distribution. Accordingly, we derive p-values empirically using a re-randomization procedure in
which we re-estimate each t-test 500 times, each time randomly assigning the treatment variable. The relative position of the t-statistic for the model that uses the actual data among the distribution of placebo
randomizations is used to generate an empirical p-value.

12

4.2

Fidelity of Randomization

Despite the difficulties that randomization can face in a small sample, past crimes are broadly
balanced between the treatment and control groups; none of the differences in means are
significant at conventional levels of significance. In order to construct an omnibus test of
covariate balance, we regress either the binary treatment variable or, within the treatment
group, continuous treatment dosage, on the available covariates and compute the F statistic.
In practice, we use a permutation test similar to the one described above in which we rerandomize the treatment variable to a given set of covariates 500 times and note the relative
position of the F statistic for the model that uses the actual data among the distribution
of placebo randomizations. For both the binary and continuous treatment variables, the
p-values on the F -statistic are approximately 0.5 indicating that covariates do not predict
treatment, a finding that is consistent with successful randomization.
We further note that, in addition to checking for covariate balance along observable variables, we can test the fidelity of randomization to imbalances along unobservables. Specifically, among the control group, we regress crime on the randomly assigned dosage of its
paired treatment development. These results, detailed later in the paper, provide little evidence against the fidelity of randomization. Given that tests for failed randomization may
be underpowered, we continue to control for observed covariates in all subsequent models.

4.3

Econometric Models

To estimate treatment effects, we estimate a series of Poisson regression models in which
the log count of crime is regressed on a treatment variable and a vector of covariates. We

13

begin by regressing log crime on a binary treatment variable. This model suggests that
the intervention reduced outdoor nighttime index crimes by 12 percent. However, estimates
are imprecise (SE = 19 percent) and the binary treatment indicator masks considerable
heterogeneity in dosage. Given that some of the treatment sites received a very small and
possibly non-clinical dosage of lighting, these estimates will be biased downward.
Because the treatment is heterogeneous and because there is considerable variability in
the assignment of a dosage of lighting to each development, our main analysis is derived from
a “dosage model” that regresses the log count of crime on the natural log of the number
of additional lights randomly assigned to each development per 62,500 square feet (i.e., one
square NYC block) among the developments in the treatment group only. The parameter
on the dosage variable captures the effect on crime of a one hundred percent change in the
dosage of additional lighting. Evaluated at the mean dosage level, this is our estimate of the
effect of the intervention on crime.
Next, we turn to the issue of what to condition on. Building upon approaches such as
Bayesian model averaging (Madrigan, Raferty, Volinksy and Hoeting 1996; Raferty, Madrigan
and Hoeting 1998), as well as that of Oster (2015), who motivates a model averaging scheme
involving re-randomization, we estimate treatment effects, averaging over a number of models. To select variables in a principled way, we turn to LASSO regression (Tibshiriani 1996),
a popular and versatile machine learning classifier that is often applied to variable selection problems in high-dimensional space (Zou and Hastie 2005; Meinhausen and Buhlmann
2006). The LASSO has the virtue of retaining only the subset of predictors that are genuinely
predictive of outcomes, using a penalty term which regularizes all of the estimated regression parameters and constrains parameter values that fall below a given threshold, making
14

them equal to zero. The optimal penalty term, λ, is selected via k-fold cross-validation by
randomly partitioning the data into k different training sets and associated test sets. For
each training set, a series of models are estimated for varying values of λ and predictions
are computed on the associated test set. The optimal λ is chosen by taking the mean of the
errors across the k test sets and choosing the value which minimizes this quantity. With this
λ in hand, the model is then re-run on the full dataset using the optimal λ. A challenge in
applying LASSO to our data is that the sample size is relatively small and the outcome is
fairly noisy. As a result, the variables selected by the LASSO can be sensitive to how the
data are randomly partitioned into the k folds. To ensure the stability and robustness of
the estimates, we re-run the LASSO 500 times, each time retaining the subset of selected
variables.
While the LASSO is useful for selecting variables, it is not appropriate for estimating
treatment effects. Hence, for each of the 500 LASSO-selected subsets of variables, we subsequently run a Poisson regression model, storing up the coefficient and a bootstrapped standard error. We report the median coefficient and standard error among the estimated models.
Estimates are reported for on-campus crimes and, in order to test for spatial spillovers, for
crimes that occur within a radius of 550 feet (two standard NYC blocks) from campus.
While we do not detect evidence of spillovers, these tests are underpowered and, in order
to be conservative, we also report estimates for crimes committed within the 550 square
foot catchment area, inclusive of the campus. These “net” estimates are thus extraordinarily
conservative and represent a lower bound on the treatment effect as they automatically fold
in displacement to adjacent areas.

15

4.4

Main Estimates

In Figure 1 we plot the natural log of crime against the natural log of the number of light
towers added per square block for the development. There is a striking negative relationship
between on-campus crime and randomly assigned lighting dosage. Turning to the middle
column, the relationship between crime and dosage is positive for off-campus crimes, which
is consistent with the possibility that some crimes are displaced to adjacent areas. Finally,
turning to net crime — crimes occurring both on and within two blocks of the campus —
the relationship between lighting and crime remains negative, albeit less negative than for
on-campus crimes.18
We next turn to generating numerical estimates of treatment effects. Table 2 presents
regression evidence on the effect of lighting dosage on crime within the treatment group. The
estimates are derived from Poisson regressions of the log count of crime on the natural log of
dosage, conditional on controls. Results are presented for on-campus and off-campus crimes,
as well as for net crimes inclusive of the off-campus catchment area. We present results
separately for both daytime and nighttime outdoor crimes, recognizing that daytime crimes
potentially provide a measure of the importance of temporal spillovers. Coefficients and
bootstrapped standard errors are the median among 500 different LASSO-selected models.
19

We also transform the Poisson coefficient to obtain the incidence rate ratio minus one,

which is the estimated treatment effect. The main estimates for outdoor nighttime crimes
in the treated developments are presented in the first set of rows. The regression estimates
closely replicate the pattern of findings presented in Figure 1. For each 100 percent change
18

Excluding the highest dosage developments does not substantively change the slope of these regression
lines. We formally test robustness to the exclusion of the highest dosage developments later in the manuscript.
19
The median number of predictors selected by the LASSO model is 2.

16

in the natural log of dosage, averaged across all developments, we estimate a 59 percent
reduction in outdoor, nighttime crimes that occur on campus. It is important to note that
while the IRRs are consistent with very large treatment effects, base rates of crime are low.
The 59% reduction in index crimes would take an average development which experiences
3.6 index crimes per six-month period prior to the intervention to 2.1 expected index crimes.
Turning to the middle set of columns of Table 2, we find little evidence that lighting
displaces crime. However, the estimate is imprecise and does not allow us to detect spillovers
with confidence. In order to be conservative, we estimate a “net” model in which the dependent variable is the count of crimes within a two-block radius of the campus, inclusive
of the campus. Since the intervention occurred only on the campus, estimating the effect of
lighting for the entire area has the mechanical effect of attenuating treatment effects, even
in the absence of spillovers. These models are, thus, conservative and provide a reasonable
lower bound on the effects of the intervention. Inclusive of potential spillovers, we estimate
that lighting reduced outdoor nighttime index crimes by 36%.
Next, we present results for daytime crimes among the treatment sites as a test for
temporal spillovers. While point estimates are negative, they are insufficiently precise to
provide confidence that spillovers are present. Two points of caution are worth noting with
respect to this test. First, even during the daytime, the presence of the temporary light
towers is a notable part of the landscape. The towers are prominent, may be associated
with public safety in the minds of residents and are tended to regularly by personnel who
re-fuel the lights during the daytime. Therefore, the lights may have a demonstration effect
on crime, even during daytime hours. Second, we note that precise timestamps on crimes
in police microdata can be noisy. Consequently, it is entirely possible that some nighttime
17

crimes, discovered during daytime hours, could be reported as daytime crimes. Hence, it is
possible that a portion of the crime reduction observed at night could be re-distributed to
the daytime.
The final rows of Table 2 present the results of a key placebo test for the fidelity of
randomization. Here, we utilize the randomized control group, leveraging the fact that, since
the developments were randomized in pairs, each of the control developments has a randomly
assigned dosage that was not actually received. These estimates are presented in the final
set of rows and are statistically indistinguishable from zero.

4.5

Robustness

The previous section presents evidence in favor of a causal effect of lighting on outdoor,
nighttime crimes in and around public housing. In this section, we further interrogate these
findings to test whether they are robust to alternative specifications and the removal of
outliers.
We begin with a discussion of the robustness of model estimates to the inclusion of alternative control variables in the regressions presented in the previous section. As an additional
check on the representativeness of the LASSO-selected predictors across the entire model
space, we re-estimate the model many times using randomly-selected subsets of control variables and show that the estimates from the LASSO-selected models lie within the central
tendency of the universe of potential model estimates. Appendix Figure 3 presents the distribution of estimated on-campus and net treatment effects from 5,000 models, each of which
conditions on a subset of between one and eight control variables randomly selected from

18

among the universe of observed covariates.20 Parameter estimates reported in Table 2 are not
unusual among the larger universe of potential estimates and are, if anything, conservative.
Next, we test for outliers by re-estimating the models presented in Table 2 excluding
one development at a time from the treatment group. Figure 2, Panel A provides a visual
depiction of these results for on-campus index crimes and net index crimes. In each of the
plots, the vertical axis represents the estimated treatment effect and the horizontal axis
represents the rank of the excluded development’s randomly assigned dosage. Point estimates
are indicated by the black dots; the associated whiskers represent the width of the 95%
confidence intervals. For both on-campus and net index crimes, the results are extraordinarily
robust to dropping a given development.
Next, we turn to whether the results are robust to excluding the highest dosage developments. In particular, given that the smallest developments received the highest dosages, we
might worry that results would be extremely sensitive to the exclusion of a few small developments that, for idiosyncratic reasons, might have experienced a large percentage change in
crime. Figure 2, Panel B plots estimated treatment effects excluding the highest ranked all
the way up to the eight highest-ranked developments according to their assigned dosage. The
estimates are remarkably insensitive to the exclusion of the highest dosage developments.
Finally, we consider the sensitivity of the conservative estimate of the lighting intervention
on net crime to changing the radius used to detect spillovers, as shown in Figure 3. The plots
show that meaningful effects persist even at very large radii around the treated campuses.

20

In addition to the random set, each model controls for development population.

19

5

Discussion

In the previous section, we present evidence that street lighting can be effective in reducing
urban street crimes. In this section, we discuss the extent to which lighting is likely to be
cost-effective.
The effects documented in this paper speak only to the ability of lighting to reduce
outdoor, nighttime crimes. On NYC’s public housing campuses, approximately 11 percent of
index crimes occur outdoors and during nighttime hours. Accordingly, a 36 percent reduction
in outdoor, nighttime index crimes means that lighting may reduce serious offending in these
communities by approximately 4 percent. We note here that a 4 percent change in index
crimes is approximately what would be expected to occur during a very serious recession
(Raphael and Winter-Ebmer 2003; Gould Weinberg and Mustard 2005) or in response to
a ten percent increase in police manpower (Evans and Owens 2007; Chalfin and McCrary
2018).
In order to measure the benefits of crime reduction that accrued to NYC residents as
a result of the lighting intervention, we construct per-development cost-of-crime measures.
Recognizing that crime is a non-market good, we use estimates of the social cost of crime
generated by Cohen and Piquero (2009) and update these estimates to express costs in
2016 dollars.21 We use their willingness-to-pay estimates derived from a contingent valuation
survey of potential crime victims and limit the analysis to index crimes.

22

Following Cohen

and Piquero, we treat homicide as an event that accrues stochastically from other crimes,
21

See Cohen (2000) and Chalfin (2015) for a more detailed discussion of the historical development of the
literature that estimates the social harms of criminal victimization.
22
In 2016 dollars, the costs estimated by Cohen and Piquero (2009) are as follows: $324,112 per armed
robbery, $45,144 per unarmed robbery, $98,391 per felony assault, $21,993 per misdemeanor assault, $40,514
per burglary, $19,678 per motor vehicle theft, and $4,630 per larceny.

20

such as a robbery or an assault. Based on these estimates, the economic value of crimes
abated due to lighting upgrades is projected to be approximately $770,000 per community
per year.23
There are two ways to think about the cost of this intervention. First, we provide an
accounting of the actual rental costs of the pilot project. Such an analysis reveals retrospectively whether costs of the temporary lighting were justified by the crime reduction
benefits that accrued. With respect to retrospective costs, the total cost of the intervention
was $5,032,632. On a per-development basis, this is approximately $129,000 or $258,000 per
development annually.
Second, we can think prospectively about what a permanent upgrade in lighting might
cost, which is more consistent with the choice that policymakers actually face. Projecting
what an equivalent permanent lighting upgrade would cost is conceptually challenging. However, based on the cost of recent permanent lighting upgrades in public housing, the up-front
cost of a development-wide lighting upgrade is expected to be between $3 and $4 million
for a development of approximately 700,000 square feet, the average size of developments
in our study. Annual costs of providing electricity to the additional lights is expected to be
roughly $15,000 per development. Over a ten-year planning horizon, we estimate that this
type of lighting upgrade will cost, on average, $200,000 per development annually. Given
these annual costs, if the effects of lighting persist, we anticipate that the ratio of benefits to
the costs of additional lighting would be approximately 4 to 1. This is a far larger benefit to
cost ratio than the marginal incarceration typically offers, without the collateral costs, and
perhaps offering collateral benefits.
23

This calculation assumes that the effectiveness of lighting will be constant over time.

21

6

Conclusion

The debate over the role of the “individual versus the situation” in the crime production
function continues to this day. This field experiment provides novel evidence that changing
the situation in urban environments through investments in street lighting can reduce crime
in disadvantaged urban areas. Accounting conservatively for potential spillovers, lighting
reduces outdoor nighttime index crimes by approximately 36 percent and reduces overall
index crimes by approximately 4 percent in affected communities, an outcome which is likely
to be cost-beneficial, should the impact of lighting persist over time. Importantly, lighting
offers cities a promising method to reduce crime while avoiding potential unintended costs
associated with reliance on incapacitation, which has been shown to have high collateral
costs. Even more important, these findings highlight a general principle — that violence,
like other costly externalities, can be extraordinarily sensitive to situational factors that are
experienced in the present relative to longer-term costs that are experienced in the future.
With respect to the promise of lighting as a scaleable crime reduction strategy, we note
that some uncertainty about the effects of a permanent infrastructure upgrade remains. In
particular, the lighting studied here is very bright and provides far more light than a typical
investment in marginal lighting would entail. Likewise, because the temporary light towers
studied here are particularly prominent and are not a natural feature of the urban landscape,
the intervention may fold in substantial demonstration effects that may not accrue from a
more organic intervention.
The cost-benefit analysis presented above also provides some intuition for how cities
might choose to trade off between capital investments in their crime control production

22

function. Since the benefits of crime control will accrue over a relatively long time horizon,
a social planner who is seeking to optimize over a fixed time horizon may find spending on
technology to be an unattractive proposition. The implication of our analysis thus accords
with a broader literature on the provision of local or regional public goods which may be over
or under-provided based upon the extent of free-riding (Bergrstrom, Garrat, and SheehanConnor 2009), or the heterogeneity of production technologies with local spillovers (Ogawa
and Wildisin 2009). While Lizzeri and Persico (2001) demonstrate local public goods may be
underprovided in winner take all electoral systems, we note that local public capital goods
could also be underprovided due to the extended time needed for those investments to pay
off, relative to traditional electoral cycles.

23

References
Aizer, A. and Doyle Jr, J. J. (2015). Juvenile incarceration, human capital, and future
crime: Evidence from randomly assigned judges. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
130(2):759–803.
Angrist, J. D. and Pischke, J.-S. (2008). Mostly harmless econometrics: An empiricist’s
companion. Princeton university press.
Athey, S. and Imbens, G. W. (2015). Machine learning methods for estimating heterogeneous
causal effects. stat, 1050(5).
Atkins, S., Husain, S., and Storey, A. (1991). The influence of street lighting on crime and
fear of crime. Home Office London.
Ayres, I. and Levitt, S. D. (1998). Measuring positive externalities from unobservable victim precaution: an empirical analysis of lojack. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
113(1):43–77.
Bayer, P., Hjalmarsson, R., and Pozen, D. (2009). Building criminal capital behind bars:
Peer effects in juvenile corrections. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(1):105–147.
Belloni, A., Chernozhukov, V., and Hansen, C. (2014). Inference on treatment effects after
selection among high-dimensional controls. The Review of Economic Studies, 81(2):608–
650.
Bertrand, M., Mullainathan, S., and Shafir, E. (2006). Behavioral economics and marketing
in aid of decision making among the poor. Journal of Public Policy & Marketing, 25(1):8–
23.
Bloom, D. (2006). Employment-focused programs for ex-prisoners: What have we learned,
what are we learning, and where should we go from here?. MDRC.
Bogar, S. and Beyer, K. M. (2016). Green Space, Violence, and Crime: A Systematic Review.
Trauma, Violence, & Abuse, 17(2):160–171.
Bovenberg, A. L. and De Mooij, R. A. (1994). Environmental levies and distortionary
taxation. The American Economic Review, 84(4):1085–1089.
Braga, A. A. and Bond, B. J. (2008). Policing Crime and Disorder Hot Spots: A Randomized
Controlled Trial. Criminology, 46(3):577–607.
Branas, C. C., Cheney, R. A., MacDonald, J. M., Tam, V. W., Jackson, T. D., Have, T., and
R, T. (2011). A Difference-in-Differences Analysis of Health, Safety, and Greening Vacant
Urban Space. American Journal of Epidemiology, 174(11):1296–1306.
Branas, C. C., Kondo, M. C., Murphy, S. M., South, E. C., Polsky, D., and MacDonald,
J. M. (2016). Urban Blight Remediation as a Cost-Beneficial Solution to Firearm Violence.
American Journal of Public Health, 106(12):2158–2164.
24

Buonanno, P. and Raphael, S. (2013). Incarceration and Incapacitation: Evidence from the
2006 Italian Collective Pardon. American Economic Review, 103(6):2437–2465.
Canty, A. and Ripley, B. D. (2017). boot: Bootstrap R (S-Plus) Functions. R package version
1.3-20.
Carr, J. B. and Doleac, J. L. (2015). Keep the kids inside? juvenile curfews and urban gun
violence. The Review of Economics and Statistics, (0).
Chalfin, A. (2015). Economic costs of crime. The encyclopedia of crime and punishment,
pages 1–12.
Chalfin, A. and McCrary, J. (2017). Criminal deterrence: A review of the literature. Journal
of Economic Literature, 55(1):5–48.
Chalfin, A. and McCrary, J. (2018). Are us cities underpoliced? theory and evidence. The
Review of Economics and Statistics, 100(1):167–186.
Chetty, R., Hendren, N., and Katz, L. F. (2016). The effects of exposure to better neighborhoods on children: New evidence from the moving to opportunity experiment. The
American Economic Review, 106(4):855–902.
Chyn, E. (2018). Moved to opportunity: The long-run effects of public housing demolition
on children. The American Economic Review, 108(10):3028–56.
Cohen, M. A. and Piquero, A. R. (2009). New Evidence on the Monetary Value of Saving a
High Risk Youth. Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 25(1):25–49.
Cook, P. J. (2010). Property crime — yes; violence — no. Criminology & Public Policy,
9(4):693–697.
Cook, P. J. and MacDonald, J. (2011). Public safety through private action: an economic
assessment of bids. Economic Journal, 121(552):445–462.
Coppock, A. (2019). ri2: Randomization Inference for Randomized Experiments. R package
version 0.1.2.
Di Tella, R. and Schargrodsky, E. (2004). Do police reduce crime? estimates using the allocation of police forces after a terrorist attack. The American Economic Review, 94(1):115–
133.
Diener, E., Larsen, R. J., and Emmons, R. A. (1984). Person× situation interactions: Choice
of situations and congruence response models. Journal of personality and social psychology,
47(3):580.
DiIulio Jr, J. (1997). Jail alone wont stop juvenile super-predators. The Wall Street Journal,
page A23.
Doleac, J. L. and Sanders, N. J. (2015). Under the Cover of Darkness: How Ambient Light
Influences Criminal Activity. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 97(5):1093–1103.
25

Domı́nguez, P. and Asahi, K. (2017). Crime time: How ambient light affect criminal activity.
Available at SSRN 2752629.
Durlauf, S. N. and Nagin, D. S. (2011). Imprisonment and crime. Criminology & Public
Policy, 10(1):13–54.
Evans, W. N. and Owens, E. G. (2007). COPS and Crime. Journal of Public Economics,
91(1):181–201.
Farrington, D. P. and Welsh, B. C. (2008). Saving children from a life of crime: Early risk
factors and effective interventions. Oxford University Press.
Fishbane, Alissa, A. O. and Shah, A. (2018). Beyond bail: Behavioral insights to improve
criminal justice outcomes. Working Paper.
Fleeson, W. (2004). Moving personality beyond the person-situation debate: The challenge
and the opportunity of within-person variability. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 13(2):83–87.
Friedman, J., Hastie, T., and Tibshirani, R. (2010). Regularization paths for generalized
linear models via coordinate descent. Journal of Statistical Software, 33(1):1–22.
Fullerton, D. (1997). Environmental levies and distortionary taxation: comment. The American Economic Review, 87(1):245–251.
Gallup (2016). In U.S., Concern About Crime Climbs to 15-Year High.
Gould, E. D., Weinberg, B. A., and Mustard, D. B. (2002). Crime Rates and Local Labor
Market Opportunities in the United States: 19791997. The Review of Economics and
Statistics, 84(1):45–61.
Hansen, B. (2015). Punishment and Deterrence: Evidence from Drunk Driving. The American Economic Review, 105(4):1581–1617.
Harrell Jr, F. E., with contributions from Charles Dupont, and many others. (2018). Hmisc:
Harrell Miscellaneous. R package version 4.1-1.
Heller, S. B., Shah, A. K., Guryan, J., Ludwig, J., Mullainathan, S., and Pollack, H. A.
(2017). Thinking, fast and slow? some field experiments to reduce crime and dropout in
chicago. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(1):1–54.
Herbert, D. and Davidson, N. (1994). Modifying the built environment: the impact of improved street lighting. Geoforum, 25(3):339–350.
Hoeting, J. A., Madigan, D., Raftery, A. E., and Volinsky, C. T. (1998). Bayesian model
averaging. In Proceedings of the AAAI Workshop on Integrating Multiple Learned Models,
volume 335, pages 77–83.
Imbens, G. W. (2010). Better LATE than nothing: Some comments on Deaton (2009) and
Heckman and Urzua (2009). Journal of Economic literature, 48(2):399–423.
26

Johnson, R. and Raphael, S. (2012). How Much Crime Reduction Does the Marginal Prisoner
Buy? The Journal of Law and Economics, 55(2):275–310.
Keizer, K., Lindenberg, S., and Steg, L. (2008). The Spreading of Disorder. Science,
322(5908):1681–1685.
Kling, J. R. (2006). Incarceration length, employment, and earnings. The American economic
review, 96(3):863–876.
Kling, J. R., Ludwig, J., and Katz, L. F. (2005). Neighborhood effects on crime for female
and male youth: Evidence from a randomized housing voucher experiment. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 120(1):87–130.
Kondo, M. C., Keene, D., Hohl, B. C., MacDonald, J. M., and Branas, C. C. (2015). A
Difference-In-Differences Study of the Effects of a New Abandoned Building Remediation
Strategy on Safety. PLOS ONE, 10(7):e0129582.
LaLonde, R. J. (1986). Evaluating the Econometric Evaluations of Training Programs with
Experimental Data. The American Economic Review, 76(4):604–620.
Lee, D. S. and McCrary, J. (2017). The deterrence effect of prison: Dynamic theory and
evidence. Advances in Econometrics, 38.
Leonard, T. C. (2008). Richard h. thaler, cass r. sunstein, nudge: Improving decisions about
health, wealth, and happiness.
Levitt, S. D. (1996). The Effect of Prison Population Size on Crime Rates: Evidence from
Prison Overcrowding Litigation. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2):319–351.
Liedka, R. V., Piehl, A. M., and Useem, B. (2006). The Crime-Control Effect of Incarceration:
Does Scale Matter?*. Criminology & Public Policy, 5(2):245–276.
Lizzeri, A. and Persico, N. (2001). The Provision of Public Goods under Alternative Electoral
Incentives. The American Economic Review, 91(1):225–239.
Loewenstein, G. and Chater, N. (2017). Putting nudges in perspective. Behavioural Public
Policy, 1(1):26–53.
Lofstrom, M. and Raphael, S. (2016). Incarceration and crime: Evidence from californias
public safety realignment reform. The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political
and Social Science, 664(1):196–220.
Madrian, B. C. and Shea, D. F. (2001). The power of suggestion: Inertia in 401 (k) participation and savings behavior. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(4):1149–1187.
Martinson, R. (1974). What works?-questions and answers about prison reform. Public
interest, (35):22.
Meinshausen, N. and Bhlmann, P. (2006). High-dimensional graphs and variable selection
with the lasso. The annals of statistics, pages 1436–1462.
27

Mischel, W. (1979). On the interface of cognition and personality: Beyond the person–
situation debate. American Psychologist, 34(9):740.
Mueller-Smith, M. (2015). The criminal and labor market impacts of incarceration. Unpublished Working Paper.
Nagin, D. S. (2013). Deterrence in the Twenty-First Century. Crime and Justice, 42(1):199–
263.
Nagin, D. S. and Pogarsky, G. (2003). An experimental investigation of deterrence: Cheating,
self-serving bias, and impulsivity. Criminology, 41(1):167–194.
Nisbett, R. and Ross, L. (1991). The person and the situation. NY: McGraw Hill.
Oster, E. (2014). Unobservable selection and coefficient stability: Theory and evidence.
Journal of Business & Economic Statistics.
Painter, K. and Middlesex Polytechnic, L. U. K. (1989). Lighting, Crime Prevention and
Community Safety: The Tower Hamlets Project; First Report. Middlesex Polytechnic
London.
Priks, M. (2015). The effects of surveillance cameras on crime: Evidence from the stockholm
subway. Economic Journal, 125(588).
Raphael, S. and Stoll, M. A. (2009). Do Prisons Make Us Safer?: The Benefits and Costs
of the Prison Boom. Russell Sage Foundation.
Raphael, S. and Winter-Ebmer, R. (2001). Identifying the effect of unemployment on crime.
The Journal of Law and Economics, 44(1):259–283.
Sampson, R. J. (2008). Moving to inequality: Neighborhood effects and experiments meet
social structure. American Journal of Sociology, 114(1):189–231.
Schultz, P. W., Nolan, J. M., Cialdini, R. B., Goldstein, N. J., and Griskevicius, V. (2007).
The constructive, destructive, and reconstructive power of social norms. Psychological
science, 18(5):429–434.
Sherman, L. W. and Weisburd, D. (1995). General deterrent effects of police patrol in crime
hot spots: A randomized, controlled trial. Justice Quarterly, 12(4):625–648.
Stevenson, M. T. (2018). Distortion of justice: How the inability to pay bail affects case
outcomes. The Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 34(4):511–542.
Thaler, R. H. and Benartzi, S. (2004). Save more tomorrow: Using behavioral economics to
increase employee saving. Journal of Political Economy, 112(S1):S164–S187.
Tibshirani, R. (1996). Regression Shrinkage and Selection via the Lasso. Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological), 58(1):267–288.

28

Varian, H. R. (2014). Big data: New tricks for econometrics. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28(2):3–28.
Western, B., Kling, J. R., and Weiman, D. F. (2001). The labor market consequences of
incarceration. Crime & delinquency, 47(3):410–427.
Wickham, H. (2016). ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis. Springer-Verlag New
York.
Xie, Y. (2018). knitr: A General-Purpose Package for Dynamic Report Generation in R. R
package version 1.20.
Zhu, H. (2019). kableExtra: Construct Complex Table with ’kable’ and Pipe Syntax. R package
version 1.1.0.
Zimring, F. E. (2012). The city that became safe. New York’s lessons for urban crime and
its control.
Zou, H. and Hastie, T. (2005). Regularization and variable selection via the elastic net.
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), 67(2):301–320.

29

Figure 1. Relationship Between Lighting and Outdoor Nighttime Index Crimes
Panel A. On−Campus Crimes

Panel B. Off−Campus Crimes

Panel C. Net Crimes

2

2

2

Log crime

3

Log crime

3

Log crime

3

1

1

1

0

0

0

−0.5

0.0

0.5

Log dosage

1.0

−0.5

0.0

0.5

Log dosage

1.0

−0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

Log dosage

Note: Plots illustrate the relationship between the natural logarithm of the number of nighttime outdoor index
crimes for the March through August 2016 study period and the natural logarithm of each housing development’s
randomly assigned number of additional lights per square block (treatment dosage). Panel A considers crimes
that occurred on the development’s campus, Panel B considers crimes that occurred within a 550 foot catchment
area of the development and Panel C considers crimes that occurred either on the development’s campus or in
the catchment area. Each hollow circle represents one of the N = 39 treatment sites with the size of the circle
corresponding to the official population of the development. The dashed line represents a linear regression line
through the data. A few sites did not experience any crimes over the study period. An approximation to the log
value for these data points is obtained using a parametric correction suggested by Chalfin and McCrary (2018).
These data points are denoted by a plus sign enclosed within the hollow circle.

Figure 2. Robustness of Estimated Treatment Effects to Dropping Developments
A. Excluding One Development at a Time
II. Net Index Crimes
0.25

0.00

0.00

−0.25

−0.25

IRR − 1

IRR − 1

I. On−Campus Index Crimes
0.25

−0.50

−0.75

−0.50

−0.75

−1.00

−1.00
1

3

5

7

9

11

13

15

17

19

21

23

25

27

29

31

33

35

37

39

1

3

5

7

Rank of excluded development

9

11

13

15

17

19

21

23

25

27

29

31

33

35

37

39

Rank of excluded development

B. Excluding Developments Cumulatively, According to Dosage
II. Net Index Crimes

1.0

1.0

0.5

0.5

IRR − 1

IRR − 1

I. On−Campus Index Crimes

0.0

−0.5

0.0

−0.5

−1.0

−1.0
1

2

3

4

5

6

Number of excluded developments

7

8

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Number of excluded developments

Note: Plots report estimated treatment effects from a series of Poisson regressions of index crimes for the March
through August 2016 study period on the natural logarithm of each housing development’s randomly assigned
number of additional lights per square block (treatment dosage). In order to test the sensitivity of the estimated
treatment effects to the exclusion of a handful of highly leveraged developments, we re-estimate the model excluding
one development at a time (Panel A) and excluding developments cumulatively, according to assigned dosage
(Panel B). Treatment effects and corresponding 95 percent confidence intervals are plotted for each of the 39
treated developments. Estimates and confidence intervals are the median among 500 models, each of which selects
predictors using LASSO regression. These LASSO selected variables are the same selections that we use in Table
2. Confidence intervals are based on standard errors that have been bootstrapped 500 times using the “boot”
package in R (Canty and Ripley 2017). The red horizontal line in all panels represents the primary estimate of the
treatment effect reported in Table 2.

Figure 3. Robustness of Estimated Treatment Effects for Net Index Crimes to Various
Displacement Radii

0.5

IRR − 1

0.0

−0.5

−1.0
100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

Off−campus radius (in feet)
Note: Plots report estimated treatment effects from a series of Poisson regressions for net index crimes - crimes
that occurred either on-campus or within a given catchment area of the campus for the March through August
2016 study period. For a given displacement radius, we regress outdoor nighttime index crimes on the natural
logarithm of each housing developments randomly assigned number of additional lights per square block (treatment
dosage). Estimates and 95 percent confidence intervals are the median among 500 models, each of which selects
predictors using LASSO regression. These LASSO selected variables are the same selections that we use in Table 2.
Confidence intervals are based on standard errors that have been bootstrapped 500 times using the “boot” package
in R (Canty and Ripley 2017). The red horizontal line in all panels represents the primary estimate of the treatment
effect reported in Table 2.

Table 1. Summary Statistics
Treatment

Control

p-value

Past Nighttime Crime
On-campus outdoor index
Off-campus outdoor index
On-campus outdoor nonserious
Off-campus outdoor nonserious

3.60
3.77
10.95
7.58

3.03
3.77
8.85
8.01

0.20
1.00
0.16
0.73

Population Structure
Avg. population
Avg. population density
Avg. household size
Pct. of population male 15-24

2449.68
182.04
2.45
0.10

2330.00
186.18
2.32
0.09

0.70
0.84
0.06
0.36

Physical Characteristics
Avg. entrances per building
Style
Square feet (thousands)

1.63
1.24
730.83

1.98
1.37
725.67

0.26
0.45
0.97

-

-

0.51
0.47

F-test
Treatment vs. control
Dosage

Note:
This table reports covariate means for the treatment and control
groups, as well as a p-value for a t-test on the difference between
those means. The final two rows of the table report p-values on
a joint test of the significance of all covariates in predicting treatment. The first row (“treatment vs. control”) corresponds to a binary indicator of treatment; the second row (“dosage”) corresponds
to a continuous measure of the intensity of treatment within the
treatment group. All p-values reported in the table are calculated
using randomization inference and are based on 1,000 simulations
from the “ri2” package in R (Coppock 2019).

Table 2. Poisson Estimates for Index Crimes

Nighttime (D=1)

Daytime (D=1)

Nighttime (D=0)

On-Campus

Off-Campus

Net

-0.89
(0.34)
[-59%]
-0.40
(0.44)
[-33%]
-0.15
(0.35)
[-14%]

-0.01
(0.45)
[-1%]
-0.29
(0.62)
[-25%]
0.18
(6.73)
[20%]

-0.45
(0.23)
[-36%]
-0.29
(0.18)
[-25%]
-0.06
(0.35)
[-6%]

Note:
This table reports estimates from a series of Poisson
regressions of index crimes for the March through August 2016 study period on the natural logarithm of
each housing development’s randomly assigned number of additional lights per square block (treatment
dosage). Each cell reports a weighted median coefficient and standard error, derived from running 500
LASSO models that identified the most predictive covariates to include in the Poisson model. Estimates
are reported for three geographic areas: 1) the development’s physical campus (On-campus), 2) a catchment
area within 550 feet of the development’s campus exclusive of the campus itself (Off-campus), and 3) areas that
are within 550 feet of the development’s campus inclusive of the campus itself, in addition to crimes that occur
indoors on-campus (Net). Estimates are reported separately for both nighttime and daytime crimes among the
treatment sites as well as for outdoor nighttime crimes
among the control sites. For each regression, in the
first row, we report the weighted median across 500
LASSO runs of the Poisson regression coefficient. In
the second row, we report the median standard error,
which computed for each LASSO run using 500 bootstrap replications via the boot package in R (Canty and
Ripley 2017). In the third row, we report the percentage change in index crimes (incidence rate ratio (IRR)
- 1).

Appendix Figure 1. Light Towers in the Field

Credit: Ruddy Roye; https://www.wnyc.org/story/spotlight-safety-housing-projects

Appendix Figure 2. Relationship Between Assigned and Allocated Dosage of Lighting
4

Allocated dosage

3

2

1

0
0

1

2

3

Assigned dosage
Note: Figure plots the relationship between the randomly assigned number of lights per square city block (assigned
dosage) and the actual number of lights per square city block that the development received (allocated dosage).
Each hollow circle represents one of the N = 39 treatment sites. The dotted line plots the linear regression of
allocated dosage on assigned dosage.

Appendix Figure 3. Robustness of Estimated Treatment Effects to Alternative Sets of
Control Variables
I. On−Campus Index Crimes

II. Net Index Crimes

5

4

4
3

Density

Density

3
2

2

1
1

0

0
−0.75

−0.50

IRR − 1

−0.25

−0.6

−0.4

−0.2

0.0

IRR − 1

Note: Histograms report estimated treatment effects from a series of Poisson regressions of outdoor nighttime index
crimes for the March through August 2016 study period on the natural logarithm of each housing development’s
randomly assigned number of additional lights per square block (treatment dosage). Each model controls for
population plus an additional random set of covariates (between 1 and 8). Covariates are drawn from a pool of
aggregate crime counts and development demographics. For the full list of potential covariates, see Appendix Table
1, excluding the individual annual crime counts. In order to test the robustness of model estimates to our choice
of control variables, we randomly sampled from among candidate control variables, drawing 5,000 samples.

Appendix Table 1. Covariate Selection
Nighttime, D = 1
On-campus
Avg. entrances per building
Avg. height
Avg. household size
Avg. population
Avg. population (ln)
Avg. population density
Avg. units per population
Pct. of population male 15-24
Pct. of population male 15-24 (ln)
Square feet
Square feet (ln)
Style
Past assault, daytime, indoor (on-campus)
Past assault, daytime, outdoor (off-campus)
Past assault, daytime, outdoor (on-campus)
Past assault, nighttime, indoor (on-campus)
Past assault, nighttime, outdoor (off-campus)
Past assault, nighttime, outdoor (on-campus)
Past index, daytime, indoor (on-campus)
Past index, daytime, outdoor (off-campus)
Past index, daytime, outdoor (on-campus)
Past index, nighttime, indoor (on-campus)
Past index, nighttime, outdoor (off-campus)
Past index, nighttime, outdoor (on-campus)
Past nonserious, daytime, indoor (on-campus)
Past nonserious, daytime, outdoor (off-campus)
Past nonserious, daytime, outdoor (on-campus)
Past nonserious, nighttime, indoor (on-campus)
Past nonserious, nighttime, outdoor (off-campus)
Past nonserious, nighttime, outdoor (on-campus)
Past serious, daytime, indoor (on-campus)
Past serious, daytime, outdoor (off-campus)
Past serious, daytime, outdoor (on-campus)
Past serious, nighttime, indoor (on-campus)
Past serious, nighttime, outdoor (off-campus)
Past serious, nighttime, outdoor (on-campus)

Off-campus
0.128
0.004

Daytime, D = 1
Net

On-campus

Off-campus

Nighttime, D = 0
Net

On-campus

0.026
0.006
0.004

0.050

Off-campus

Net

0.966
0.336
0.178

0.820
0.296

0.056
0.020
0.014
0.102

0.174

0.036

0.062
0.024

0.068
0.424

0.856
0.200

0.996

0.900

0.812
0.004

0.028

0.320
0.698

0.708
0.796

0.026
0.256

0.212
0.540

0.612

0.018

0.396

0.024

(continued)
On-campus
Assault,
Assault,
Assault,
Assault,
Assault,
Assault,
Assault,
Assault,
Assault,
Assault,
Assault,
Assault,
Assault,
Assault,
Assault,
Assault,
Assault,
Assault,
Assault,
Assault,
Assault,
Assault,
Assault,
Assault,
Assault,
Assault,
Assault,
Assault,
Assault,
Assault,
Assault,
Assault,
Assault,
Assault,
Assault,
Assault,
Assault,
Assault,

daytime, (off-campus), 2011
daytime, (off-campus), 2012
daytime, (off-campus), 2013
daytime, (off-campus), 2014
daytime, (off-campus), 2015
daytime, (on-campus), 2011
daytime, (on-campus), 2011
daytime, (on-campus), 2012
daytime, (on-campus), 2012
daytime, (on-campus), 2013
daytime, (on-campus), 2013
daytime, (on-campus), 2014
daytime, (on-campus), 2014
daytime, (on-campus), 2015
daytime, (on-campus), 2015
daytime, outdoor (net), 2011
daytime, outdoor (net), 2012
daytime, outdoor (net), 2013
daytime, outdoor (net), 2014
daytime, outdoor (net), 2015
nighttime, (off-campus), 2011
nighttime, (off-campus), 2012
nighttime, (off-campus), 2013
nighttime, (off-campus), 2014
nighttime, (off-campus), 2015
nighttime, (on-campus), 2011
nighttime, (on-campus), 2011
nighttime, (on-campus), 2012
nighttime, (on-campus), 2012
nighttime, (on-campus), 2013
nighttime, (on-campus), 2013
nighttime, (on-campus), 2014
nighttime, (on-campus), 2014
nighttime, (on-campus), 2015
nighttime, (on-campus), 2015
nighttime, outdoor (net), 2011
nighttime, outdoor (net), 2012
nighttime, outdoor (net), 2013

Off-campus

0.002

Net

On-campus

0.006

0.024

Off-campus

Net

On-campus

Off-campus

Net

0.002
0.056

0.004
0.570

0.048
0.054

0.002
0.088

0.690

0.014
0.142

0.002
0.142

0.142
0.002

0.388

0.954

0.008

0.078

0.630

0.014
0.244
0.980

0.002

0.382

0.002

0.318
0.776

0.006
0.526
0.002

0.544
0.262
0.036

0.720

0.026
0.014

0.688

0.004

0.002

0.324
0.136

0.276

0.362

0.102

0.004

0.022

0.014

0.006

0.060

0.176

0.408
0.108
0.014

0.152

0.936

0.388
0.654

0.332

0.412

0.010
0.462
0.244

0.008

0.156

0.124
0.002
0.002

0.870
0.918

(continued)
On-campus
Assault, nighttime, outdoor (net), 2014
Assault, nighttime, outdoor (net), 2015
Index, daytime, (off-campus), 2011
Index, daytime, (off-campus), 2012
Index, daytime, (off-campus), 2013
Index, daytime, (off-campus), 2014
Index, daytime, (off-campus), 2015
Index, daytime, (on-campus), 2011
Index, daytime, (on-campus), 2011
Index, daytime, (on-campus), 2012
Index, daytime, (on-campus), 2012
Index, daytime, (on-campus), 2013
Index, daytime, (on-campus), 2013
Index, daytime, (on-campus), 2014
Index, daytime, (on-campus), 2014
Index, daytime, (on-campus), 2015
Index, daytime, (on-campus), 2015
Index, daytime, outdoor (net), 2011
Index, daytime, outdoor (net), 2012
Index, daytime, outdoor (net), 2013
Index, daytime, outdoor (net), 2014
Index, daytime, outdoor (net), 2015
Index, nighttime, (off-campus), 2011
Index, nighttime, (off-campus), 2012
Index, nighttime, (off-campus), 2013
Index, nighttime, (off-campus), 2014
Index, nighttime, (off-campus), 2015
Index, nighttime, (on-campus), 2011
Index, nighttime, (on-campus), 2011
Index, nighttime, (on-campus), 2012
Index, nighttime, (on-campus), 2012
Index, nighttime, (on-campus), 2013
Index, nighttime, (on-campus), 2013
Index, nighttime, (on-campus), 2014
Index, nighttime, (on-campus), 2014
Index, nighttime, (on-campus), 2015
Index, nighttime, (on-campus), 2015
Index, nighttime, outdoor (net), 2011

Off-campus

Net

On-campus

Off-campus

Net

On-campus

Off-campus

Net

0.140
0.398
0.644

0.970
0.530
0.852
0.004

0.136
0.400

1.000
0.056

0.002

0.806
0.092

0.114
0.004
0.244
0.024

0.004

0.632
0.980

0.412
0.874

0.366

0.002

0.006
0.878

0.004

0.218

0.058
0.870

0.576

0.918
0.004

0.014
0.314

1.000

0.874
0.164
0.436

0.088

0.002

0.152
0.550
1.000
0.996

0.002
0.004
0.004
0.006

0.004
0.002
0.006

0.690

0.002

0.120

0.002

0.002

0.156

0.002

0.032
0.002

0.684
0.158

0.772

0.630

0.996
0.180

0.772
0.608
0.706

0.584
0.158

(continued)
On-campus
Index, nighttime, outdoor (net), 2012
Index, nighttime, outdoor (net), 2013
Index, nighttime, outdoor (net), 2014
Index, nighttime, outdoor (net), 2015
Nonserious, daytime, (off-campus), 2011
Nonserious, daytime, (off-campus), 2012
Nonserious, daytime, (off-campus), 2013
Nonserious, daytime, (off-campus), 2014
Nonserious, daytime, (off-campus), 2015
Nonserious, daytime, (on-campus), 2011
Nonserious, daytime, (on-campus), 2011
Nonserious, daytime, (on-campus), 2012
Nonserious, daytime, (on-campus), 2012
Nonserious, daytime, (on-campus), 2013
Nonserious, daytime, (on-campus), 2013
Nonserious, daytime, (on-campus), 2014
Nonserious, daytime, (on-campus), 2014
Nonserious, daytime, (on-campus), 2015
Nonserious, daytime, (on-campus), 2015
Nonserious, daytime, outdoor (net), 2011
Nonserious, daytime, outdoor (net), 2012
Nonserious, daytime, outdoor (net), 2013
Nonserious, daytime, outdoor (net), 2014
Nonserious, daytime, outdoor (net), 2015
Nonserious, nighttime, (off-campus), 2011
Nonserious, nighttime, (off-campus), 2012
Nonserious, nighttime, (off-campus), 2013
Nonserious, nighttime, (off-campus), 2014
Nonserious, nighttime, (off-campus), 2015
Nonserious, nighttime, (on-campus), 2011
Nonserious, nighttime, (on-campus), 2011
Nonserious, nighttime, (on-campus), 2012
Nonserious, nighttime, (on-campus), 2012
Nonserious, nighttime, (on-campus), 2013
Nonserious, nighttime, (on-campus), 2013
Nonserious, nighttime, (on-campus), 2014
Nonserious, nighttime, (on-campus), 2014
Nonserious, nighttime, (on-campus), 2015

Off-campus

Net

On-campus

Off-campus

Net

On-campus

Off-campus

Net

0.002
0.004

0.014
0.004

0.996

0.002
1.000

0.110

0.094
0.400

0.124

0.024

0.008

0.200

0.008
0.008
0.224
0.040

0.004

1.000

0.136

0.894
0.996
0.580
0.036

0.206

0.536

0.054
0.644

0.232
0.028

0.998

0.078

0.926
0.938

0.002
0.500
0.962

0.852

0.268

0.888

0.020
0.008
0.040

0.140

0.408

0.980
0.004

0.074
0.002
0.002

0.004

0.114

0.008
0.004

0.988
1.000

0.038
0.014
0.516

0.028
0.002
0.002

0.120

0.058

(continued)
On-campus
Nonserious, nighttime, (on-campus), 2015
Nonserious, nighttime, outdoor (net), 2011
Nonserious, nighttime, outdoor (net), 2012
Nonserious, nighttime, outdoor (net), 2013
Nonserious, nighttime, outdoor (net), 2014
Nonserious, nighttime, outdoor (net), 2015
Serious, daytime, (off-campus), 2011
Serious, daytime, (off-campus), 2012
Serious, daytime, (off-campus), 2013
Serious, daytime, (off-campus), 2014
Serious, daytime, (off-campus), 2015
Serious, daytime, (on-campus), 2011
Serious, daytime, (on-campus), 2011
Serious, daytime, (on-campus), 2012
Serious, daytime, (on-campus), 2012
Serious, daytime, (on-campus), 2013
Serious, daytime, (on-campus), 2013
Serious, daytime, (on-campus), 2014
Serious, daytime, (on-campus), 2014
Serious, daytime, (on-campus), 2015
Serious, daytime, (on-campus), 2015
Serious, daytime, outdoor (net), 2011
Serious, daytime, outdoor (net), 2012
Serious, daytime, outdoor (net), 2013
Serious, daytime, outdoor (net), 2014
Serious, daytime, outdoor (net), 2015
Serious, nighttime, (off-campus), 2011
Serious, nighttime, (off-campus), 2012
Serious, nighttime, (off-campus), 2013
Serious, nighttime, (off-campus), 2014
Serious, nighttime, (off-campus), 2015
Serious, nighttime, (on-campus), 2011
Serious, nighttime, (on-campus), 2011
Serious, nighttime, (on-campus), 2012
Serious, nighttime, (on-campus), 2012
Serious, nighttime, (on-campus), 2013
Serious, nighttime, (on-campus), 2013
Serious, nighttime, (on-campus), 2014

Off-campus

Net

On-campus

Off-campus

Net

On-campus

Off-campus

1.000
0.142

Net
0.052

0.876
0.460
0.984

0.002

0.436
0.126
0.010
0.004

0.986

0.028

0.434

0.004
0.048

0.012

0.390

0.026
0.690
0.070

0.018

0.792
0.002

1.000
0.054

1.000
0.090

0.492

0.004

0.698
0.940

0.528

0.790
0.912
0.968

0.162
1.000
0.004

0.376
0.318

0.084
0.932

1.000

0.078
0.158

0.068
0.014

0.100
1.000

0.844

(continued)
On-campus
Serious,
Serious,
Serious,
Serious,
Serious,
Serious,
Serious,
Serious,

nighttime,
nighttime,
nighttime,
nighttime,
nighttime,
nighttime,
nighttime,
nighttime,

(on-campus), 2014
(on-campus), 2015
(on-campus), 2015
outdoor (net), 2011
outdoor (net), 2012
outdoor (net), 2013
outdoor (net), 2014
outdoor (net), 2015

Off-campus

Net

On-campus

Off-campus

Net

On-campus

Off-campus

Net
0.018

1.000
0.180

0.014
0.464
0.996

0.994

0.652
0.430
0.020

0.326

0.132
0.164
0.180
0.166

Note: This table reports the percentage among the 500 LASSO regressions in which each covariate was selected to be included in the outcome model used
to estimate treatment effects.

