NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PREDICTING HIGH-RISK OPIOID PRESCRIPTIONS BEFORE THEY ARE GIVEN
Justine S. Hastings
Mark Howison
Sarah E. Inman
Working Paper 25791
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25791

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2019, Revised August 2019

We thank Miraj Shah for contributions to the project; Tom Coderre, Brandon Marshall, Susan Athey,
and participants at the NBER conference on Machine Learning in Healthcare for helpful comments;
and the Office of the Governor of Rhode Island and the Rhode Island Executive Office of Health and
Human Services for supporting this research. We thank the Smith Richardson Foundation and the
Laura and John Arnold Foundation for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2019 by Justine S. Hastings, Mark Howison, and Sarah E. Inman. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Predicting High-Risk Opioid Prescriptions Before they are Given
Justine S. Hastings, Mark Howison, and Sarah E. Inman
NBER Working Paper No. 25791
April 2019, Revised August 2019
JEL No. D61,I1,I12,I18,Z18
ABSTRACT
Misuse of prescription opioids is a leading cause of premature death in the United States. We use
new state government administrative data and machine learning methods to examine whether the
risk of future opioid dependence, abuse, or poisoning can be predicted in advance of an initial
opioid prescription. Our models accurately predict these outcomes and identify particular prior
non-opioid prescriptions, medical history, incarceration, and demographics as strong predictors.
Using our model estimates, we simulate a hypothetical policy which restricts new opioid
prescriptions to only those with low predicted risk. The policy’s potential benefits likely
outweigh costs across demographic subgroups, even for lenient definitions of “high risk.” Our
findings suggest new avenues for prevention using state administrative data, which could aid
providers in making better, data-informed decisions when weighing the medical benefits of
opioid therapy against the risks.
Justine S. Hastings
Brown University
Department of Economics
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
justine_hastings@brown.edu

Sarah E. Inman
Columbia University
School of International and Public Affairs
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
sei2112@columbia.edu

Mark Howison
Research Improving People's Lives
1 Park Row, Suite 401
Providence, RI 02903
mhowison@ripl.org

A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25791

1 Introduction
Prescription opioids rank among the highest in terms of potential for dependence, abuse, and poisoning.
In 2016, more Americans under the age of 50 died from drug overdoses than from car crashes or gun
violence, a trend driven by increases in opioid overdoses (1). However, opioids may also be an important
therapy for those who suffer from chronic pain. The majority of those prescribed opioids do not experience
adverse outcomes; a survey of studies of opioid use found that rates of misuse, abuse, and addiction averaged
between 8 percent and 12 percent (2). This rate is, however, higher than an early (and widely cited) claim
that less than 1 percent of hospitalized patients receiving narcotics developed an addiction (3).
Moreover, many of those suffering from adverse outcomes were introduced to opioids through a
legitimate opioid prescription. One study of six years of medical and pharmacy claims found that 79.9
percent of opioid abusers had a prescription prior to their first abuse diagnosis (4). Of the opioid abusers
who did not themselves have a prior prescription, 50.8 percent had a family member with a prior
prescription.
Given the risks and long-term consequences of adverse outcomes following legitimate opioid
prescriptions, many providers now report a lack of confidence in managing their patients’ chronic pain
through opioid therapy (5). Providers could benefit from better information on the risks of initiating a
patient on opioid therapy, especially when that patient has never received an opioid prescription before.
Prior studies have identified risk factors for opioid abuse and dependence through descriptive analysis
and statistical modeling of both medical claims and electronic health records (6–10), and two studies have
also evaluated the predictive performance of such models (11, 12). However, these studies focus on
individuals already receiving opioid therapy and describe prescription patterns which are indicative of
dependency and misuse within this subpopulation. Previous research has not yet developed a predictive
model that is applicable to the larger population of potential recipients of opioid therapy.
In this study, we use novel integrated administrative data to estimate models of adverse opioid-related
outcomes for Medicaid enrollees in Rhode Island and conduct policy simulations of restricting opioid
prescriptions to only those with low predicted risk. By some estimates, the opioid epidemic created $5.5
billion in additional health care costs to the Medicaid program nationally in 2013 (13). Estimating our
model on state administrative data provides an avenue for state policymakers to predict the risk associated
with prescribing opioids to any potential Medicaid enrollee, which could be used to inform providers’
2

treatment decisions.
We use de-identified administrative records from the State of Rhode Island housed in a secure data
enclave (14, 15). Personally identifiable information has been removed and replaced with anonymous
identifiers so that researchers with approved access can join and analyze records associated with the same
individual while preserving anonymity. Because this study does not involve data that is both identifiable
and private, Brown University’s Institutional Review Board does not classify it as research with human
subjects. The database includes Medicaid records from 2005 to 2017, and data on major social benefit and
insurance programs, employment, incarceration, and criminal history. We construct a panel data set of
70,153 individuals who received an opioid prescription in the Medicaid pharmacy claims between 2006 and
2012, out of 400,024 distinct Medicaid enrollees in this period. Further details are in Appendix Section 2
and Table S4.
We define an adverse opioid-related outcome as receiving a diagnosis of opioid dependence, abuse, or
poisoning 1, or receiving treatment for an opioid use disorder in the five years following initial prescription.
Figure S3 shows the cumulative frequency of adverse outcomes from the time of initial prescription, which
peaks at 6.0 percent by year five.
We construct variables from observations in the twelve months prior to when an individual receives an
opioid prescription. These include 71 variables for demographics, incarceration, citations, arrests, car
crashes, wages, unemployment rates, household composition, and payments received from social benefit
and insurance programs.
We construct 489 variables from Medicaid claims and enrollment records, for a total of 560 variables, as
follows. First, we observe 8,494 distinct diagnosis codes and 6,507 distinct procedure codes in the Medicaid
claims data. We use natural language processing topic modeling techniques to consolidate the codes into
200 topics, based on the codes’ text descriptions and frequency. The topic models reduce the dimensionality
of the diagnosis and procedure codes and model their co-occurrence. For example, the ten most frequent
words in topic number 195 are “movements thoracic back accidents overexertion strenuous ligament neck
site lumbar.” The variable for topic number 195 measures how strongly this combination of diagnoses and
procedures for accidental back and neck injury is represented in each individuals’ medical history. Details
1

This includes both opioid and heroin poisoning. See Appendix Section 2.2 for details.

3

on the topic modeling implementation appear in Appendix Section 3.1.
Second, the pharmacy claims data include 39,805 distinct drug product codes. We use existing
pharmacological classifications to consolidate these into prior prescriptions indicators for 262 drug
categories.
We estimate predictive models using machine learning algorithms which search over variables and
functions of those variables to maximize out-of-sample predictive fit. These algorithms vary in complexity
and interpretability (16), so we fit three kinds of models: a regularized regression, an ensemble, and a neural
network. The complexity of regularized regressions is limited to functions of variables the researcher
specifies in advance. However, each variable’s contribution to prediction is easily interpreted. At the other
extreme, neural networks can adaptively model complex non-linearities and interactions between variables,
potentially delivering a higher predictive fit, but with greatly reduced interpretability (17).
For the regularized regression, we use a LASSO which searches over a large number of variables to
identify the subset yielding highest out-of-sample predictive fit. The model is easily interpretable through
a post-LASSO regression on the selected variables. However, the large set of variables we construct may
include highly correlated pairs of variables, and a single LASSO could arbitrarily select one variable from
such a pair. Therefore, we use a bootstrapped LASSO (BOLASSO) which retains the variables that are
consistently selected among 100 bootstrap replicates (18). For the ensemble model, we average the predictions across these 100 bootstrap replicates. For the neural network, we use a recurrent neural network
which can explicitly model the time dependence of the variables (19). Appendix Section 4 contains details
on model implementation.
We use the model predictions to describe the potential costs and benefits of a hypothetical policy that
identifies high-risk individuals before their initial prescription, prevents those prescriptions, and (we assume)
also prevents their adverse outcomes. Such a hypothetical policy is supported by recent findings that
predictive screening tools for opioid use disorder help primary care providers improve clinical outcomes
(20), and by advice that clinicians consider patient risk before initiating opioid therapy (21). It also has
similarities to the Centers for Disease Control’s Patient Review and Restriction Program for limiting opioid
prescriptions (22).
To simulate policy impact, we define a predicted risk threshold above which the policy would restrict
opioid prescriptions. The costs and benefits then depend on how accurately our model classifies individuals
4

at this threshold. We define two costs: CA denotes the cost to an individual and to society of an adverse
outcome, and CH denotes the hassle cost an individual experience from receiving an alternative therapy to
opioid therapy. Assuming the policy will prevent adverse outcomes, it will save the cost CA − CH for each
True Positive (TP ) who is predicted as high-risk and would have had an adverse outcome. False Positives
(FP ) accrue CH because they are incorrectly classified as high-risk and prevented from obtaining an opioid
prescription. The policy misses the potential savings of CA for the false negatives, those who are incorrectly
classified as low-risk but have an adverse outcome. However, there is no net change since these costs would
accrue in the absence or presence of the policy. Finally, the true negatives are predicted as low-risk, do not
have an adverse outcome, and accrue neither cost.
The net benefit of the hypothetical policy is, therefore, TP (CA − CH ) − FP · CH . It is positive when
TP/(FP + TP ) > CH /CA. This captures the tradeoff between model accuracy (the True Positive Rate)
and the “cost ratio” CH /CA. If the hassle cost CH is low relative to the adverse outcome cost CA, then it
will be beneficial to intervene with more individuals by setting a lower risk threshold and accepting a lower
degree of classification accuracy. We use this framework to illustrate hypothetical policy tradeoffs and to
measure fairness across marginalized subpopulations.

2 Results
2.1 Predictive performance
A common metric for assessing the performance of a machine learning model is the area under the
receiver- operating characteristic curve (AUC). The AUC measures the probability that, given two randomly
chosen individuals with different outcomes, the model will correctly assign a higher risk to the individual
with the adverse outcome. A perfect classifier has an AUC of 1, and a classifier that chooses at random has
an AUC of 0.5.
Our models achieve AUCs of 0.754 (95% C.I. 0.740 - 0.771) for the BOLASSO, 0.781 (95% C.I.
0.7690.795) for the LASSO ensemble, and 0.793 (95% C.I. 0.780 – 0.808) for the neural network. The
gains to the neural network are small and not significantly different from the LASSO ensemble; the loss in
interpretability does not deliver gains in predictive power.
Figure 1 shows the distribution of true outcomes by predicted risk decile for each model. Within
5

the top three risk deciles, the fraction of true outcomes predicted by all of the models is greater than the
base rate of outcomes among the entire population, which is 0.06.

2.1 Interpreting model results
Figure 2 shows the distribution of odds ratios from the post-BOLASSO regression for the 89 variables
which the BOLASSO model selected as the strongest, consistent predictors from the full set of 560 variables
across the 100 bootstrap replicates. BOLASSO helps to identify consistent covariates, avoiding arbitrary
choices among highly correlated pairs. While the coefficients on the selected variables do not necessarily
have a causal interpretation, they pick up factors which are strong predictors among observables. For
example, observed claims for routine preventative health may themselves lower risk through increased or
more frequent interactions with medical professionals, or they may proxy for attention to personal health or
responsibility which is the true unobserved underlying factor that reduces risk. In a predictive model, our
primary goal is to understand the observables that predict risk so we can design more effective policy.
Understanding these predictors can, however, also point us in the direction of potential causal relationships
and underlying mechanisms for further study.
Overall, the variables with the largest odds ratios were release from prison (1.929), and prior
prescriptions for antipsychotics (1.317), centrally-acting muscle relaxants (1.296), benzodiazepines
(1.213), and opiate agonists (1.196). Individuals who were released from prison in the prior year are
estimated as 92.9 percent more likely to have an adverse outcome if given an initial prescription, all else equal.
The coefficient on opioid agonists indicates that prior prescriptions from drugs such as cough syrups and
mild painkillers with small dosages of an opioid ingredient (see Table S5) are positive risk factors, even
though these drugs are not considered strong enough for chronic opioid therapy.
Variables with the smallest odds ratios (indicating decreased risk) were enrollment in Medicaid with a
payer code for the Rhode Island Pharmaceutical Assistance to the Elderly program (0.008 – indicating an
almost complete reduction in risk), the categorically-needy Medicaid eligibility criterion (0.136), Hispanic
race (0.245), missing race (0.305), and missing marital status (0.350). Because we use modal race and
marital status across all administrative sources, these missing indicators are likely proxies for individuals
who are enrolled only in Medicaid and not in other state services where race and marital status are reported.
The majority of variables (72) are derived from Medicaid records. Of these, four are derived from
Medicaid enrollment characteristics (such as eligibility criteria), one is total pharmacy payments, and four
6

are for prior prescriptions. The remainder of the Medicaid predictors are diagnosis/procedure topics. Some
of the significant themes among the selected topics include: injuries and pain (+); mental health (+); HIV (+);
cardiovascular health (+); contraceptives (-); tobacco and alcohol use (+); cancer (-); routine examinations
(-); and mammograms (-).

2.2 Cost ratio
Figure 3 shows the break-even cost ratio CH /CA at which the hypothetical policy is cost neutral across
cumulative risk deciles using predictive risk from the neural network model. In the top risk decile, the
break-even ratio is 0.233: it is net beneficial to recommend against opioid prescriptions for individuals in
the top decile if the CH is less than 23.3 percent of CA. It is net beneficial to intervene with the entire
population if CH is less than 6.0 percent of CA.
The existing literature provides guidance on reasonable estimates for CH and CA. In 2015, 33,091
people died from drug overdoses involving opioids (23), and 2,375,000 individuals over the age of 12 had an
opioid use disorder (24). The U.S. Department of Transportation’s Value of a Statistical Life is $10.1 million.
Florence et al. (13) estimate the aggregate annual societal cost of an opioid use disorder to be $61,297
(including additional cost of health care, substance abuse treatment, lost productivity, and criminal justice
activities). Weiss and Rao (25) estimate a 50 percent recovery probability after one year of medicationassisted treatment. Using these statistics, with the simplifying assumption that once an individual receives
a prescription, they either overdose resulting in death, become dependent but successfully recover after one
year of treatment, or continue to be dependent for ten years, we estimate a ballpark present discounted value
of $450,000 for CA.
Hassle costs are more difficult to quantify. They may include lost productivity due to chronic pain after
receiving an alternative therapy. The economic cost of pain in the United States is conservatively estimated
at $560 to $635 billion (2010 dollars), with a value of lost productivity from $299 to $335 billion (26).
Treating pain compassionately is a moral imperative for physicians, who must balance protecting those
experiencing chronic pain with the significant risk of harm that opioids can cause individuals, their families,
and their communities (27).
However, recent research suggests that opioid therapy may not be more effective at pain relief than nonopioid therapy in both the short- and long-term. A randomized trial comparing opioid therapy to non7

opioid therapy for acute short-term pain found similar levels of pain relief between the two treatments (28).
Observational studies of restricting opioid therapy and offering non-opioid therapy over longer periods of
time also show no advantage for opioid treatment in terms of pain relief, with some patients on higherpotency opioids reporting more psychological impairment than those on lower-potency opioids (29, 30).
This suggests that the CH is likely lower than $104,850 (23.3 percent of $450,000), meaning that a low
risk threshold that maximizes true positives at the cost of increased false positives could be optimal. These
findings support a belief among some within the medical community that the risks of opioid prescription
outweigh the benefits in many cases of prescription outside of cancer or palliative care (31). A benefit of
structuring our cost-benefit analysis in terms of the cost ratio is that a risk threshold can easily be reevaluated
as better data on these costs become available.

2.3 Fairness
In addition to evaluating the costs and benefits of the hypothetical policy, our model can help
policymakers examine measures of “fairness” – the extent to which the benefits versus costs of a policy
accrue disproportionately to marginalized groups. The model’s false discovery rate (FDR) provides such a
measure. It is defined as the fraction of false positives among all individuals who are predicted to have an
adverse outcome. Figure 4 shows the FDR in the highest risk quintile by race, incarceration history, and
disability status.
While members of minority groups (African-American, Hispanic) have a higher point estimate for FDR
in the highest risk quintile of our model, the variance in the estimates is high and the difference is not
significant. The previously incarcerated have a significantly lower FDR, and there is no significant difference
by disability status. Therefore, we do not find evidence of unfairness using the FDR.

3 Discussion
Prevention and treatment policies can be complementary approaches to opioid use disorders. Treatment
can help the many individuals already suffering from adverse outcomes, while prevention can stem the
growth of new cases of opioid dependence, abuse, or poisoning.
The proven standard treatment for opioid use disorder is medication-assisted treatment (MAT) (32–
34). However, it faces two significant hurdles. First, MAT is not widely available to those with opioid use
8

disorders; only 36 percent of substance abuse treatment facilities offering one of three different kinds of
medication treatment (35). Second, even when those suffering from opioid use disorders can be connected
to treatment, the costs associated with treatment are high and recovery from an opioid use disorder is
challenging. The probability of recovery after a year of MAT is estimated at 50 percent (25).
Prevention strategies can help prevent further cases of opioid use disorder. Current strategies are
primarily designed around reducing the quantity or potency of opioid prescriptions to curb misuse and
prevent poisoning among those with existing opioid use disorders. 2 These strategies are especially
complementary to a treatment approach. A recent study suggests that limiting opioid availability for those
with an existing disorder may increase the use of illicit drugs such as heroin. 3
The most widespread approach to preventing misuse by those with a disorder has been the deployment
of state-level prescription drug monitoring programs (PDMPs). These electronic data systems present data
on the prescription history of controlled drugs to providers, and are now in use in almost every state (34).
They have been shown to reduce prescription rates of opioids and increase provider comfort in prescribing
opioids, as providers can be reassured that they are not enabling risky opioid-related behaviors such as
doctor shopping or overlapping prescriptions (38, 39).
These strategies are reactive rather than proactive; they target individuals who have already begun
opioid treatment and have likely developed dependency based on risky prescription behavior. Our models
complement these policies by providing an opportunity to predict high-risk prescriptions among the larger
population of potential patients who have yet to be given an initial opioid prescription.
Our models and hypothetical policy aim to prevent dependency before it occurs. This is complementary
to existing efforts and could make use of the infrastructure already in place, such as the PDMPs. For
example, a PDMP could implement our modeling approach to show providers a risk categorization for all
patients (e.g. a red, yellow, or green indicator for predicted risk). This could increase information available
to providers, expand the population covered by the PDMP, and help providers consider the benefits and risks
of initiating opioid therapy with a new patient.

2

For example, a major health insurer’s effort to reduce extended-release oxycodone prescription by requiring prior authorization,
which led to an increase in the rate of short-acting opioid prescriptions and no overall change in the total morphine milligram
equivalents prescribed (36).
3
Abuse-deterrent reformulations of prescription opioids were developed to make it more difficult to crush or dissolve pills to
release the drug more quickly. Unfortunately, recent evidence suggests that the introduction of abuse-deterrent prescription opioids
into the market caused opioid abusers to substitute away from prescription opioids to heroin, with differential increases in fatal
heroin poisonings (37).

9

A limitation of our study is that it is restricted to the population of Medicaid enrollees. Expanding the
study to a data source such as an all-payers claims database would improve representativeness by including
Medicare enrollees and the privately insured. However, a strength of restricting our study to the Medicaid
population is our ability to securely join claims data to additional administrative records, which could be
challenging with an all-payers claim database.
Our definition of adverse outcomes is limited by the accuracy of diagnosis codes in the Medicaid records.
In particular, prior studies have found that opioid-related diagnoses can be underreported because of their
potential stigma (40, 41). To address this limitation, we added an adverse outcome based on procedure codes
for the treatment of opioid use disorder, which could indicate an adverse outcome even in the absence of a
diagnosis.
Including treatment as an indicator of adverse outcomes is also a limitation. As noted in prior work,
receiving treatment for an opioid use disorder is a positive outcome conditional on already having a disorder
(41, 42). However, the goal of this study is to suggest opportunities for prevention by examining whether
individuals at a high risk of developing an adverse outcome can be identified with confidence before they
are given a prescription using administrative data. This complements important research being done on
successfully treating opioid use disorders after they have occurred (43).

4 Conclusion
The opioid epidemic is a complex public health challenge for which prevention and treatment are
complementary approaches. Our results demonstrate the feasibility of a new approach to prevention based
on intervening with high-risk initial prescriptions through predictive modeling. Our data-driven, machinelearning approach to modeling adverse outcome risk provides new insights into the benefits, costs, and fairness of policies limiting opioid prescriptions. Intervening at the earliest stage, before an individual receives
an initial opioid prescription, has the potential to prevent future treatment costs and recovery challenges and,
ultimately, the life-long consequences of opioid use disorders.

10

Acknowledgments
We thank the Smith Richardson Foundation and the Laura and John Arnold Foundation for financial support.
We thank Miraj Shah for contributions to the project; Susan Athey, Tom Coderre, Brandon Marshall, and
participants at the NBER conference on Machine Learning in Healthcare for helpful comments; and the
Office of the Governor of Rhode Island and the Rhode Island Executive Office of Health and Human Services
for supporting research to improve fact-based policymaking.
Data are available through individual data sharing agreements with each of the following Rhode Island
agencies and municipal police departments: RI Department of Corrections, RI Department of Labor and
Training, RI Executive Office of Health and Human Services, RI State Police, Central Falls Police Department, Cranston Police Department, Cumberland Police Department, Middletown Police Department,
Narragansett Police Department, Providence Police Department, Warwick Police Department, Woonsocket
Police Department.
AHFS® Pharmacologic/Therapeutic Classification© used with permission. © 2017, the American
Society of Health-System Pharmacists, Inc. (ASHP). The Data is a part of the AHFS Drug Information®;
ASHP is not responsible for the accuracy of transpositions from the original context.

11

References
[1] Kaplan S (2017) C.D.C. Reports a Record Jump in Drug Overdose Deaths Last Year. The New York Times (Nov. 3, 2017).
[2] Vowles KE, et al. (2015) Rates of opioid misuse, abuse, and addiction in chronic pain: a systematic review and data synthesis.
Pain 156(4):569–576.
[3] Porter J, Jick H (1980) Addiction rare in patients treated with narcotics. New England Journal of Medicine 302(2):123.
[4] Shei A, et al. (2015) Sources of prescription opioids among diagnosed opioid abusers. Current Medical Research and Opinion
31(4):779–784.
[5] Pearson A, Moman R, Moeschler S, Eldrige J, Hooten WM (2017) Provider confidence in opioid prescribing and chronic pain
management: results of the Opioid Therapy Provider Survey. Journal of Pain Research 10:1395–1400.
[6] White AG, Birnbaum HG, Schiller M, Tang J, Katz NP (2009) Analytic models to identify patients at risk for prescription opioid
abuse. American Journal of Managed Care 15(12):897–906.
[7] Sullivan MD, et al. (2010) Risks for possible and probable opioid misuse among recipients of chronic opioid therapy in
commercial and medicaid insurance plans: The TROUP Study. Pain 150(2):332–339.
[8] Palmer RE, et al. (2015) The prevalence of problem opioid use in patients receiving chronic opioid therapy: computer-assisted
review of electronic health record clinical notes. Pain 156(7):1208–1214.
[9] Yang Z, et al. (2015) Defining Risk of Prescription Opioid Overdose: Pharmacy Shopping and Overlapping Prescriptions Among
Long-Term Opioid Users in Medicaid. Journal of Pain 16(5):445–453.
[10] Brat GA, et al. (2018) Postsurgical prescriptions for opioid naive patients and association with overdose and misuse: retrospective cohort study. BMJ 360:j5790.
[11] Dufour R, et al. (2014) Understanding predictors of opioid abuse: predictive model development and validation. American
Journal of Pharmacy Benefits 6(5):208–216.
[12] Hylan TR, et al. (2015) Automated Prediction of Risk for Problem Opioid Use in a Primary Care Setting. Journal of Pain
16(4):380–387.
[13] Florence CS, Zhou C, Luo F, Xu L (2016) The economic burden of prescription opioid overdose, abuse, and dependence in the
United States, 2013. Medical Care 54(10):901–906.
[14] Hastings JS, Howison M, Lawless T, Ucles J, White P (2019) Unlocking Data to Improve Public Policy. OSF Preprints 28krq.
Preprint, posted March 15, 2019.
[15] Hastings J (2019) Fact-Based Policy: How Do State and Local Governments Accomplish It? The Hamilton Project (Brookings
Institution) Policy Proposal 2019-01.
[16] Hastie T, Tibshirani R, Friedman J (2009) The Elements of Statistical Learning. (Springer-Verlag, New York), second edition.
[17] LeCun Y, Bengio Y, Hinton G (2015) Deep learning. Nature 521(7553):436–444.
[18] Bach FR (2008) Bolasso: Model Consistent Lasso Estimation Through the Bootstrap in Proceedings of the 25th International
Conference on Machine Learning, ICML ’08. (ACM, New York, NY, USA), pp. 33–40.
[19] Hochreiter S, Schmidhuber J (1997) Long Short-Term Memory. Neural Computation 9(8):1735–1780.
[20] Lee C, Sharma M, Kantorovich S, Brenton A (2018) A Predictive Algorithm to Detect Opioid Use Disorder: What Is the Utility
in a Primary Care Setting? Health Services Research and Managerial Epidemiology 5:1–8.
[21] Agarin T, Trescot A, Agarin A, Lesanics D, Decastro C (2015) Reducing Opioid Analgesic Deaths in America: What Health
Providers Can Do. Pain Physician 18(3):E307–E322.
[22] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2013) Patient Review & Restriction Programs: Lessons learned from state Medicaid
programs, Technical Report CS240524.

12

[23] National Institute on Drug Abuse (2017) National Overdose Deaths from Select Prescription and Illicit Drugs.
https://www.drugabuse.gov/sites/default/files/overdose data 1999-2015.xls (Accessed March 25, 2019).
[24] Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality (2017) 2016 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: Detailed Ta- bles.
https://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/NSDUH-DetTabs-2016/NSDUH-DetTabs-2016.pdf (Accessed March 25, 2019).
[25] Weiss RD, Rao V (2017) The Prescription Opioid Addiction Treatment Study: What have we learned. Drug & Alcohol
Dependence 173:S48–S54.
[26] Gaskin DJ, Richard P (2012) The Economic Costs of Pain in the United States. The Journal of Pain 13(8):715–724.
[27] Califf RM, Woodcock J, Ostroff S (2016) A Proactive Response to Prescription Opioid Abuse. New England Journal of
Medicine 374(15):1480–1485.
[28] Chang AK, Bijur PE, Esses D, Barnaby DP, Baer J (2017) Effect of a Single Dose of Oral Opioid and Nonopioid Analgesics on
Acute Extremity Pain in the Emergency Department: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA 318(17):1661–1667.
[29] Shimoni Z, Varon D, Froom P (2018) Minimal Use of Opioids for Pain Relief in an Internal Medicine Department. Southern
Medical Journal 111:288–292.
[30] Elsesser K, Cegla T (2017) Long-term treatment in chronic noncancer pain: Results of an observational study comparing opioid
and nonopioid therapy. Scandinavian Journal of Pain 17(1):87–98.
[31] Chou R, et al. (2009) Clinical Guidelines for the Use of Chronic Opioid Therapy in Chronic Noncancer Pain. The Journal of Pain
10(2):113–130.e22.
[32] Barry CL (2017) Fentanyl and the Evolving Opioid Epidemic: What Strategies Should Policy Makers Consider? Psychiatric
Services 69(1):100–103.
[33] Mohlman MK, Tanzman B, Finison K, Pinette M, Jones C (2016) Impact of Medication-Assisted Treatment for Opioid Addiction
on Medicaid Expenditures and Health Services Utilization Rates in Vermont. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment 67:9–14.
[34] Volkow ND, McLellan AT (2016) Opioid Abuse in Chronic Pain — Misconceptions and Mitigation Strategies. New England
Journal of Medicine 374(13):1253–1263.
[35] Mojtabai R, Mauro C, Wall MM, Barry CL, Olfson M (2019) Medication Treatment For Opioid Use Disorders In Substance Use
Treatment Facilities. Health Affairs 38(1):14–23.
[36] Barnett ML, et al. (2018) A Health Plan’s Formulary Led To Reduced Use Of Extended-Release Opioids But Did Not Lower Overall
Opioid Use. Health Affairs 37(9):1509–1516.
[37] Alpert A, Powell D, Pacula RL (2017) Supply-Side Drug Policy in the Presence of Substitutes: Evidence from the Introduction of
Abuse-Deterrent Opioids, (National Bureau of Economic Research), Working Paper 23031.
[38] Lin DH, et al. (2017) Physician attitudes and experiences with Maryland’s prescription drug monitoring program (PDMP).
Addiction 112(2):311–319.
[39] Wen H, Schackman BR, Aden B, Bao Y (2017) States With Prescription Drug Monitoring Mandates Saw A Reduction In Opioids
Prescribed To Medicaid Enrollees. Health Affairs 36(4):733–741.
[40] Carrell DS, et al. (2015) Using natural language processing to identify problem usage of prescription opioids. International Journal
of Medical Informatics 84(12):1057–1064.
[41] Barocas JA, et al. (2018) Estimated Prevalence of Opioid Use Disorder in Massachusetts, 2011–2015: A Capture–Recapture
Analysis. American Journal of Public Health 108(12):1675–1681.
[42] Hadland SE, et al. (2018) Receipt of Timely Addiction Treatment and Association of Early Medication Treatment With Retention
in Care Among Youths With Opioid Use Disorder. JAMA Pediatrics 172(11):1029–1037.
[43] Green TC, et al. (2018) Postincarceration Fatal Overdoses After Implementing Medications for Addiction Treatment in a Statewide
Correctional System. JAMA Psychiatry 75(4):405–407.

13

Figure 1: The fraction of true outcomes by risk decile in the test sample.
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

1

2

3

Risk Decile

4

5

6

7

8

9

Neural Network
BOLASSO Regresion Ensemble

10

Post-BOLASSO Regression

Note: The vertical black line indicates the base rate of outcomes among the entire population, which is 0.06.

14

Figure 2: Odds ratios from the post-BOLASSO regression.
2

Released from a corrections facility

Increased Risk

1.75

1.5

Prior prescription for Atypical Antipychotics

Odds Ratio

1.25

Size of household
1

Medicaid claims and enrollment
Social benefit and insurance programs
0.75

Decreased Risk

Rhode Island monthly unemployment rate

Employment
Incarceration and criminal justice

0.5

0.25

0

Demographics

Ethnicity is Hispanic

Enrolled in the RI Pharmaceutical Assistance to the
Elderly Program
Note: The full regression output is available in Table S6.

15

Figure 3: The break-even cost ratio by cumulative risk decile.
0.3

Break-even Cost Ratio

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Cumulative Risk Decile
Note: The break-even cost ratio is the point at which the hypothetical policy becomes cost neutral. If the hassle cost
is less than this ratio times the adverse outcome cost, than the policy will be net beneficial. Lower hassle costs are
required to make the policy net beneficial among lower risk scores. Error bars indicate the 95% confidence interval
calculated from 100 bootstrap replicates.

16

Figure 4: The false discovery rate for the highest risk quintile.
1.0

0.9

False Discovery Rate

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

Race/Ethnicity

Incarcerated

No

Yes

No

Yes

White

Hispanic

African-American

0.0

Disabled

Note: The false discovery rate is defined as the fraction of false positives among all individuals who are predicted to
have an adverse outcome, which is the population that the hypothetical policy would affect. Error bars indicate the
95% confidence interval calculated from 100 bootstrap replicates.

17

Appendix
1 Experimental Design
Our objective was to define a panel of Rhode Island Medicaid recipients who received an initial opioid
prescription under Medicaid coverage; define adverse outcomes of opioid dependence, abuse, or poisoning;
and model and assess the accuracy of predictions of adverse outcomes using information known only prior
to the initial prescription. Data were split into randomly-sampled training, validation, and testing sets using
the ratio 50:25:25 at the beginning of the study. We report the results of model predictions on the testing
set, which was withheld from analysis prior to the preparation of the manuscript.
Data are from the period 2005-2017, and include Rhode Island administrative records from the Department
of Human Services (DHS), Department of Labor and Training (DLT), Department of Corrections (DOC),
Medicaid program (under the Executive Office of Health and Human Services), and police agencies
(including the Rhode Island State Police and eight municipal police departments).
Although our data span the years 2005 to 2017, we construct a panel of individuals with initial prescriptions
between 2006 and 2012 to allow for the construction of variables a year before the initial prescription and
to define outcomes up to five years after the initial prescription.

2 Panel and Outcome Definitions
2.1 Opioid Prescriptions
To define our panel, we first establish which pharmacy claims correspond to opioid prescriptions. The
primary identifier for the dispensed drug is a standardized 11-digit National Drug Code (NDC) from the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration’s NDC Directory.1 This directory is only available as a current
snapshot, and because our claims data start in 2005, there are many unmapped NDCs to the current
directory. Out of approximately 14.8 million pharmacy claims between 2006 and 2012, only 66.8 percent
join to the current directory. Therefore, we construct a historical NDC directory using a data mining
framework that downloads and collates all available Internet Archive snapshots of the FDA’s NDC website
since 2000.2 This historical directory also includes full ingredient lists for each NDC, standardized to
milligrams. Using this improved directory, 88.1 percent of pharmacy claims between 2006 and 2012 map
to an NDC entry.
We define an opioid prescription as any claim for a drug containing an opioid ingredient at or above the
recommended starting dose when initiating opioid therapy for chronic pain management, as established in
Washington State’s 2015 prescribing guideline and further cited in the Centers for Disease Control’s 2016
prescribing guideline.3,4 Table S1 lists these ingredients and the minimum amounts we use to define an
opioid drug. Of the 4,359 drugs containing one of these ingredients, 4,175 meet the minimum threshold
amount and appear in 3.9 percent of claims.
Additionally, we define a recovery prescription as any NDC containing one of four ingredients commonly
used in medication-assisted treatment of an opioid use disorder, which identifies 412 such drugs that appear
in 0.5 percent of claims. These prescriptions may indicate that an individual has a preexisting opioid use
disorder.

2.2 Outcomes

18

For each individual in our panel, we examine all of the Medicaid claims following their initial opioid
prescription to construct indicator variables for four types of adverse outcomes: opioid dependence, opioid
abuse, prescription-opioid poisoning and heroin poisoning. We include heroin poisoning as an outcome
given the increasing use of heroin among those who abuse opioids, and the high proportion (greater than
80 percent) of joint heroin-prescription-opioid users who abused opioids prior to using heroin.5
We determine these outcomes from the claim’s International Classification of Diseases (ICD) diagnosis
codes, which are used by medical professionals to classify a patient’s health conditions following an
encounter. Because our data span the transition from the ICD-9 to ICD-10 classification, we include
diagnosis codes from both. Table S2 lists the exact codes used to indicate each of these four diagnosisrelated outcomes.
Not everyone with an opioid use disorder receives a diagnosis code. Though it is unknown precisely what
fraction of opioid use disorders go undiagnosed, Carrell et al. found that diagnosis codes were missing for
as many as a quarter of patients for whom their providers were aware of opioid abuse.6 Similarly, a study
by Barocas et al. estimated that only 44% of individuals with opioid use disorder were identified as such in
claims and administrative records.7 To address the challenges with diagnoses codes, we define a fifth
treatment outcome using procedure codes related to the treatment of opioid use disorder, and more generally
for drug rehabilitation and detoxification (Table S2). Finally, we define a sixth “any" outcome as the union
of any of the diagnoses or treatment outcomes, to capture as broad a population of individual with opioid
use disorder as possible. Data and measurement limitations notwithstanding, our model demonstrates that
administrative data can be combined to form an accurate prediction of these outcomes, suggesting a feasible
path forward for utilizing data to inform prescription risk. Figure S3 shows the accumulating fraction of
adverse outcomes over the five-year period following initial prescription.

2.3 Final Panel
Out of 400,024 distinct Medicaid enrollees between 2006 and 2012, our panel initially contains 74,213
individuals who received at least one opioid prescription in that period. We exclude 511 individuals who
received a recovery prescription before their initial opioid prescription, since this indicates they may have
been seeking treatment for an opioid use disorder. We exclude 3,549 individuals with an adverse outcome
prior to their initial opioid prescription, since we assume they were already receiving opioids from another
source, such as through private insurance before enrolling in Medicaid. Our final panel includes 70,153
individuals. Table S4 shows the incidence of adverse outcomes among these individuals by baseline
characteristics.

3 Variable Construction
We construct variables that summarize information known in the 12 months prior to the individual’s initial
prescription.
Using the demographics from the integrated RI 360 database,8 we construct variables for (modal) age, sex,
race, marital status, body mass index, and median income and fraction below the federal poverty line in the
home Census block group. Using DHS data, we construct variables for household size and new births in
the household, and monthly payments for the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), the
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), the General Public Assistance (GPA), the Child Care
Assistance Program (CCAP), and State Supplemental Payment portions of Supplemental Security Income
benefits. Using DLT data, we construct indicators for sector of work derived from the first two digits of
industry codes assigned according to the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS); monthly
payments for Temporary Disability Insurance (TDI) and Unemployment Insurance (UI); and quarterly

19

wage history, including average quarterly wages and variance, the number of employers and the number of
hours worked (for hourly employees); the monthly unemployment rate in Rhode Island; and the annual
national unemployment rate for two-digit NAICS industries that the individual has worked in. Using DOC
data, we construct indicators for charges, seven categories of sentencing, and commitments and releases
from prison. Using police data, we construct variables for arrests; the number of car crashes involved and
injured in; and the number of and total fines for citations.
The largest set of variables comes from the Medicaid data. These include indicators for enrollment
eligibility categories, plan type, and payer codes; number of claims and total bill and payment amounts for
all claims and for Emergency Department claims; indicators for prescriptions in 262 drug categories from
the AHFS Pharmacologic/Therapeutic Classification;9 and topic models summarizing the concatenated text
descriptions for all of the individual’s ICD-9 diagnosis codes and HCPCS procedure codes.

3.1 Topic Modeling
We construct the topic models using a technique called non-negative matrix factorization (NMF), which is
commonly used in text analysis to discover latent topic structure in documents.10 In this application, we
treat each individual’s concatenated text descriptions of diagnosis and procedure codes as a document to
learn the latent topic structure across individuals’ health histories. Our topic models summarize 70,153
documents comprised of 16,367 distinct words from the code descriptions, after removing 173
uninformative words using a stopword list. The total corpus consists of over 20.5 million words.
NMF works by factorizing the non-negative 𝑑𝑑 × 𝑡𝑡 matrix of the documents’ word frequencies into nonnegative matrices 𝑑𝑑 × 𝑡𝑡 and 𝑡𝑡 × 𝑤𝑤, where d is the number of documents, w is the number of distinct words,
and t is the number of topics. We apply a term frequency-inverse document frequency (TF-IDF)
transformation to the 𝑑𝑑 × 𝑡𝑡 matrix to reweight the word frequencies by their overall frequencies in the entire
corpus, which is common practice when implementing NMF. The 𝑑𝑑 × 𝑡𝑡 matrix represents the weighting of
topics for each document, and the 𝑡𝑡 × 𝑤𝑤 matrix represents the weighting of words for each topic. We
summarize each topic using the 10 words with the greatest frequency in the 𝑡𝑡 × 𝑤𝑤 matrix.
Because the number of topics t is not known a priori, we tune this parameter by finding the t with the best
out-of-sample area under the operating-receiver characteristic curve (AUC) in a logistic regression that
includes only the topic model variables. We use only the training set for this tuning, and further subdivide
it in half into topic training and topic validation sets. The tuning achieves AUCs on the topic validation set
of 0.660 for 10 topics, 0.674 for 20 topics, 0.703 for 50 topics, 0.714 for 100 topics, 0.716 for 200 topics,
and 0.696 for 500 topics. Therefore, we select the model with 200 topics as the final variables.

3.2 Low-Dosage Opioids
Within the prescription drug categories, there is a category for opiate agonists. By construction of our panel,
no individuals should have previously received an opioid prescription. However, the opiate agonist category
includes 152 drugs that were not identified in the 4,175 opioid drugs from our historical NDC directory,
and which are listed in Table S5. These drugs either contain an opioid ingredient at a lower amount than
the minimum thresholds defined by the Washington State prescribing guidelines, or contain an ingredient
not identified in those guidelines (e.g., “opium”). Therefore, the opiate agonist variable indicates that the
individual received a drug that was not likely for initiating opioid therapy, but nonetheless contains a small
amount of an opioid ingredient. Most of these drugs are over-the-counter cough syrups or painkillers
combined with small amounts of an opioid ingredient. Of the 152, there are eight that are not present in the
historical NDC directory, possibly because they were on the market for a short enough time that they do
not occur in any of the available historical snapshots of the NDC directory.

20

3.3 Tensors
For our neural network models, we construct tensors of monthly values for a given variable for each of the
individuals in our panel in the 12 months prior to the individual’s initial prescription. Missing values are
imputed using mean values from the training population.
The DHS tensor includes 13 variables for demographics (age and indicators for sex, race, and Spanish or
Portuguese as a primary language) and monthly payments for the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program (SNAP), the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), the General Public Assistance
(GPA), the Child Care Assistance Program (CCAP), and State Supplemental Payment portions of
Supplemental Security Income benefits.
The DLT tensor includes 31 variables for indicators for sector of work derived from the first two digits of
industry codes assigned according to the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS); monthly
payments for Temporary Disability Insurance (TDI) and Unemployment Insurance (UI); and quarterly
wage history, including wage amount, the number of employers and the number of hours worked (for hourly
employees).
The DOC tensor includes 16 variables for demographics (age and indicators for sex, race, Spanish as a
primary language), and indicators for charges, seven categories of sentencing, and commitments and
releases from prison.
The Medicaid tensor includes 683 variables for demographics (age and indicators for sex, race, and Spanish
or Portuguese as a primary language); indicators for eligibility categories, plan type, and payer codes at
each month of enrollment; number of claims and total bill and payment amounts for all claims and for
Emergency Department claims; the number of prescriptions in each of 265 categories from the AHFS
Pharmacologic/Therapeutic Classification; and indicators for ICD-9 diagnosis codes and HCPCS procedure
codes for all codes that are correlated >0.02 with any adverse outcome in the training population.
The police tensor includes 42 variables for demographics (age and indicators for sex and officer-observed
race); indicators for all arrests, DUI arrests, and domestic-offense arrests; the number of car crashes
involved and injured in; the number of and total fines for citations; and the spatio-temporal intensity of calls
for service in the individual’s home Census block group for 29 categories of calls.
Finally, we construct an integrated tensor including all of the 785 variables from the DHS, DLT, DOC,
Medicaid, and police tensors. The dimension of this integrated tensor are 70,153 individuals x 12 months x
785 variables.

4 Models
We estimate a range of predictive models using modern machine learning algorithms, which vary in both
their complexity and interpretability. For example, a class of models called “regularized regression models”
estimate standard linear models, but search over many potential explanatory variables, potentially more
explanatory variables than available data observations, to maximize out-of-sample predictive fit and
minimize over-fitting. Like ordinary least squares or logistic models, the model results are easy to interpret,
but the complexity is limited to functions of variables the researcher specifies in advance. At the other
extreme are artificial neural network models where the algorithm searches over non-linear transformations
of layers of local linear regressions. The increased complexity allows the algorithm to search for arbitrary
non-linearities and interactions between variables, but at a cost of greatly reducing the interpretability of

21

the model (e.g., it is difficult to simply measure which variables contribute most to predictive fit).

4.1 Regularized Regression
For our regularized regression, we use an algorithm called Bootstrap Least Absolute Shrinkage and
Selection Operator (BOLASSO).11 This algorithm is a generalization of the popular LASSO algorithm
which is able to consistently identify a model even when predictors are highly correlated. The BOLASSO
selects the predictors with non-zero coefficients that appear in at least 90% of bootstrapped LASSO models.
Following convention, we use BOLASSO to select the variables from among 560 variables which are
persistently the strongest predictors of future adverse opioid outcomes, and we present results from a
second-stage logistic regression of an indicator for future adverse outcomes on these selected variables, to
describe the predictive power of each variable. Exhibit A6 lists the variables selected by the BOLASSO as
occurring with a non-zero coefficient in more than 90 of the 100 LASSO bootstrap replicates, along with
the regression results from the second-stage logistic regression. In addition to the second-stage logistic
regression, we also construct a regression ensemble model that averages the predictions of all 100 bootstrap
replicates in the BOLASSO.
We fit each LASSO bootstrap replicate on the training set using a regularized logistic regression
implementation called the gamma LASSO, which was developed specifically to address the challenges of
modeling sparse, high-dimensional data.12 Since a predictive model fits idiosyncratic noise through
increased complexity in the model’s structure, machine learning techniques commonly penalize complexity
in the models they produce through a process called regularization. We tune the regularization parameters
for the gamma LASSO model through a parameter search over gamma values in [0, 1, 10] and a path of
100 lambda values, and we select the model with the best area under the receiver-operating characteristic
curve (AUC) on the validation set. Regularization helps prevent overfitting to the training data and thus
improves out-of-sample fit. We are primarily interested in out-of-sample performance since our goal is to
use the model to inform successful policy interventions, which require making predictions on new
observations.13

4.2 Neural Networks
We train a neural network model for each tensor using the Python package Keras,14 which provides an
interface to the TensorFlow library.15 Specifically, we train a recurrent neural network (RNN), since RNNs
have the ability to model temporal patterns in the input data. We input our training data into a two-layer
network of 10x10 Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)16 units with the tanh activation function. We input
the last LSTM layer into a dense layer that applies a sigmoid activation function to the weighted sum of the
10 inputs in order to produce a single predicted probability of adverse outcome. We employ regularization
prior to each layer in the form of a dropout factor of 0.25, which causes a random deactivation of units
within the layer during training with a fixed probability of 0.25.17
The neural networks are optimized to minimize the binary cross-entropy, also known as log-loss, on the
training data. We use the Adam18 optimization algorithm, training with a batch size of 16. We tune the
model on the validation set by allowing the neural network to train for as many epochs as needed until the
area under the receiver-operating curve (AUC) from predictions on the validation set does not improve by
0.001. Table S7 shows the AUC from predictions on the testing set for each data source and each individual
outcome.

22

Notes
1
U.S. Food & Drug Administration. National Drug Code Directory [Internet; cited 2019 Feb 19]; Available from:
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/InformationOnDrugs/ucm142438.htm
2

Research Improving People’s Lives. Assembling a Historical National Drug Code Directory from the Internet
Archive [Internet; cited 2019 Feb 19]; Available from: https://github.com/ripl-org/historical-ndc

3

Agency Medical Directors’ Group. Interagency Guideline on Prescribing Opioids for Pain. Olympia, WA: 2015
[cited 2019 Feb 19]. Available from:
http://www.agencymeddirectors.wa.gov/Files/2015AMDG□pioidGuideline.pdf

4

Dowell D, Haegerich TM, Chou R. CDC Guideline for Prescribing Opioids for Chronic Pain — United States,
2016. MMWR Recomm Rep [Internet]. 2016 [cited 2019 Feb 19];65. Available from:
https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/65/rr/rr6501e1.htm
5

Jones CM. Heroin use and heroin use risk behaviors among nonmedical users of prescription opioid pain
relievers – United States, 2002–2004 and 2008–2010. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2013 Sep;132(1–2):95–100.

6
Carrell DS, Cronkite D, Palmer RE, Saunders K, Gross DE, Masters ET, et al. Using natural language processing
to identify problem usage of prescription opioids. Int J Med Inform. 2015 Dec;84(12):1057–64.
7

Barocas JA, White LF, Wang J, Walley AY, LaRochelle MR, Bernson D, et al. Estimated Prevalence of Opioid
Use Disorder in Massachusetts, 2011–2015: A Capture–Recapture Analysis. Am J Public Health. 2018 Oct
25;108(12):1675–81.

8

Hastings JS, Howison M, Lawless T, Ucles J, White P. Unlocking Data to Improve Public Policy.
Communication of the ACM. Forthcoming.

9

AHFS® Pharmacologic/Therapeutic Classification© used with permission. © 2017, the American Society of
Health-System Pharmacists, Inc. (ASHP). The Data is a part of the AHFS Drug Information®; ASHP is not
responsible for the accuracy of transpositions from the original context.

Févotte C, Idier J. Algorithms for Nonnegative Matrix Factorization with the β-Divergence. Neural
Computation. 2011 Jun 14;23(9):2421–56.
10

11
Bach FR. Bolasso: Model Consistent Lasso Estimation Through the Bootstrap. In: Proceedings of the 25th
International Conference on Machine Learning [Internet]. New York, NY, USA: ACM; 2008 [cited 2018 Feb 19].
p. 33–40. (ICML 08). Available from: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1390156.1390161
12

Taddy M. One-step estimator paths for concave regularization. arXiv:13085623 [Internet]. 2016 May 1 [cited
2019 Feb 27]; Available from: http://arxiv. org/abs/1308.5623

13

Kleinberg J, Ludwig J, Mullainathan S, Obermeyer Z. Prediction Policy Problems. Am Econ Rev. 2015
May;105(5):491–5.
14

Chollet F, et al. Keras: The Python Deep Learning library [Internet; cited 2019 Feb 27]; Available from:
https://keras.io/
15

Abadi M, Barham P, Chen J, Chen Z, Davis A, Dean J, et al. TensorFlow: A System for Large-Scale Machine
Learning. In: 12th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 16). 2016 [cited
2019 Feb 19] p. 265–83. Available from: https://www.usenix.org/conference/ osdi16/technicalsessions/presentation/abadi
16

Hochreiter S, Schmidhuber J. Long Short-Term Memory. Neural Computation. 1997 Nov 1;9(8):1735–80.

17

Srivastava N, Hinton G, Krizhevsky A, Sutskever I, Salakhutdinov R. Dropout: A Simple Way to Prevent Neural
Networks from Overfitting. J Mach Learn Res. 2014 Jun 14;15:1929–58.
18

Kingma DP, Ba J. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. arXiv:14126980 [Internet]. 2014 Dec 22 [cited
2019 Feb 19]; Available from: http://arxiv. org/abs/1412.6980

23

Table S1. Minimum amounts of ingredients in a drug to classify it as an opioid prescription or a
recovery prescription.
Opioid Ingredient
Codeine
Fentanyl
Hydrocodone
Hydromorphone
Meperidine*
Morphine
Oxycodone
Oxymorphone
Tapentadol
Tramadol

Minimum Amount (mg)
30.0
0.0125
5.0
2.0
0.0
10.0
5.0
5.0
50.0
50.0

Recovery Ingredient°
Buprenorphine
Methadone
Naloxone
Naltrexone

Minimum Amount (mg)
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

* Meperidine has no recommended starting dose for treatment of chronic pain because of its risk for complications
in older adults; therefore, we consider any amount as evidence that the drug is an opioid.
° We consider any amount of a recovery ingredient as evidence that the drug may have been used to treat a prior
opioid use disorder.

24

Table S2. Diagnosis and procedure codes used to indicate adverse outcomes when occurring in
any claim after the initial opioid prescription.
Outcome
Opioid
Dependence
Opioid Abuse
PrescriptionOpioid
Poisoning

Heroin
Poisoning

Treatment

Code

Description

304.0
304.7
F11.2*
305.0
F11.1*

Opioid type dependence
Combinations of opioid type drug with any other drug dependence
Opioid dependence
Nondependent opioid
Opioid abuse

965.00
965.02
965.09
970.1
E850.1
E850.2
E935.1
E935.2
E940.1
T400*
T402*
T403*
965.01
E850.0
E935.0
T401*
J2310°
J2315°
J0592°
X0305°
X0321°

Poisoning by opium (alkaloids), unspecified
Poisoning by methadone
Poisoning by other opiates and related narcotics
Poisoning by opiate antagonists
Accidental poisoning by methadone
Accidental poisoning by other opiates and related narcotics
Methadone causing adverse effects in therapeutic use
Other opiates and related narcotics causing adverse effects in therapeutic use
Opiate antagonists causing adverse effects in therapeutic use
Poisoning by, adverse effect of and underdosing of opium
Poisoning by, adverse effect of and underdosing of other opioids
Poisoning by, adverse effect of and underdosing of methadone
Poisoning by heroin
Accidental poisoning by heroin
Heroin causing adverse effects in therapeutic use
Poisoning by and adverse effects of heroin
Naloxone HCI Injection, per 1 mg
Naltrexone injection, depot form, 1mg
Buprenorphine HCL injection, 0.1mg
Methadone detoxification – outpatient
Methadone maintenance, assessment and evaluation, counseling, treatment and
review, and lab testing
Alcohol and or drug services; methadone administration and or service
Injection, methadone, up to 10mg
Methadone
Alcohol and drug rehabilitation and counseling
Drug rehabilitation
Drug detoxification
Drug rehabilitation and detoxification combined
Alcohol and drug rehabilitation combined
Alcohol and drug detoxification
Combined alcohol and drug rehabilitation and detoxification

H0020°
J1230°
83840°
946°
9464°
9465°
9466°
9467°
9468°
9469°
* ICD-10 diagnosis code
° HCPCS procedure code

25

Figure S3. Cumulative frequency of adverse outcomes over time since initial opioid
prescription.
7
Any adverse outcome
Heroin poisoning
6

Opioid abuse

Percent of adverse outcomes

Opioid dependence
Prescription-opioid poisoning

5

Treatment
4

3

2

1

0
0

1

2

3

Years since prescription

26

4

5

Table S4. Descriptive statistics for the final panel.
Variable
Age

Race/Ethnicity

Sex

Marital status

Body mass index

Blockgroup fraction of residents below
FPL
Average quarterly wages in previous year

Received SNAP in previous year
Received SSI in previous year
Received UI in previous year
Received TDI in previous year
Children in DHS household in previous
year

Value
<18
18-45
45-60
61+
NA
White
Black
Hispanic
Other
NA
Female
Male
NA
Married
Not married
NA
Underweight (<18.5)
Normal (18.5-25)
Overweight (25-30)
Obese (>30)
NA
At least 16.4%
Otherwise
NA
<$2500
$2500-$7500
$7500-$15000
>$15000
$0 or NA
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
0 or NA
1
2+

27

N
8501
43238
11802
6531
81
40937
7392
7634
4765
9425
47739
22379
35
11975
39052
19126
1139
20073
15737
12590
20614
11652
16565
41936
14624
14316
1477
65
39671
39678
30475
1204
68949
6220
63933
5538
64645
4263
16006
49884

Outcome
2.39%
6.79%
8.11%
1.32%
4.94%
8.14%
4.33%
2.06%
2.22%
2.83%
5.14%
7.73%
2.86%
4.82%
7.94%
2.65%
9.31%
7.65%
6.12%
5.21%
4.48%
5.36%
6.46%
5.94%
7.18%
4.52%
4.47%
3.08%
6.10%
7.64%
3.78%
8.80%
5.91%
6.62%
5.90%
6.86%
5.89%
2.67%
9.52%
5.11%

Table S5. Low-dosage prescription opioids identified by the AHFS Pharmacologic/Therapeutic
Classification category for opiate agonists.
NDC Code
00037-2403

Opioid Ingredients
codeine phosphate (16mg)

00054-0243
00054-0386
00093-0050
00121-0504
00121-0775
00121-1775
00185-0749

codeine sulfate (15mg)
hydromorphone hydrochloride (1mg)
codeine phosphate (15mg)
codeine phosphate (12mg)
codeine phosphate (10mg)
codeine phosphate (16mg)
codeine phosphate (16mg)

00378-6117
00378-7103
00378-8088
00406-0483
00482-0440
00482-0441*
00574-7040

oxycodone hydrochloride (4.8355mg)
oxycodone hydrochloride (2.5mg)
tramadol hydrochloride (37.5mg)
codeine phosphate (15mg)
codeine phosphate (10mg)

Other Ingredients
aspirin (325mg)
carisoprodol (200mg)

acetaminophen (300mg)
aceteminophen (120mg)
guaifenesin (100mg)
guaifenesin (100mg)
aspirin (325mg)
carisoprodol (200mg)
aspirin (325mg)
acetaminophen (325mg)
acetaminophen (325mg)
acetaminophen (300mg)
guaifenesin (300mg)

opium (30-60mg)
opium, powdered (60mg)
opium (30-60mg)
opium, powdered (1.5%ww)
morphine sulfate (5mg)

atropa belladonna (16.2mg)
belladonna extract (16.2mg)
atropa belladonna (0.81%ww) atropa belladonna (16.2mg)
belladonna (0.8-0.81%ww)

aspirin (325mg)

00591-3551
00603-1020
00603-1075

oxycodone hydrochloride (4.5mg)
ocycodone terephthalate (0.38-0.4mg)
oxycodone hydrochloride (4.8355mg)
codeine phosphate (12mg)
codeine phosphate (10mg)

00603-1078

codeine phosphate (10mg)

00603-1329
00603-1520

codeine phosphate (10mg)
codeine phosphate (10mg)

00603-1585
00603-1588

codeine phosphate (10mg)
codeine phosphate (10mg)

00603-2337
00603-4978
00603-9013
00641-1130*
10135-0519*
13107-0058
16571-0301

codeine phosphate (15mg)
oxycodone hydrochloride (2.5mg)
codeine phosphate (12mg)

16571-0302
46672-0561
49884-0946
50383-0079
50383-0087
50383-0804
50383-0805

codeine phosphate (10mg)
codeine phosphate (12mg)
tramadol hydrochloride (37.5mg)
codeine phosphate (12mg)
codeine phosphate (10mg)
codeine phosphate (10mg)
codeine phosphate (10mg)

53489-0159
53746-0617
57664-0185
57664-0537
57963-0103
58177-0449*
58177-0620*

codeine phosphate (15mg)
tramadol hydrochloride (37.5mg)
codeine phosphate (10mg)
tramadol hydrochloride (37.5mg)
codeine phosphate(10mg)

00574-7045
00574-7110
00591-0617*
00591-0820

codeine phosphate (15mg)
codeine phosphate (10mg)

aspirin (325mg)
acetaminophen (120mg)
alcohol, dehydrated (3.68-3.7%ww)
guaifenesin (100mg)
alcohol, dehydrated (1.9%ww) guaifenesin (100mg)
pseudoephedrine hydrochloride (30mg)
guaifenesin (100mg)
chlorpheniramine maleate (2mg)
pseudoephedrine hydrochloride (30mg)
promethazine hydrochloride (6.25-6.3mg)
phenylephrine hydrochloride (5mg)
promethazine hydrochloride (6.25)
acetaminophen (300mg)
acetaminophen (325mg)
acetaminophen (120mg)

acetaminophen (300mg)
guaifenesin (100mg)
pseudoephedrine hydrochloride (30mg)
guaifenesin (100mg)
acetaminophen (120mg)
acetaminophen (325mg)
acetaminophen (120mg)
guaifenesin (100mg)
promethazine hydrochloride (6.25mg)
phenylephrine hydrochloride (5mg)
promethazine hydrochloride (6.25mg)
acetaminophen (300mg)
acetaminophen (325mg)
promethazine hydrochloride (6.25mg)
acetaminophen(325mg)
guaifenesin(100mg)

28

58177-0621*
58657-0500
60432-0245
60432-0606
60505-2644
60505-7010
60951-0310
60951-0701
63481-0121
63481-0627
65162-0617
65162-0694

codeine phosphate(10mg)
codeine phosphate(12mg)
codeine phosphate(10mg)
tramadol hydrochloride (37.5mg)
fentanyl (12ug)
oxycodone hydrochloride (4.8355mg)
oxycodone hydrochloride (2.5mg)
oxycodone hydrochloride (4.8355mg)
oxycodone hydrochloride (2.5mg)
tramadol hydrochloride (37.5mg)
codeine phosphate(10mg)

66594-0333
66689-0024*
68308-0840
68308-0845
68382-0334
69543-0252
69543-0253

codeine phosphate(9mg)

76439-0252
76439-0253

codeine phosphate(10mg)
codeine phosphate(10mg)

oxycodone hydrochloride (2.5mg)
oxycodone hydrochloride (4.8355mg)
tramadol hydrochloride (37.5mg)
codeine phosphate(10mg)
codeine phosphate(10mg)

guaifenesin(100mg)
acetaminophen(120mg)
promethazine hydrochloride (6.25mg)
acetaminophen(325mg)
aspirin (325mg)
acetaminophen(325mg)
aspirin (325mg)
acetaminophen(325mg)
acetaminophen(325mg)
phenylephrine hydrochloride (5mg)
promethazine hydrochloride (6.25mg)
pyrilamine maleate (8.33mg)
acetaminophen(325mg)
aspirin (325mg)
acetaminophen(325mg)
guaifenesin(100mg)
guaifenesin(100mg)
pseudoephedrine hydrochloride (30mg)
guaifenesin(100mg)
guaifenesin(100mg)
pseudoephedrine hydrochloride (30mg)

* NDC code exists in AHFS Pharmacologic/Therapeutic Classification but does not exist in NDC directory

29

Table S6. Regression output for the post-BOLASSO logistic regression

Released from a corrections facility

Odds
Ratio
1.929

Prior prescription for Atypical Antipychotics

1.317

Prior prescription for Centrally Acting Skeletal Muscle Relaxants

1.296

Prior prescription for Benzodiazepines

1.213

Prior prescription for Opiate Agonists

1.196

Rhode Island monthly unemployment rate

1.194

Size of household

1.146

Topic 124 (fluid combinations opioid body ph specimen breath ethanol
single screen)
Topic 128 (compulsive disorders examination diagnostic history status
psychiatric com interview disposition)
Total Medicaid pharmacy payments

1.144

Topic 60 (bls service statue ground mile mileage transport support
emergency life)
Topic 24 (injection specify drug intramuscular infusion push intravenous
diagnostic prophylactic therapeutic substance)
Topic 42 (acute quantification function delta cirrhosis viral chronic liver
hepatic coma)
Topic 101 (symptoms oblique sacral pain referable canal back lumbosacral
sciatica lumbar)
Topic 82 (fractured periapical broken jaws sinus disorder dental caries teeth
structures)
Topic 34 (limb splint metacarpal static injury phalanges phalanx minimum
finger fingers)
Topic 166 (region spondylosis cervical spinal lumbosacral degeneration
displacement myelopathy intervertebral disc)
Topic 112 (household member able render incontinence care personal
combined ad homemaker)
Topic 154 (back hands struck accidents accidentally striking eyes injury fall
wall)
Topic 195 (movements thoracic back accidents overexertion strenuous
ligament neck site lumbar)
Topic 17 (periumbilic amylase erect decubitus constipation abdomen
generalized epigastric site pain)
Topic 90 (using cardiovascular maximal submaximal bicycle treadmill stress
exercise study myocardial)
Topic 70 (multiplex diagnosticsamplification amplification isolation purified
highly nuclear acid nucleic diagnostics)
Topic 49 (absolute count quantification cd non cells disease virus human
immunodeficiency)
Topic 175 (cyst scoliosis spinal therapy morbid canal physical back obesity
cervicalgia)
Topic 46 (sensitivity antibiotic definitive kit commercial isolate quantitative
urine identification bacterial)
Topic 197 (physician vitamin infliximab abdomen infusion small large site
intestine enteritis)
Topic 187 (generalized therapeutic intensive greater smoking cessation
oppositional defiant tobacco disorder)
Total Unemployment Insurance payments

1.080

Variables

30

1.104
1.088

1.075
1.072
1.069
1.067
1.064
1.063
1.062
1.061
1.061
1.061
1.061
1.056
1.053
1.050
1.042
1.038
1.037
1.036

95% C.I.

p-value

(1.585 2.349)
(1.114 1.556)
(1.128 1.488)
(1.065 1.383)
(1.048 1.365)
(1.134 1.257)
(1.085 1.210)
(1.111 1.178)
(1.066 1.142)
(1.047 1.131)
(1.042 1.119)
(1.037 1.114)
(1.037 1.108)
(1.031 1.108)
(1.035 1.101)
(1.025 1.104)
(1.026 1.102)
(1.025 1.099)
(1.022 1.102)
(1.020 1.104)
(1.018 1.105)
(1.017 1.106)
(1.008 1.107)
(1.017 1.089)
(1.016 1.086)
(0.997 1.089)
(1.007 1.001)
(1.001 1.073)
(0.997 1.077)

0.000

Bootstrap
Frequency
100%

0.001

97%

0.000

100%

0.004

100%

0.008

100%

0.000

100%

0.000

100%

0.000

100%

0.000

97%

0.000

100%

0.000

97%

0.000

100%

0.000

100%

0.000

100%

0.000

100%

0.001

93%

0.001

98%

0.001

95%

0.002

99%

0.003

95%

0.005

97%

0.006

92%

0.021

96%

0.003

92%

0.004

100%

0.067

92%

0.018

92%

0.044

95%

0.074

93%

Topic 151 (nonobstetric stenosis enthesopathy minimum pelvic pain joint
hip pelvic region)
Topic 182 (systemic erythrocyte sedimentation cpk kinase ck creatine lupus
erythematosus myositis)
Topic 6 (caries viral asthmaunspecified infection evaluation management
visit key emergency comp)
Number of police citations

1.035

Topic 74 (nonpsychotic obstruction allergy crisis tobacco airway
radiological insomnia disorder depressive)
Topic 18 (radiological less sinuses paranasal frontal anteroposterior lateral
minimum examination views)
Number of opioid prescriptions in household

1.023

Topic 62 (skills visit physical therapeutic intervention individual assessment
health therapy counseling)
Topic 93 (tachycardia abnormal ekg palpitations tracing routine
interpretation report leads electrocardiogram)
Topic 126 (mtt mh psychosis treatment disorganized rn program chronic
assertive paranoid)
Topic 10 (mental single disorder depressive episode recurrent major
affective behavior severe)
Topic 92 (followed stem canal spinal material brain contrast imaging proton
resonance)
Topic 16 (schedule vaccine viral prophylactic inoculation vaccination
subcutaneous intradermal administration percutaneous)
Topic 57 (shl problems disorder treatment group processing auditory voice
language speech)
Topic 119 (scan swelling follow st compression responses maneuvers duplex
extremity veins)
Topic 54 (face injury soft cervical eyes swelling lump mass scalp head)

0.999

Topic 125 (gait mileage statute ground mile emergency non chair wheel van)

0.973

Topic 179 (emergency functions special ed encounter oppositional defiant
transportation trip rehabilitation)
Topic 4 (sealant evaluation periodic oral child adult application included
topical fluoride)
Topic 180 (conductive speech sensorineural recognition impedance
tympanometry audiometry threshold testing loss)
Topic 194 (hypometropia refractive eyes treatment evaluation continuation
examination prog diagnostics initiation)
Average quarterly wages

0.971

Topic 29 (low colposcopy gladnular lgsil lesion squamous intraepithelial
dysplasia smear papanicolaou)
Topic 3 (microalbumin hemoglobin strip manifestations juvenile glycated
complication mellitus ii uncontrolled)
Topic 106 (rn minimum mental social evaluation periodic oral bitewings
films prophylaxis)
Topic 144 (pleurisy rubella mumps bcg examination test screening skin
intradermal pulmionary)
Topic 192 (heterophile conjunctivitis strep bacterial culture source definitive
bronchitis tonsillitus acute)
Topic 155 (specimen nursing home laboratory necessary medical connection
way allowance drawn)
Average quarterly hours worked

0.968

Topic 137 (phalanges metatarsil cellulitis pain valgus hallux toe minimum
limb toes)
Topic 7 (therapy modality physical activities provider procedure strength
develop exercises areas)

0.955

31

1.032
1.025
1.025

1.022
1.010

0.996
0.996
0.995
0.987
0.984
0.978
0.975
0.974

0.971
0.970
0.969
0.968

0.967
0.965
0.965
0.964
0.960
0.958

0.953

(0.997 1.074)
(0.999 1.067)
(0.981 1.072)
(0.992 1.058)
(0.986 1.062)
(0.974 1.072)
(1.000 1.020)
(0.959 1.041)
(0.951 1.045)
(0.958 1.036)
(0.956 1.036)
(0.943 1.033)
(0.916 1.056)
(0.915 1.046)
(0.928 1.025)
(0.929 1.022)
(0.930 1.018)
(0.912 1.035)
(0.898 1.050)
(0.910 1.034)
(0.915 1.025)
(0.919 1.020)
(0.918 1.021)
(0.917 1.020)
(0.902 1.033)
(0.908 1.025)
(0.913 1.018)
(0.897 1.028)
(0.880 1.044)
(0.908 1.005)
(0.905 1.003)

0.075

93%

0.061

93%

0.272

93%

0.139

97%

0.230

92%

0.370

98%

0.048

100%

0.957

95%

0.883

94%

0.845

92%

0.803

95%

0.561

93%

0.652

92%

0.524

95%

0.318

96%

0.283

94%

0.238

99%

0.373

98%

0.460

96%

0.351

98%

0.270

95%

0.223

100%

0.228

93%

0.219

98%

0.306

93%

0.249

91%

0.187

99%

0.243

100%

0.326

99%

0.075

93%

0.065

100%

Topic 1 (complicating complications current premature classifiable labor
mother threatened pregnancy complication)
Topic 9 (cholesterol lipoprotein ldl creatine hyperglyceridemia cpk kinase ck
measurement hypercholesterolemia)
Topic 28 (technique infectious acid nucleic rna gonorrhoeae trachomatis
chlamydia dna probe)
Topic 72 (vaccination inoculation injection intramuscular jet above dosage
split vaccine influenza)
Topic 145 (excludes mental palsy lung infantile bronchus special problem
functions care)
Topic 132 (blood secondary folic cyanocobalamin capacity binding ferritin
vitamin deficiency iron)
Topic 97 (acute spontaneous otalgia serous nonsuppurative infective rupture
supparative eardrum media)
Topic 53 (bone breast liver radiation chemotherapy female secondary
bronchus lung malignant)
Topic 21 (alpha estriol fetoprotein single organisms screening dose post
glucose pregnant)
Topic 84 (aklaline phosphatase serum alt alanine sgpt ast sgot aspartate
amino)
Topic 66 (full marrow infusion myeloid chemotherapy myeloma lymphoid
leukemia achieved having)
Topic 38 (product palsy infantile disposable incontinence procedures
temporary mhrh offline disabilities)
Topic 141 (diseases precription transmitted sexually measures
contraceptives management general contraceptive advise)
Topic 36 (community cedarrs incontinence assertive adult monthly program
dd mr intellectual)
Topic 14 (detection interpretation digitization physician bilateral further
aided computer mammogram screening)
Sex is male

0.952

Topic 11 (examination myopia routine gynecological coinsurance deductible
office visits copay share)
Body mass index

0.859

Age

0.704

Primary language is Spanish

0.450

Race is African American

0.400

Enrolled in Medicaid managed care

0.386

Race is Asian, Native American, or other

0.374

Married is missing

0.350

Race is missing

0.305

Ethnicity is Hispanic

0.245

Eligible for Medicaid as categorically needy

0.136

Enrolled in RI Pharmaceutical Assistance to the Elderly

0.008

0.950
0.940
0.948
0.945
0.945
0.942
0.941
0.938
0.931
0.930
0.927
0.927
0.924
0.910
0.861

0.851

(0.898 1.009)
(0.897 1.006)
(0.897 1.005)
(0.889 1.010)
(0.866 1.031)
(0.891 1.002)
(0.883 1.006)
(0.889 0.995)
(0.876 1.003)
(0.878 0.987)
(0.870 0.994)
(0.845 1.017)
(0.869 0.988)
(0.836 1.021)
(0.846 0.980)
(0.778 0.954)
(0.800 0.922)
(0.806 0.899)
(0.650 0.761)
(0.347 0.585)
(0.337 0.474)
(0.341 0.437)
(0.276 0.507)
(0.300 0.407)
(0.250 0.372)
(0.190 0.318)
(0.123 0.150)
(0.001 0.061)

0.097

96%

0.080

92%

0.072

93%

0.099

99%

0.205

99%

0.059

99%

0.073

94%

0.033

100%

0.063

96%

0.016

100%

0.032

100%

0.110

100%

0.020

99%

0.121

100%

0.012

100%

0.004

100%

0.000

99%

0.000

100%

0.000

99%

0.000

100%

0.000

100%

0.000

100%

0.000

100%

0.000

100%

0.000

100%

0.000

100%

0.000

100%

0.000

100%

Note: This is a logistic regression of variables selected by BOLASSO as occurring with a non-zero coefficient in more than 90%
of LASSO bootstrap replicates.

32

Table S7. Area under the receiver-operating characteristic curve (AUC) of neural network
models using different subsets of administrative data and outcome definitions.

DHS
DLT
DOC
Medicaid
Police
Integrated

Any Poisoning
0.695
(0.684-0.712)
0.563
(0.545-0.579)
0.694
(0.678-0.712)
0.763
(0.750-0.779)
0.637
(0.619-0.651)
0.793
(0.780-0.808)

Dependence
0.705
(0.686-0.728)
0.548
(0.527-0.569)
0.718
(0.700-0.738)
0.771
(0.753-0.787)
0.643
(0.616-0.662)
0.801
(0.780-0.818)

Abuse
0.692
(0.662-0.720)
0.513
(0.479-0.549)
0.716
(0.687-0.753)
0.741
(0.702-0.764)
0.622
(0.595-0.660)
0.773
(0.736-0.807)

Prescription-Opioid
0.665
(0.623-0.709)
0.486
(0.434-0.532)
0.626
(0.584-0.673)
0.675
(0.632-0.720)
0.598
(0.554-0.642)
0.707
(0.659-0.748)

Heroin
Poisoning
0.554
(0.442-0.646)
0.431
(0.363-0.522)
0.766
(0.628-0.896)
0.697
(0.560-0.831)
0.478
(0.364-0.607)
0.708
(0.566-0.837)

Note: Confidence intervals are calculated from 100 bootstrap replicates.

33

Treatment
0.728
(0.709-0.749)
0.535
(0.518-0.558)
0.724
(0.697-0.748)
0.772
(0.757-0.792)
0.656
(0.632-0.679)
0.810
(0.795-0.829)

