                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          RISE OF BANK COMPETITION:
                EVIDENCE FROM BANKING DEREGULATION IN CHINA

                                        Haoyu Gao
                                         Hong Ru
                                      Robert Townsend
                                      Xiaoguang Yang

                                     Working Paper 25795
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25795


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2019


We thank Emily Breza, Vedran Capkun, Hui Chen, Hans Degryse, Yongheng Deng, Daniel
Ferreira, Rainer Haselmann, Zhiguo He, Christoph Herpfer, Haizhou Huang, Jennifer Huang,
Sheng Huang, Yi Huang, Divya Kirti, Chen Lin, Shu Lin, Paul Malatesta, Alberto Manconi, Jun
Qian, Wenlan Qian, Yingyi Qian, Zheng Song, Jian Wang, Pengfei Wang, Shang-Jin Wei, Wei
Xiong, Hong Yan, Bernard Yeung, and Tianyu Zhang. We also thank conference discussants and
participants of ABFER 2018; AFA 2018; CFRC 2017; CICF 2017; CIFFP 2018; EFA 2018;
NBER 2017; SFS Cavalcade Asia-Pacific 2017; the NTU Finance Conference; the Geneva
International Macroeconomics and Finance Workshop; the JLFA of the London Business School;
the 12th Conference on Asia-Pacific Financial Markets (best paper award); the 30th AsianFA
Annual Meeting; the 2nd New Institutional Accounting Conference (best paper award); an
CKGSB, HKIMR, NUS, RMU, PBCSF, and UIBE seminars. We acknowledge in-kind support
received for China Banking Regulatory Commission data access. All views expressed are our
own, and we are solely responsible for any errors. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Haoyu Gao, Hong Ru, Robert Townsend, and Xiaoguang Yang. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Rise of Bank Competition: Evidence from Banking Deregulation in China
Haoyu Gao, Hong Ru, Robert Townsend, and Xiaoguang Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 25795
May 2019
JEL No. G21,G28,L50,O40

                                         ABSTRACT

Using proprietary individual level loan data, this paper explores the economic consequences of
the 2009 bank entry deregulation in China. Such deregulation leads to higher screening standards,
lower interest rates, and lower delinquency rates for corporate loans from entrant banks.
Consequently, in deregulated cities, private firms with bank credit access increase asset
investments, employment, net income, and ROA. In contrast, the performance of state-owned
enterprises (SOEs) does not improve following deregulation. Deregulation also amplifies bank
credit from productive private firms to inefficient SOEs due mainly to SOEs’ soft budget
constraints. This adverse effect accounts for 0.31% annual GDP losses.


Haoyu Gao                                           Robert Townsend
Central University of Finance and Economics         Department of Economics, E52-538
Beijing 100081, P.R. China                          MIT
gaohaoyu@cufe.edu.cn                                50 Memorial Drive
                                                    Cambridge, MA 02142
Hong Ru                                             and NBER
Nanyang Technological University                    rtownsen@mit.edu
Block S3-B1A-07
50 Nanyang Avenue                                   Xiaoguang Yang
Singapore                                           Mathematics And System Science Academe
ruhong@ntu.edu.sg                                   55 Zhonggu
                                                    xgyang@iss.ac.cn
1. Introduction

Banks are the most important financial intermediaries in many countries and play an
essential role in economic growth while banking sectors are often heavily regulated across
the globe (e.g., Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2013)). A closely related central question in the
debate concerns whether bank competition is desirable or not. The existing empirical
evidence is mixed. For example, increased bank competition may be beneficial to
borrowers by lowering borrowing costs but can also have negative consequences such as
risk-taking and decreased efforts from banks in regard to information collection. 1
Previous studies have shown mixed evidence on the aggregate effects of increased
competition in the banking sector.
     This paper uses individual loan level data to separate the costs and benefits of
increased bank competition in China, the largest bank loan market worldwide. 2 We find
that bank entry deregulation and consequently increased competition lead to better loan
contract terms, which benefit corporate borrowers and result in higher levels of growth
and profitability. Moreover, internal loan ratings as indicators of quality increase and
subsequent loan defaults decrease. Thus, a potentially negative effect of competition is
not in the data (e.g., risk-seeking). However, there remains a distortion in China’s
economy which is made worse; Deregulation amplifies bank credit from productive
private firms to inefficient state-owned enterprises (SOEs). We describe this a novel
trade-off of banking deregulation and in turn contribute to the on-going debate.
     More specifically, we study the impacts of the 2009 partial bank entry deregulation
on bank competition dynamics and consequent economic activities. Big five state-owned
commercial banks have dominated China's banking system with 51,557 branches covering
85% of the country while twelve joint equity banks were suppressed severely in regard to
competition with only 4,161 branches covering 9% of the country in 2008.3 Before 2009,


1 See, for example, the survey papers by Berger et al. (2004) and Allen et al. (2001).
2 The total value of bank loans made in China reached USD19.6 trillion in Feb 2018, ranking first across
the globe. The U.S. ranks the second, with USD9.1 trillion (https://www.ceicdata.com/en).
3 We can broadly categorize banks in China into three groups: big five commercial banks at the top of the

hierarchy, twelve joint equity banks in the middle of the hierarchy, and 131 local municipal banks at the
bottom of the hierarchy. See Section 2 for a more detailed discussion.



                                                   1
the China Banking Regulatory Commission (CBRC) restricted joint equity bank’s
expansion by allowing such banks to apply for only one branch in one city. In April 2009,
the CBRC partially lifted this entry barrier and allowed joint equity banks to open
branches freely in a city in which they had already established branches. Joint equity
banks were also allowed to freely enter all cities in a province when they operated
branches in this province’s capital city. Overall, 38.5% of joint equity bank-city pairs were
deregulated while others were still subjected to the entry barrier regulation.
     The 2009 deregulation policy offers a Difference-in-Differences (DID) empirical
setting. In particular, joint equity banks in regulated cities and big five banks in cities in
which no equity banks have been allowed to expand are mostly immune to the
deregulation shock and can serve as the control group. Exogenous variation in
deregulation is at the bank-city level. In the same city, different equity banks can have
different exposures to deregulation depending on their ex-ante branch distributions. We
take care not to confound this with common economic time trends of the national level or
for individual cities. 4 We control for year-, bank-, and firm-fixed effects to further
mitigate this concern. Moreover, bank lending and firm activities move in parallel
between deregulated and regulated cities before the shock. In sum, the 2009 deregulation
allows us to identify how joint equity banks compete, how big five banks respond, how
firms react across cities with different ex-ante competition levels and quantify these
impacts.
     Our primary data are collected from the CBRC, which record detailed loan-level
information on the seventeen largest commercial banks in China for 2006 to 2013. The
loan level data cover all borrowers with an annual credit line of over RMB 50 million
(approximately US$8 million), which represent approximately 80% of the total bank loan
market in China. Moreover, for each loan, the data record specific contract terms such as
borrower and lender IDs, loan sizes, maturity levels, internal ratings, and delinquent
events. We also match the loan data to Chinese Industry Census (CIC) firm-level data by


4 For example, the Chinese government initiated the RMB 4 trillion stimulus program in Nov 2008. We
find that the growth rates of loans outstanding before the 4 trillion program (i.e., Nov 2008) and before
deregulation (i.e., April 2009) are similar across the control and treatment groups.



                                                   2
firm ID. This allows us to trace out each loan a firm borrowed and to study how firms
react to deregulation in terms of their investment, employment, performance, and
profitability trends.
    We first document how joint equity banks expand and compete with big five banks.
Joint equity banks have been growing substantially since the 2009 deregulation. For
example, their market share increased from 24.5% in 2008 to 33.5% in 2010. The
percentage of cities covered by joint equity banks significantly increased from 9.5% in
2008 to 15.7% (by 65.3%) in 2010 while big five banks barely increased their coverages
(by only 2%) over the same period. Regressions of lending amounts on deregulation shock
show results consistent with these unconditional patterns. Furthermore, when joint
equity banks enter, expansion is mainly observed on the intensive margins; 88% of the
loans of entrant banks go to firms that have been borrowing from incumbent banks. On
the other hand, the 2009 deregulation has had insignificant effects on deposits. This is
due mainly to the deposit interest rate cap imposed by the Chinese government. New
entrant banks must offer the same interest rate to depositors as incumbent banks.
    Second, we study how deregulation affects loan contract terms and loan performance.
DID regressions show that the 2009 deregulation led to significantly lower interest rates,
better internal loan ratings, more third-party guarantees, and lower default rates for joint
equity bank loans in deregulated cities. These effects are mainly observed for private firms
rather than for SOEs. In particular, the 2009 deregulation led to a 6.6% decrease in the
interest rates of private firms but to no significant effects on SOEs’ borrowing costs.
Deregulation also led to a 0.5% increase in the internal loan ratings of private firms but
not for those of SOEs. Moreover, the percentage of loans given to private firms that need
guarantees increased by 9.1% while the increase was only 5.8% for SOE loans.
Consequently, with stronger screening standards applied by new entrant joint equity
banks, deregulation led to a 77.7% decrease in the default rates of private firm loans while
the default rates of SOEs did not change significantly. SOEs did not employ stronger
lending standards in China since they have soft budget constraints (i.e., implicit
government guarantees).




                                             3
     Third, we explore the effects of the 2009 deregulation on firm activities. We restrict
our sample to firms that have borrowed from banks, as such firms should be affected
directly by loan contract term changes caused by deregulation. DID regressions show that
the 2009 deregulation led to increases in growth rates of fixed assets and in the number
of employees by 21.3% and 8.1%, respectively. In addition to stronger growth in size,
deregulation also led to increases in firms’ net income growth and ROA by 44.0% and
1.8%, respectively. Moreover, the pre-trend dummies have insignificant coefficients,
which further supports the parallel trend assumption. We also find that the positive
effects of deregulation on borrowers are more pronounced in cities with higher
Herfindahl-Hirschman Indexes (HHIs) ex-ante or in cities in which new entrant joint
equity banks have greater total assets. Thus, deregulation was more effective in previously
less competitive areas or when entrant banks were more powerful.
     We then perform a back-of-the-envelope calculation. In particular, as noted above,
deregulation led to a 21.3% increase in fixed assets equal to an RMB 45 million annual
increase per firm. Average loans outstanding per firm are valued at RMB 350 million.
Thus, by the ratio, deregulation led to an RMB 0.13 increase in fixed assets for every RMB
1 loan outstanding. As total loans outstanding for private firms according to the CIC
amounted to RMB 3 trillion in 2008, deregulation led to an RMB 390 billion increase in
fixed assets. This represents approximately 1.11% of China’s GDP in 2008. The economic
consequences of the 2009 deregulation are statistically and economically significant.
     Next, we explore the negative consequences of deregulation. SOEs in China, similar
to those in many other countries, are much less efficient (e.g., lower ROA and TFP) than
private firms and distort credit allocation. 5 After the 2009 deregulation, joint equity
banks made even more loans to SOEs. The DID regressions show that joint equity banks’
SOE loans outstanding and shares of SOE loans made in deregulated cities increased by
35.4% and 13.9%, respectively. Among SOEs, joint equity bank branches in deregulated
cities lent significantly more to less efficient ones (i.e., SOEs with lower TFP), which
further distorted credit allocation. These less efficient SOEs have greater assets on

5 The big five banks in China have been criticized for their inefficient lending to SOEs, which has resulted
in a large volume of nonperforming loans (e.g., Allen, Qian, and Qian (2005)).



                                                     4
average and rank higher in the political hierarchy (e.g., central government SOEs), which
equips them with softer budget constraints (i.e., stronger implicit government
guarantees).
     In addition to entrant joint equity banks’ preferences for SOEs with soft budget
constraints, incumbent big five banks did not alter their lending to SOEs significantly
after deregulation. Consequently, more credit flows to SOEs following deregulation.
Furthermore, we find that private firms can benefit from deregulation significantly more
than SOEs can in terms of growth and profitability such that credit should have been
granted to more productive private firms. These results serve to emphasize the potential
unintended adverse consequences of banking deregulation in China.
     In sum, deregulation led to two seemingly opposing effects on the economy. On the
positive end, for individual private firms with bank credit access, deregulation improved
firm growth and profitability, especially in previously less competitive banking areas. On
the negative end, across all firms, deregulation led to more credit allocated to inefficient
SOEs. This worsening of credit allocation across firms undermined the positive effects of
the 2009 deregulation. Another back-of-the-envelope calculation highlights the point: the
total decrease in fixed assets from distorted credit allocation caused by deregulation is
equal to a 0.31% GDP loss.6
     This paper contributes to the literature in three ways. First, our findings add to the
literature on the nexus of financial market development and economic growth, especially
in relation to the banking sector. Using comprehensive loan-level data, this paper
documents loan-to-loan competition dynamics and disentangles the costs and benefits of
deregulation. This, in turn, sheds light on the mixed evidence of previous empirical
studies, most of which do not use granular data on individual loans and borrowers and
use only aggregate market indicators such as the HHI to estimate net effects of bank




6
  We perform a back-of-the-envelope calculation to estimate losses resulting from increased SOE lending
that should have been granted to private firms. See further information in Section 4.5.



                                                  5
competition (e.g., Berger and Hannan (1989); Hannan (1991); and Neumark and Sharpe
(1992)).7
     Our findings of positive effects of deregulation on individual borrowers reconcile the
conventional wisdom that increased bank competition can lower borrowing costs and
improve lending efficiency to fuel economic growth (e.g., Jayaratne and Strahan (1996);
Smith (1998); Claessens, Demirgüç-Kunt, and Huizinga (2001); Barth, Caprio, and Levine
(2001, 2004)). In contrast, competition can have negative effects such as increased risks
in the banking system (e.g., Keeley (1990); Allen and Gale (2000); Hellman, Murdock,
and Stiglitz (2000); Jiang, Levine, and Lin (2016)) and decreased efforts from banks in
regard to loan screening and monitoring (e.g., Petersen and Rajan (1995); Boot and
Thakor (2000); Marquez (2002)).8 We find opposing evidence that deregulation leads to
stronger screening standards and to lower default rates for new entrant joint equity banks.
The traditional trade-off given in the literature is not present in China (i.e., lower interest
rates vs. lesser screening efforts and higher risks). We document a new consideration that
deregulation leads to lending to inefficient SOEs. This worse credit allocation is primarily
attributable to SOE’s soft budget constraints and serves as a novel and essential cost of
banking deregulation in China.
     This paper makes a second contribution by estimating the effects of banking
deregulation on the lending strategies of new entrant banks vs. incumbent banks. The
deregulation of bank entry barriers has been widely used in empirical studies to explore
the economic consequences of increased bank competition (e.g., Jayaratne and Strahan
(1996, 1998); Black and Strahan (2002); Dick and Lehnert (2010); Jiang, Levin, and Lin


7 In addition to studies exploring effects of banking reform, many studies have found positive relationships
between financial market development and economic growth. See, for example, Gurley and Shaw (1955);
Goldsmith (1969); McKinnon (1973); King and Levine (1993a, b); Demirgüç-Kunt and Maksimovic (1998);
Rajan and Zingales (1998); Levine and Zervos (1998); Levine, Loayza, and Beck (2000); Cetorelli (2003);
Cetorelli and Strahan (2006); and Bertrand, Schoar, and Thesmar (2007). There are also opposing views
and contrary evidence on the harmful effects of financial reform, especially in relation to bank expansion.
See, for example, Petersen and Rajan (1994); Berger et al. (1998); Cetorelli (2001); Cetorelli and Gambera
(2001); Prasad et al. (2003); and Hakenes and Schnabel (2010). Cetorelli and Peretto (2012) argue that the
effects of bank competition depend on market conditions.
8 Gormley (2010, 2014) show that new entrant banks (e.g., foreign banks) target a specific group of

borrowers while the credit access of other firms can be reduced. Consequently, increased competition from
new entrant banks can have adverse effects on growth overall.



                                                     6
(2016)). We take a step forward to illustrate both sides of such competition: how new
entrant banks target borrowers and change loan contract terms and how incumbent
banks respond. This supplements previous studies by offering evidence on both sides of
competition at the individual loan level, revealing underlying mechanisms of the
economic consequences of bank entry deregulation documented in the literature.
     Third, besides China, our findings have policy implications in many other countries.
The consolidation of banks is a global phenomenon that has spurred much public debate
(e.g., Berger, Demsetz, and Strahan (1999)). China is the second largest economy
worldwide whereby its credit allocation is distorted mainly by SOEs and is far from being
efficient (e.g., Hsieh and Klenow (2009); Hsieh and Song (2015); Song and Wu (2015)).9
This is primarily related to the soft budget constraints of SOEs that have implicit or
explicit government guarantees (e.g., Qian and Roland (1998); Song and Xiong (2017)).
This has led to adverse effects of banking deregulation on credit allocation in China (i.e.,
new entrant equity banks prefer SOEs). Our results suggest that policymakers should
consider the interaction of different frictions in reform policies. Fixing one distortion (e.g.,
bank entry restrictions) can introduce unintended adverse effects arising from other
distortions (e.g., the soft budget constraints of SOEs). This echoes several recent studies
arguing that reforms in China could have unintended adverse consequences (e.g.,
Hachem and Song (2016, 2017); Chen, Petukhov, and Wang (2017); Liu, Wang, and Xu
(2017); Wang et al. (2017)).10 Policymakers’ decisions on banking reforms rely heavily on
fully understanding economic consequences from all dimensions, especially potentially
adverse effects such as those that we find in China.
     The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the institutional
background of the banking system in China. Section 3 presents our data and summary




9
   Politicians in China can also distort resource allocation. Huang, Pagano, and Panizza (2017) documents
that local government debts in China crowd out more productive private firms.
10
    Our study also relates to another strand of the literature on the sequencing of financial liberalization
across the globe, especially in emerging markets (e.g., Chinn and Ito (2006), Kaminsky and Schmukler
(2008)). Governments should optimally sequence reforms to minimize risks and maximize benefits (e.g.,
Calvo (1998); Fischer (1998); Prasad et al. (2003)).



                                                     7
statistics. Section 4 provides the empirical results regarding bank competition and its
economic effects. Section 5 concludes.
2. Background
2.1.     China’s Banking System

       The banking sector in China originated from a centralized system in 1949 when the
People’s Bank of China (PBOC), as China’s central bank, governed both commercial bank
businesses (e.g., deposits, lending, and foreign exchange) and central bank functions.
Along with economic opening policies being instituted by Deng Xiaoping in 1978, the
banking system entered a period of reform. In 1983, the PBOC began to focus on national
macroeconomic policy, monetary stability, and economic development. At the same time,
the big four commercial banks (i.e., the ICBC, ABC, BOC and, CCB) started to take over
commercial bank businesses, and each was specialized in a specific area. 11 In 1987, the
Bank of Communications (BoCom) was formally established and became the first national
shareholding commercial bank. We classify the ICBC, ABC, BOC, CCB, and BoCom as the
big five commercial banks in China directly controlled by the state.12 The two principal
shareholders of these big five commercial banks are the Ministry of Finance and the China
Investment Corporation.13
     The Bank of Communications’ experience in reform and development has paved the
way for the development of shareholding commercial banks in China and exemplified
banking reforms in China. Between 1988 and 2005, twelve joint equity banks were
established, mostly as SOEs or institutions transformed from local financial companies.
Although joint equity banks are also national banks, unlike big five commercial banks,
they usually focus on local business and operate on a much smaller scale. This is partly
the case because these joint equity banks cannot open branches freely in cities other than


11 The Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (ICBC) specialized in the credit business, the Agriculture
Bank of China (ABC) specialized in supporting economic development in rural areas, the Bank of China
(BOC) specialized in foreign exchange business, and the China Construction Bank (CCB) is responsible for
the management and distribution of government funds allocated for construction and infrastructure
projects.
12 We exclude the BoCom in the sample and find that our main results presented in this paper are robust.
13 The China Investment Corporation is a sovereign wealth fund that manages China’s foreign exchange

reserves.



                                                   8
cities in which they hold headquarters. Compared to the big five, joint equity banks play
a much less central role in the banking market. For example, in 2006, the total assets of
big five banks amounted to RMB 24.4 trillion while the total assets of joint equity banks
amounted to RMB 5.4 trillion.
2.2.     CBRC Regulations on Bank Branches

       As is the case in many other countries, the banking sector in China is heavily
regulated. In March 2003, the CBRC was founded to supervise and monitor the banking
sector. The CBRC placed strict restrictions on the twelve joint equity banks, especially
with regard to the opening of new branches. For example, in 2006, the CBRC announced
that the twelve joint equity banks, along with local commercial banks, could only apply to
open one branch in one city at a time with each application.14 Specifically, banks cannot
submit another branch opening request until the current one has been rejected or
approved by the CBRC. A bank must send an application to the CBRC’s provincial offices
for initial review. When an application passes this local review, the case is then transferred
to the CBRC’s headquarters for final evaluation. The turnaround time for each application
is approximately one year with some taking even longer depending on the review periods
of local CBRC offices.
       Moreover, the CBRC capped the total number of branches that could be opened in
each city. At the end of 2005, big five bank branches were on average operating in
approximately 90% of Chinese cities while the twelve joint equity banks were operating
in only approximately 7% of Chinese cities. Bank entry regulations imposed by the CBRC
in 2006 greatly limited capacities of joint equity banks to compete fairly with big five
banks that had already established branches in almost all cities and counties in China.
       In April 2009, “Adjustment comment on the market access policy of setting up
branches for small- and medium-sized commercial banks” was introduced by the CBRC
as a significant and vital policy deregulating the Chinese banking system. 15 This


14 Please refer to CBRC Order [2006] No.2, titled “The implementation of administrative licensing items
on Chinese commercial banks”
15 Please refer to CBRC Order [2009] No. 143, titled “Adjustment comment on the market access policy of

setting up branches for small- and medium-sized commercial banks”



                                                  9
adjustment aimed to free joint equity banks by allowing them to open new branches in
new cities. The deregulation removes entry restrictions imposed on opening new
branches in a city when a joint equity bank had already set up branches in this city. Joint
equity banks can also enter all cities of a province freely when they had branches in the
capital city of a given province. Explicitly, for these deregulated cities, joint equity banks
can freely open branches without any restrictions on the number of branches opened.
Moreover, for each application, joint equity banks can apply to open multiple branches
without approval from the central CBRC office. Instead, banks only need the approval of
the local CBRC office, rendering the application process much simpler and more efficient
with typically four months of turnaround time.
     Moreover, no specific requirement on capital amounts for new branches was
imposed. However, when a bank did not operate any branches in a city or provincial
capital city, it was still strictly regulated under the old rules of the CBRC. Taken together,
this bank entry deregulation policy enacted in April 2009 would dramatically reduce the
cost and waiting periods of new branch entry applications for joint equity banks. As one
senior officer of the CBRC noted, the deregulation shock served as a milestone in the
development of commercial banks and in growing levels of competition in China’s
banking sector.16 On October 15, 2013, in CBRC Order [2013] No.1, an updated version
of CBRC Order [2006] No.2, the CBRC completely lifted entry restrictions placed on all
commercial banks.
     In this paper, we use the 2009 partial deregulation policy as an exogenous shock to
perform a Difference-in-Differences (DID) test. Specifically, the 2009 deregulation does
not apply to big five banks already operating in most cities in China. Big five banks
operating in cities in which no joint equity banks are allowed to expand and joint equity
banks in regulated cities are not directly affected by the 2009 deregulation policy and thus
can serve as the control group. This allows us to use DID regressions to identify the


16 In response to this deregulation, the China Merchants Bank, one of the twelve joint equity banks, decided
to open another 20 new branches by the end of 2009. As reported in the Announcement of 39 th Meetings
of the Seventh Sections of The Board of Directors, the China Merchants Bank would expand to Jiangsu,
Guangdong, Henan, Sichuan, Shandong, Zhejiang, Jiangxi, Liaoning, Fujian, Yunnan, Hunan, Hubei,
Anhui, and Guangxi.



                                                    10
deregulation’s impacts on how new entrant joint equity banks compete (“intruders”), how
big five banks respond (“defenders”), and how firms respond as a result. Since this
deregulation only applies to specific regions and banks, we can exploit variation within a
city and across banks.17
3. Data and Summary Statistics

       We use three datasets for our empirical analyses, including two proprietary datasets
on Chinese bank loans and branches and Chinese Industry Census (CIC) firm-level data.
3.1.     CBRC Loan Level Data

       The first dataset includes all major bank loans that the CBRC compiled for
monitoring and administrative use, covering over 7 million loan contracts granted by the
19 largest Chinese banks to firms with unique organization codes. This monthly frequency
dataset covers all borrowers with an annual credit line of over RMB 50 million
(approximately US $8 million) and covers the period running from October 2006 to June
2013, which accounts for over 80% of all bank credit in China. The data cover over
160,000 borrowing firms located in all 31 provinces in China and 20 different sectors
determined by the Economic Industrial Classification Code for China. In addition to their
comprehensive coverage, the data also offer detailed loan-level information, i.e., the
unique firm identifier, firm-level fundamentals (e.g., size, leverage and location), bank
information (e.g., the names and location of branches), and loan-level characteristics (e.g.,
loan amounts, loan maturity levels, credit guarantee providers, internal ratings, issuing
dates, loan maturity dates, and loan delinquency statuses).18
3.2.     CBRC Branch Data

     The second dataset includes the information of all bank branches in China, which is
also collected by the CBRC. This dataset covers over 200,000 branches of approximately
2,800 banking financial institutions for 1949 to 2016. The dataset includes branch level


17 Table A2 of the Appendix shows the distribution of the number of branches of different banks operating
across provinces before the 2009 deregulation.
18 However, the data do not record loan interest rates. In China, the lending rate was fully liberalized after

July 20, 2013. During our sample period, bank lending rates were still highly regulated.



                                                     11
information, such as full names, branch IDs, branch addresses, and exact opening and
closing dates. From these data, we can determine how many new branches a specific bank
set up in a given period and in a particular region (provinces, cities, or counties). For our
analyses, we restrict our bank branch sample to the 17 commercial banks (i.e., big five
banks and twelve joint equity banks).
     To validate the quality of these bank branch data, we cross-check them with public
branch information for the Bank of China (BOC) for 2016. We use data for the BOC
because we are able to find information on all of its branches with corresponding names,
addresses, branch levels, and operating statuses on BOC’s website. We construct the
BOC’s branch list for September 2016 from the CBRC’s dataset and check each of these
branches based on the BOC’s website. In total, the BOC’s website records 10,714 operating
branches. This number is close to the number of branches (10,686) disclosed in the BOC’s
2015 annual report and is also similar to the number reported in the CBRC’s dataset
(10,678 branches). We also compare the names of branches between CBRC data and
BOC’s website, and 9,900 branches have exactly the same names in these two datasets.
This means that 92.71% of the branches reported in the CBRC dataset are the same as
those listed on BOC’s website. For the remaining 7.29% unmatched branches, we
manually checked their names at the city level, and we can match another 3.58% of the
branches. In sum, 96.29% of BOC branches listed in the CBRC dataset can be matched to
branches listed on BOC’s website. The quality of the CBRC bank branch dataset is thus
outstanding.

3.3.    Chinese Industry Census Data

     The other dataset we use for this work is the CIC for 1998 to 2013.19 The CIC was
collected by The Chinese National Bureau of Statistics (NBS). It covers all manufacturing
firms in China with annual sales of more than RMB 5 million (this increased to RMB 20
million in 2011). The CIC appears to be the most detailed database on Chinese


19
   We obtained CIC data for 1998 to 2013 with the exception of data for 2010, which are of poor quality.
For 2010 we use Orbis data from Bureau van Dijk to compensate for firm variables of the CIC. We in turn
recover approximately 80% of the data for 2010.



                                                  12
manufacturing ﬁrms, and the content and quality of the database are sufficient. The CIC
offers detailed firm-level accounting information (e.g., balance sheets, income statements,
and cash flow statements) as well as other firm characteristics (e.g., number of workers,
locations, industries, shareholder types, and registration types). Although we do not have
access to loan-level interest rate information from the CBRC data, we use the annual value
of interest payments for each firm given in CIC data to calculate the interest rate. From
ﬁrm registration types given in CIC data, we classify ﬁrms as SOEs and non-SOEs. To
investigate the impact of bank credit access on firm activities, we merge CBRC data with
CIC data for 2007 to 2013.
     We also obtain population census data on all firms in China for 2008. This cross-
sectional dataset records firm IDs, total assets, ownership information, numbers of
workers, and operating incomes for 9,212,411 firms. Approximately 75% of the firms
included in the CBRC dataset can be matched to the 2008 census data (i.e., twelve
thousands of sixteen thousands).       20   We in turn stratify CBRC borrowers by ownership
(i.e., SOEs vs. private firms) and performance features (e.g., high vs. low efficiency).
3.4.     Summary Statistics

       Figure 1 shows two heat maps illustrating the number of outstanding joint equity
bank branches operating in 2008 and 2013. The darker color corresponds to a larger
number of joint equity bank branches operating in a province. Over the last two decades,
joint equity banks have been growing rapidly. As is shown in Panel A of Figure 1, in 2008,
there are still several provinces with less than 20 joint equity bank branches (Jilin, Inner
Mongolia, Gansu, Qinghai, Ningxia, Guizhou, Guangxi, Hainan, and Xizang). Overall, in
2008, the big five banks dominated China's banking system with 51,557 branches
operating in 84.9% of Chinese cities while the twelve joint equity banks were suppressed
severely in terms of competition with only 4,161 branches operating in 9.5% of Chinese
cities. After the 2009 deregulation, the number of joint equity bank branches increased
dramatically from 4,161 in 2008 to 5,272 in 2010, covering 15.7% of Chinese cities, while

20 We cross-checked the variables between CIC and 2008 census data. More than 95% of them are
consistent. In CBRC data we compared differences in firm characteristics (e.g., total assets) of firms
matched to the census and unmatched firms. The t-tests show insignificant differences.



                                                 13
the big five barely expanded their coverage (by only a 2% increase) over the same period.
Moreover, Panel B of Figure 1 shows that 12 out of 31 provinces had over 200 joint equity
bank branches by the end of 2013. Notably, five provinces reached over 500 joint equity
bank branches, i.e., Guangdong, Zhejiang, Shandong, Shanghai, and Jiangsu. In Figure
A1 of the Appendix, we plot the number of big five bank branches operating in 2008 and
2013. Again, the numbers did not change considerably during these five years.
                                 [Place Figure 1 about here]
    In addition to the increase in the number of branches observed, joint equity banks
also grew rapidly in terms of lending market shares. In particular, in Figure 2, the solid
line represents the percentage of joint equity banks’ loans outstanding of total loans
outstanding (i.e., joint equity and big five banks). The number has increased over time.
For example, in 2007, 21.7% of outstanding loans were issued by joint equity banks. This
number increased to 24.5% in 2008 and sharply jumped after the 2009 deregulation,
reaching 33.5% in 2010. This confirms that joint equity banks expanded substantially
following deregulation. The share of joint equity banks continues to increase over time
(i.e., from 21.7% in 2007 to 40.1% in 2013, an increase of approximately 85%). Moreover,
the dotted line represents shares of joint equity banks for new loan issuances, revealing
similar patterns as the solid line.
                                [Place Figure 2 about here]
    To further illustrate contributions of the 2009 deregulation policy to the rapid
catching up of joint equity banks, in Figure 3, we plot the unconditional pattern for loans
outstanding for the treatment (i.e., joint equity banks in their deregulated cities) and
control groups (i.e., banks in cities not affected by the shock). The solid line represents
the treatment group, and the dotted line represents the control group. Before April 2009,
loans outstanding for the treatment group changed in parallel with loans outstanding for
the control groups. Since the shock of April 2009, the gap has been increasing over time
because joint equity banks can freely open new branches in treatment groups. The pattern
illustrated in Figure 3 suggests that the increased lending after April 2009 has mainly
been due to deregulation. No significant changes in differences between the treatment




                                            14
and control cities are found before April 2009. This serves as evidence of a parallel trend
assumption underlying the DID analysis.
                                    [Place Figure 3 about here]
     Table 1 presents summary statistics for the data. As discussed above, we employ the
2009 bank entry deregulation policy as an exogenous shock on interbank competition
mainly occurring between joint equity and big five banks. Our main variable of interest is
the DID dummy After2009.4×Exposure, where After2009.4 is equal to one for
observations following the policy shock of April 2009 and is equal to zero before it.
Exposure is equal to one for bank-cities affected by the shock and is equal to zero for
unaffected bank-cities. Particularly for joint equity banks, Exposure is equal to one in city
j where a bank has existing branches or in the capital city of the province of this city since
according to the 2009 deregulation policy this joint bank is free to open branches in city
j. Exposure is equal to zero for banks operating in cities not affected by deregulation, i.e.,
joint equity banks in still regulated cities and big five banks in cities in which no joint
equity banks were allowed to enter freely after April 2009. We exclude cities in which
joint equity banks hold headquarters in the sample since all twelve joint equity banks have
opened a significant number of branches in cities in which they hold headquarters and
did not need to expand more after the deregulation policy.21
     Panel A reports city-bank-month descriptive statistics with 332,904 observations.
The mean of Exposure is 0.533, which means that, on average, 53.3% of the city-bank
pairs are affected by deregulation while the other 46.7% are not directly affected.
Moreover, of the city-bank pairs with Exposure=1, 18.7% operated joint equity bank
branches before April 2009. In other words, for the remaining 81.3% of the cities,
unrestricted branch opening occurred due to their being existing branches in provincial
capital cities rather than in the city itself. This mitigates concerns over whether the
government endogenously targeted several specific cities to perform deregulation in 2009.
Panel A also reports the number of branches and loans outstanding at the bank-city-
month level for 2007 to 2013. On average, each bank operates 1.4 branches in each city.

21
   Our empirical results remain qualitatively and quantitatively robust even when we include observations
of cities in which banks hold headquarters.



                                                   15
This is a small value due mainly to the fact that joint equity banks operate no branches in
many cities, especially in earlier years.
    Panel B presents a summary of loan contract terms. The average loan is valued at
approximately RMB 14.8 million with short-term maturity. In total, 99.1% of the loans
have the highest ratings at the point of issuance. Approximately 24.1% of loans have third-
party guarantees, which provides a credit enhancement scheme for lenders. The default
rate defined as over 90 days of delinquency is 0.9%, and this is comparable to the
nonperforming loan rate disclosed in banks’ annual reports in China. For each loan, we
also know the borrower’s characteristics such as total assets, leverages, ownership
information, and efficiency levels. We measure firm efficiency by dividing operating
incomes over total assets and use the median level given in census data to classify efficient
and inefficient firms. Panel C of Table 1 shows firm-level characteristics observed after
merging CBRC borrowers with CIC data. For example, the median firm size is RMB 198.6
million. Moreover, we determine the firm level interest rate by dividing the total value of
interest payments by the total value of outstanding loans at the end of the prior year. The
median interest rate is 9.1%. We describe all variable definitions in Table A1 of the
Appendix.
                                 [Place Table 1 about here]
    Furthermore, we categorize bank branches into incumbent bank branches and new
entrant branches. In particular, we define new entrant branches as those that open in less
than or equal to 12 months in a city. On average, for new entrant branches of joint equity
banks, the percentage of loans to new firms that have never borrowed from CBRC sample
banks is approximately 12%. This means that when joint equity banks enter a new city,
instead of securing new clients, their loans mainly go to old firms that have been
borrowing from incumbent banks (88%). Moreover, we find that borrowers can make a
complete switch from big five banks to joint equity banks while the magnitude of the
complete switch is approximately 1%. This means that most loans from new entrant banks
are “add-on” loans (99%).




                                             16
       We then compare the loan contract terms of new entrant and incumbent banks. 22
Table A4 of the Appendix reports the mean difference in loan contract characteristics.
Panel A applies to all banks in the sample, and Panel B applies to joint equity banks.
Patterns observed are very similar between Panels A and B. In particular, loans from new
entrant bank branches have higher values, better internal ratings, more third-party
guarantees, and lower default rates.
4. Empirical Analysis and Results
4.1.      Expansion of Joint Equity Banks under 2009 Deregulation

       We start by analyzing how joint equity banks expand in terms of opening new
branches and making loan issuances after the 2009 deregulation. In other words, we
examine if joint equity banks expand and compete with incumbent big five banks in the
lending market when the restrictions on branch openings are removed. Following the
2009 deregulation, joint equity banks can freely open branches in the cities in which they
already established branches or in all cities of a province in which they operate branches
in the capital city of that province. At the city-bank-month level we regress the number of
branches and outstanding loan amounts on the 2009 deregulation shock. Formally, the
regression can be expressed as follows:
                      Y𝑖𝑗𝑡 = 𝛽1 𝐴𝑓𝑡𝑒𝑟2009.4𝑡 𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑗 + 𝛽2 𝐴𝑓𝑡𝑒𝑟2009.4𝑡
                    +𝛽3 𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑗 + 𝜙𝑋𝑖𝑡 + 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛿𝑗 + 𝜂𝑡 + Ɛ,                         (1)
       where Y𝑖𝑗𝑡 is the logarithm of one plus the number of outstanding branches or the
logarithm of one plus the total value of outstanding loans for city i, bank j at the end of
month t. 𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑗 is equal to one for joint equity banks in deregulated cities and is
equal to zero otherwise. We control for city (𝛼𝑖 ), bank (𝛿𝑗 ), and year (𝜂𝑡 ) fixed effects. We
also control for a city’s GDP for each year. Moreover, we also exclude the cities in which
joint equity banks in the sample hold headquarters since all twelve joint equity banks have
built a substantial number of branches in cities where they hold headquarters and do not
need to expand more after deregulation.


22   Our results remain quite robust to other definitions of new bank entry (e.g., 36 months).



                                                      17
    Table 2 shows the regression results. The dependent variable in Panel A is the
logarithm of one plus the number of outstanding branches. Column (1) applies to the
period three months before and after the shock (i.e., from January 2009 to June 2009).
Columns (2), (3), and (4) apply to periods six months, twelve months, and twenty-four
months before and after the shock, respectively. In columns (1) to (4) the coefficients 𝛽1
of After2009.4Exposure are positive and statistically significant. For example, in
column (1), the coefficient is 0.007 with a t-statistic of 4.94. This means that deregulation
led to a 0.7% increase in the number of joint equity bank branches in deregulated cities
three months after the shock. Additionally, the coefficients of After2009.4Exposure
increase monotonically from columns (1) to (4). For example, in column (4), the
coefficient is 0.086 with a t-statistic of 17.13. This means that the number of joint equity
bank branches increased by 8.6% in deregulated cities two years from deregulation. The
long-term effect of deregulation on joint equity bank branch expansion is larger since it
takes time to open branches in a new city. This also mitigates concerns that for still
regulated cities, joint equity banks can simply open one branch to qualify for deregulation.
Furthermore, we find that when a joint equity bank did not operate any branches in a city
(nor in the provincial capital city) before April 2009, the bank could not qualify for
deregulation even when it opened a branch subsequently.
    In Panel B of Table 2, the dependent variable is the logarithm of one plus outstanding
loan amounts. Consistent with Panel A, deregulation led to a significant increase in
lending from joint equity banks in deregulated cities. For example, the coefficient
estimated in column (4) is 0.312 (t-statistic=17.63) statistically significant at the 1% level,
which means that the total value of outstanding loans increased by 31.2% due to
deregulation. These effects are economically significant. Furthermore, from the
robustness test the results are still consistent after controlling for the cityyear and
bankyear fixed effects.
                                 [Place Table 2 about here]
    Next, we study how the incumbent big five banks respond to the deregulation shock.
In Appendix Table A5, we repeat the regressions on loans outstanding and on the number



                                              18
of branches operated by big five banks. The control group includes big five banks operated
in cities still regulated after April 2009. In particular, Exposure is equal to zero for big
five banks in regulated cities and is equal to one for big five banks in deregulated cities.
The coefficients of After2009.4Exposure are statistically insignificant. In sum, after
deregulation, incumbent big five banks barely change their lending practices in
deregulated cities while joint equity banks expand considerably. These results are
consistent with the unconditional patterns shown in Figures 1, 2, and A1. In short, the
2009 deregulation led to a significant growth in the joint equity market share and to
enhanced competitive pressures on incumbent big five commercial banks in line with the
goals of deregulation.
    The deregulation shock may be confounded with the RMB 4 trillion stimulus package
initiated in November 2008. For example, the 4-trillion program could have granted
more credit for deregulated cities than for regulated ones. To mitigate this concern, in
Table A3 we calculate the growth rates of loans outstanding for November 2008 to March
2009 (i.e., after the 4-trillion but before the 2009 bank entry deregulation) for joint equity
banks operating in deregulated cities, big five banks operating in deregulated cities, and
big five banks operating in still regulated cities. Table A3 shows that the average growth
rates of outstanding loans amount are approximately 30% for all three groups. We
perform t-tests on each pair of these three groups and document insignificant differences
within each pair. Moreover, in column (1) of Table 2 we restrict our sample to January
2009 to June 2009 (within the 4-trillion period), and we continue to find that the 2009
deregulation helped joint equity banks expand in deregulated cities. These results suggest
that increases in lending observed between the treatment and control groups from our
DID analysis do not confound with the 4-trillion program and move in parallel before the
deregulation policy of April 2009.
    In addition to our analyses of deregulation effects on lending activities in Table 2 we
also examine how these new entrant branches affect deposits made in local areas.
Economic consequences can also come from the depositor’s side. In Table A6 we perform
DID regressions using local deposit values as the dependent variable. The coefficients of
After2009Exposure are mostly insignificant. In China, the deposit interest rates are


                                             19
capped by the government so that new entrant banks provide local depositors the same
interest rates as incumbent banks. Consequently, the depositors have weak incentives to
switch banks. This may explain why the 2009 deregulation has had enormous impacts on
lending activities but less so for deposits. Our analysis of the deregulation policy’s
economic consequences in Section 4.3 primarily relates to the lending side.
4.2.     Banking Deregulation and Loan Contract Terms

       Next, we study changes in lending activities observed for joint equity bank loans
following deregulation. In particular, we perform a DID analysis at the loan level to assess
causal effects of the 2009 deregulation shock on the loan contract terms of joint equity
bank loans in deregulated cities. Formally, the regression is:
             𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛 𝑇𝑒𝑟𝑚𝑠𝑘𝑖𝑗𝑡 = 𝛽1 𝐴𝑓𝑡𝑒𝑟2009.4𝑡 𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑗 + 𝛽2 𝐴𝑓𝑡𝑒𝑟2009.4𝑡
           +𝛽3 𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑗 + 𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑 + 𝜙𝑋𝑘𝑡 + 𝛼𝑗 + 𝛿𝑘 + 𝜂𝑡 + Ɛ,                  (2)
       where 𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛 𝑇𝑒𝑟𝑚𝑠𝑘𝑖𝑗𝑡 refers to the characteristics of a loan borrowed by firm k
(located in city i) from bank j in month t. 𝛼𝑗 , 𝛿𝑘 and 𝜂𝑡 are vectors of bank, firm, and
year dummy variables that account for bank-, firm-, and year-fixed effects. 𝑋𝑘𝑡 is a set of
time-varying firm level variables, including the firm size and firm leverage ratio. We
aggregate the loan-level sample at the firm-bank-month level. We control for pre-trend
dummies for the shock. The coefficient of interest, 𝛽1, estimates the impact of branch
deregulation on loan contract terms. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.
       Table 3 Panel A shows the results. Columns (1) to (4) apply to all firms in our sample.
Column (1) reports the effects of deregulation on loan default rates and the coefficient of
After2009.4Exposure is -0.007 with significance at the 5% level. On average, the default
rate is approximately 0.9%, and -0.007 is equivalent to a 77.7% decrease in default.
Column (5) refers to SOE loan default rates, and the coefficient is insignificant. In contrast,
column (9) refers to private firms and the coefficient is significantly negative. This
suggests that after deregulation, loan performance improved for private firms but not for
SOEs in deregulated cities. Moreover, in column (2) for internal loan ratings, the
coefficient of After2009.4Exposure is 0.005 with significance at the 1% level. This
suggests that loans with the best ratings increased by 0.5% after the deregulation shock.


                                               20
There may be two reasons for these rating improvements: borrowers have higher levels
of credit quality or banks inflate the ratings. The low default ratio we find in column (1)
supports the first hypothesis that banks raised the screening bar and lent to borrowers of
better credit quality. This effect on ratings is also mainly found for private firms.
Specifically, column (6) shows no significant changes in loan ratings for SOEs and column
(10) shows that for private firms, ratings were significantly better after the shock.
     Next, for third-party loan guarantees, in column (3) the coefficient of
After2009.4Exposure is 0.021 with significance at the 1% level. The average third-party
guarantee ratio is 24.1%, which means that deregulation led to an increase in third-party
guarantees by 8.7%. Moreover, for SOEs listed in column (7), the coefficient of
After2009.4Exposure is 0.014 with significance at the 5% level, which is smaller than
the coefficient in column (11) for private firms, which is 0.022 with significance at the 1%
level. This means that deregulation led to an increase in third-party guarantees, which is
more pronounced for private firms than for SOEs. Moreover, the maturity of these loans
increased significantly after deregulation. In Panel B we repeat the DID regressions for
the loan-level sample. The results are robust and similar to those shown in Panel A.
                                [Place Table 3 about here]
    Although we do not have access to loan-level information on interest rates, we can
extrapolate such information from the interest payment amount documented in CIC data
and from the outstanding loan amount given in CBRC data. In Table A7 Panel A of the
Appendix we find that deregulation significantly reduced borrowers’ interest rates. In
Panel B we interact the DID dummy with the private firm dummy. We find that interest
rates dropped significantly more for private firms than for SOEs. In particular, column (2)
of Panel B shows that the coefficient of After2009.4Exposure is -0.610, which is
statistically insignificant. The coefficient of PrivateAfter2009.4Exposure is -0.603 at
the 1% significance level. The median interest rate is 9.1% for the CIC data. These results
suggest that interest rates on average decreased by 6.6% for private firms after the 2009
deregulation. There is no significant effect on SOEs’ borrowing costs. One caveat is that
our interest rate extrapolation might not be accurate since interest payments given by the



                                             21
CIC may include interest for forms of debt other than bank loans or may exclude interest
payments for fixed assets. To mitigate this concern, we collect a subsample of loans with
accurate loan level interest rate information for listed firms from the China Stock Market
& Accounting Research (CSMAR) database. Panel C shows that deregulation led to a
significant decline in interest rates of loans based on the smaller sample in CSMAR.
       In sum, the results of decreased default rates and increased internal loan ratings and
third-party guarantees are consistent with unconditional patterns shown in Table A4.
Overall, the 2009 bank entry deregulation led to lower interest costs, higher ex-ante loan
screening standards, and better ex-post loan performance. These effects are mainly found
for private firms since higher lending standards are not necessary for SOEs in China due
primarily to their soft budget constraints (i.e., implicit government guarantees).
4.3.     Banking Deregulation and Firm Activities

       This section explores the economic consequences of the 2009 bank entry
deregulation in terms of firm activities. The 2009 deregulation policy on bank entry, along
with other reforms of the financial system, aims to improve lending efficiency and
promote economic growth in China. In Section 4.2 we show that the 2009 deregulation
led to better loan contract terms. Next, we wish to understand how firms respond to the
2009 deregulation in terms of securing better loan contract terms. By merging the CIC
firm-level and CBRC loan data, we select firms that have borrowed from banks in our
sample period. These firms are directly affected by the 2009 entry deregulation. We then
perform DID regressions of firm activities (e.g., expansions of assets and employment)
and firm performance (e.g., net income and ROA) on the 2009 deregulation shock. The
panel data are at the firm×year level. The regression is as follows:
         Y𝑘𝑖𝑡 = 𝛽𝐴𝑓𝑡𝑒𝑟2009𝑡 𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑖 + 𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑 + 𝛿𝑘 + 𝜂𝑡 + Ɛ,                  (3)
       where Y𝑘𝑖𝑡 is a vector of firm level activities such as the growth of fixed assets and
employment, leverage ratios, ROA, and growth in net incomes for firm k that is located in
city i in year t. 𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑖 in equation (3) is defined as a dummy of the city level equal to
one when city i is eligible for branch expansion for any joint equity bank according to the
2009 deregulation (i.e., joint equity banks had already set up branches in city i or in its



                                              22
capital city before the shock). We also control for the pre-trend dummy for one and two
years before the 2009 deregulation. 𝛿𝑘 and 𝜂𝑡 are included to account for firm- and
year-fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.
    Table 4 shows the DID regression results. Overall, the 2009 joint equity banking
sector deregulation does have significantly positive effects on firms’ real economic
activities. For example, following the 2009 deregulation, firms in deregulated areas
experienced significant increases in their fixed asset and employment levels. In particular,
column (1) shows that from 2006 to 2011 (i.e., three years before and after the shock), the
growth rate of fixed assets on average increased by 34.1% with a t-statistic of 6.42
following the 2009 deregulation. In column (2) we expand our sample period from 2004
to 2013 (i.e., five years before and after the shock), and accordingly the growth rate of
fixed assets increased by 21.3% with a t-statistic of 5.65. Columns (3) and (4) refer to
employment growth rates. The 2009 bank deregulation led to a 14.8% increase in firms’
employment growth. Moreover, the coefficients of parallel trend interaction dummies
𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑡−1 and 𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑡−2 are statistically insignificant. No significant differences in
firm activities are observed between deregulated and regulated areas before the 2009
shock. This serves as more supportive evidence of the parallel trend assumption, which
further mitigates the concern that the DID results are driven by the demand side of the
economy (e.g., firms in deregulated cities have better investment opportunities).
    From columns (5) to (8), we use net income growth and ROA to measure firm-level
profitability and efficiency. The coefficient of After2009.4Exposure estimated in column
(5) is 0.872 with a t-statistic of 4.27, showing that the net income growth rate increases
by 87.2% after the 2009 joint equity bank expansion shock. In column (7), for ROA, the
coefficient is 0.019 with a t-statistic of 6.45. Since the average ROA of CIC firms is 0.061,
based on the coefficient estimated in column (7), the 2009 deregulation led to a 31.1%
increase in ROA. In sum, firms that can borrow from banks can benefit immensely from
bank deregulation by growing faster and becoming more profitable.
                                 [Place Table 4 about here]
    Furthermore, we explore the heterogeneous effects of deregulation across cities. In
particular, new entrant banks should have more substantial impacts on areas with limited


                                             23
competition among banks before the shock. In other words, new entrant banks do not
change the landscapes of the banking markets when they are already very competitive.
We calculate the HHI based on the outstanding number of branches present before the
shock (i.e., in 2008) for each city. We then interact this ex-ante HHI with
After2009.4Exposure and repeat the DID regressions as shown in Table 4. Table 5
shows the regression results. The positive effects of the 2009 deregulation on borrowers
are significantly more pronounced in cities with lower competition levels ex-ante (i.e.,
higher HHI). Interaction term After2009.4ExposureHHI presents significantly
positive coefficients in most columns. For example, in column (1), the coefficient of
After2009.4ExposureHHI is 1.542 with a t-statistic of 1.94 while the coefficient of
After2009.4Exposure is 0.247 with a t-statistic of 3.43. This suggests that the asset
growth rate is 9.1% higher for the least competitive cities than it is for the most
competitive ones.23
                                      [Place Table 5 about here]
4.4.     Banking Deregulation and Credit Allocation

       We document the positive effects of deregulation in Section 4.3. In this section, we
explore the potential costs of deregulation. In particular, we study how joint equity banks
alter their credit allocation patterns after the 2009 deregulation shock. It is well
documented that in China banking credit allocation is inefficient since commercial banks
(both big five and twelve joint equity banks) prefer to lend to SOEs. 24 This is mainly the
case due to government intervention and the soft budget constraints of SOEs. SOEs have
been enjoying government guarantees, which provide them with easy access to credit
from banks. Private firms on the other hand have minimal access to bank credit and rely
heavily on informal lending channels (e.g., Allen and Qian (2014)).




23
   In addition to heterogeneous effects observed across cities with different levels of competition, we also
explore new entrant banks’ sizes. From unreported results, we find that the positive effects of deregulation
are stronger when new entrant banks are more prominent.
24 See, for example, Hsieh and Klenow (2009), Hsieh and Song (2015), and Song and Wu (2015). In our

sample, SOEs contribute 9% of the output in China while they take 22% of the bank credit.



                                                    24
    To understand the effects of deregulation on credit allocation, we calculate the ratio
of loans made to SOEs to total loan amounts for each city-bank-month as a dependent
variable in the DID regressions. Table 6 Panel A shows that joint equity banks issue
significantly more loans to SOEs after the 2009 deregulation in deregulated cities in
which they can open branches freely. For example, in column (1), we restrict our sample
to one year before and after the shock (i.e., two years in total). The coefficient of
After2009.4Exposure is 0.034 with significance at the 5% level. On average,
approximately 24.5% of bank loans are for SOEs. The value of 0.034 estimated in column
(1) means that in the first year following deregulation, joint equity banks increased their
shares of lending to SOEs by 13.9%. In column (2), for the period two years before and
after the shock, we also find significantly positive coefficients of After2009.4Exposure.
When a joint equity bank opens new branches in a new city, relative to incumbent big five
banks, it usually does not have access to ample information on local firms. These new
branches prefer to lend to SOEs, which have implicit or explicit government guarantees.
In contrast, lending to private firms is much riskier for loan officers who are punished
when private firms default. In China, SOEs have soft budget constraints and are
considered “safer” assets than private firms and are preferred by joint equity banks.
Moreover, in columns (3) and (4), we use the logarithm of the outstanding loan amount
for SOEs as our dependent variable in our DID regressions. Consistent with columns (1)
and (2), the coefficients of After2009.4Exposure are significantly positive. For example,
in column (3), the coefficient is 0.354 with significance at the 1% level. This means that
joint equity banks increase their total lending to SOEs by 35.4%.
                                [Place Table 6 about here]
    In addition to new entrant joint equity banks, we also study the effects of
deregulation on incumbent big five banks in terms of their credit allocation patterns. We
repeat these DID regressions for big five banks in Table A8 of the Appendix. From
columns (1) to (4), all coefficients of After2009.4Exposure are statistically insignificant.
This means that big five banks did not respond much to deregulation in regard to their
SOE lending. Moreover, increases in SOE lending from joint equity banks after the 2009



                                             25
deregulation did not crowd out SOE lending from incumbent big five banks. Overall, the
2009 deregulation led to more bank credit given to SOEs. It is well documented that in
general, SOEs are less efficient than private firms. 25 The 2009 bank entry deregulation
thus led to a worsening of credit allocation in China.
     Furthermore, we explore how new entrant branches select firms to lend to among
SOEs. In Table 6 Panel B, we calculate the TFP for each firm before the shock (e.g., for
2008). We then use the TFP to measure firm efficiency, and we define an efficient firm as
one with a TFP value above the median. In columns (1) and (2), among SOEs, we calculate
the percentage of loans made to SOEs with high TFP as the dependent variable at the city-
bank-month         level    and      perform       DID      regressions.       The     coefficients      of
After2009.4Exposure are significantly negative. This means that in addition to joint
equity banks’ preferences for SOEs, they further choose to lend to less efficient SOEs after
deregulation. For example, the coefficient in column (1) is -0.043 with significance at the
5% level. This is equivalent to a 4.3% increase in lending to inefficient SOEs. We further
explore the reason for the preference for inefficient SOEs. From Panel B of Table A9 we
find that inefficient SOEs have significantly higher rankings in political hierarchy and are
significantly larger in size. In China, different SOEs have different political rankings (e.g.,
local vs. central SOEs) and SOEs ranked higher usually have softer budget constraints.
Similarly, larger SOEs enjoy softer budget constraints due to the notion of them being
“too big to fail”. In columns (3) and (4) of Table 6 Panel B, we perform the same analysis
on private firms and find no significant results since private firms do not have soft budget
constraints, and banks have no apparent reason to lend to inefficient private firms. These
results further support our hypothesis that new entrant joint equity banks tend to lend to
SOEs, especially to inefficient ones since they are safer assets due to government
guarantees.
     The key assumption of our DID analysis is the presence of parallel trends between
the treatment and control groups. In columns (2) and (4) of Panels A and B we include


25
  In Table A9, Panel A we show that SOEs are significantly less efficient than private firms in China. In
particular, we use the asset turnover ratio (sales/assets) and TFP to measure efficiency and find that these
two variables are significantly lower for SOEs than for private firms.



                                                    26
three pre-trend dummies to refer to January, February, and March of 2009 (i.e., three
months before the deregulation shock). All pre-trend dummies have insignificant
coefficients. This again verifies that our DID findings are not driven by underlying
economic trends other than by the deregulation policy of April 2009. Furthermore, in
Table A10 of the Appendix we perform the same analysis as that given in column (4) of
Panel A, but we include dummies 𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒 × 𝑀𝑜𝑛𝑡ℎ𝑡 (t covers April 2008 to March
2010). We find that before April 2009, all coefficients of dummies 𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒 ×
𝑀𝑜𝑛𝑡ℎ𝑡 are statistically insignificant. After April 2009, we have significantly positive
coefficients for dummies 𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒 × 𝑀𝑜𝑛𝑡ℎ𝑡 . This serves as strong evidence of the
parallel trend assumption and that the shock did have impacts after April 2009.
4.5.     Quantifying the Positive and Negative Effects of Deregulation

        On the one hand, the 2009 bank entry deregulation increased interbank
competition. This led to significantly better loan contract terms that caused borrowers to
grow faster and to become more profitable. On the other hand, the deregulation also led
to more credit flows to inefficient SOEs that should have been granted to more productive
private firms. Disentangling these two opposing forces sheds new light on the mixed
empirical evidence of previous studies and is also of crucial importance to policymakers.
       Based on the estimated coefficients we perform a back-of-the-envelope calculation
to quantify the magnitude of positive and negative effects of the 2009 deregulation policy.
For positive outcomes, the coefficient of After2009Exposure is 0.213 in column (2) of
Table 4. This suggests that the deregulation led to a 21.3% increase in fixed assets growth,
which corresponds to an RMB 45 million increase in fixed assets per firm. Coupled with
the average outstanding loan amount of RMB 350 million per firm for 2008, we can find
that the deregulation led to an RMB 0.13 increase in fixed assets per RMB 1 of loans
outstanding. The total value of loans outstanding for private firms was RMB 3 trillion in
2008. Thus, deregulation led to RMB 390 billion increase in total fixed assets (3×0.13),
which is equal to approximately 1.11% of China’s GDP in 2008.
       For adverse effects, we first trace the heterogeneous impacts of increased bank
competition between SOEs and private firms. In particular, in Table 7, we interact the



                                            27
DID dummy with the dummy for private firms. Overall, private firms can benefit
significantly more from the 2009 deregulation than SOEs can. The effects of the 2009
deregulation on SOEs are nearly absent. In particular, compared with SOEs, after 2009,
private firms operating in deregulated cities presented significantly higher levels of fixed
asset growth, employment growth, net income growth, and ROA. These effects are not
statistically significant for SOEs. For example, in column (1), the coefficient of
After2009.4×Exposure×Private is 0.505 with a t-statistic of 4.31. This suggests that
compared to those of SOEs, the fixed assets growth rates of private firms increase by
50.5% following the 2009 deregulation. On the other hand, the coefficient of
After2009.4×Exposure is -0.167, which is statistically insignificant. This shows that in
contrast to private firms, the 2009 deregulation has no impact on SOE asset growth.
Columns (3) and (4) also show similar patterns for employment growth.
    Moreover, for firm performance (i.e., net income growth and ROA), private firms can
benefit significantly more from the 2009 deregulation while SOEs did not increase their
net incomes and ROA. In particular, for private firms the 2009 deregulation led to
increases in net income growth and ROA by 52.5% and 42.6%, respectively. These
findings suggest that expansions of joint equity banks in China have more positive effects
on private firms since these firms are more efficient and can better capture the benefits
of this reform. This is also consistent with Table A7, which shows that interest rates
dropped more for private firm loans following the 2009 deregulation.
                                [Place Table 7 about here]
    In sum, Table 7 shows that for firms with bank credit access, increased bank
competition has positive effects on their growth and performance, which come mainly
from private firms. These positive effects are both statistically and economically
significant. In other words, when a private firm can borrow from banks, bank entry
deregulation can greatly improve its performance and profitability, which causes it to
grow faster. On the other hand, bank entry deregulation causes more credit that should
have been granted to private firms to be allocated to inefficient SOEs. We perform another
back-of-the-envelope calculation to quantify this loss. In particular, the coefficient of
After2009×Exposure is -0.117 in column (2) of Table 7. This suggests that an SOE can


                                            28
lose 11.7% of its fixed assets after deregulation, which is equal to an RMB 0.48 decrease
in fixed assets for RMB 1 loans outstanding. From Table 6, we know that the 2009
deregulation led to a 4.1% increase in shares of SOE loans. Total loans outstanding
amounted to RMB 4.23 trillion. Thus, deregulation led to approximately RMB 173 billion
of SOE loans that should have been granted to more productive private firms (4.23×4.1%).
The loss of total fixed assets is approximately RMB 107 billion, which is equal to
approximately 0.31% of China’s GDP in 2008.
    Overall, on the one hand, the 2009 deregulation led to increases in growth in
borrower’s assets, employment, net income, and ROA. This accounts for a 1.11% GDP gain.
On the other hand, the 2009 deregulation led to more bank credit flows to SOEs that
should have been granted to more productive private firms. This accounts for a 0.31%
GDP loss. These two opposing forces suggest that for policymakers it is critical to fully
understand all consequences of reforms, especially for interactions among different
frictions. Lifting one friction can have unintended adverse effects arising from other
frictions. The sequence is essential to reform success. In China, the soft budget constraints
of SOEs can render credit allocation worse off after bank entry deregulation.
5. Conclusion

    This paper examines how new entrant banks compete with incumbent banks and the
economic consequences of increased interbank competition. Using unique loan-level data
and firm-level survey in China we trace each loan issued by big five commercial banks and
twelve joint equity banks. We find that after the 2009 bank entry deregulation, firms with
bank credit access can benefit from increased competition among banks and receive
better loan terms (e.g., lower interest rates). In contrast, deregulation leads to a
worsening of credit allocation across firms, i.e., more bank credit flowing into SOEs,
especially for inefficient ones with higher political rankings and softer budget constraints.
These opposing forces shed new light on mixed evidence from previous studies on the
economic consequences of banking deregulation.
    Whether bank competition is good or bad for economic growth is a central question
worldwide. This paper is the first to document specific competition dynamics occurring



                                             29
between new entrant banks and incumbent banks. We establish causal links between
banking deregulation and growth in reference to China. China has been experiencing
unprecedented high rates of economic growth over the past decades and is now the second
largest economy worldwide. Throughout this period of economic growth, China has also
developed the world’s largest banking market. However, researchers, practitioners, and
policymakers have heavily criticized inefficient modes of credit allocation in China. The
Chinese government has been pushing financial reforms to improve this situation
through, for instance, banking sector deregulation. For policymakers it is essential to
understand the countervailing effects of banking deregulation and adverse effects in
particular. In China there are many sources of friction in financial markets, and it is
critical to understand interactions occurring between such frictions. For example, other
reforms should be implemented together with banking deregulation, i.e., removing
government guarantees for SOEs. This would allow more (private/efficient) firms in
China to undertake different financing strategies, e.g., switching from informal to formal
lending channels.
    In future research, it is essential to understand how this rapid change in China’s
banking sector has affected the global economy. What are the benefits and risks
associated with the reform of banking systems in China? How do China’s banking and
shadow banking systems relate? Addressing these questions will further help us
understand the world’s largest bank debt market and its role in the global economy.




                                           30
                                      References

     Allen, F., and Gale, D., 2000. Financial contagion. Journal of Political Economy 108,
1-33.
     Allen, F., Gersbach, H., Krahnen, J.P., and Santomero, A.M., 2001. Competition
among banks: Introduction and conference overview. Review of Finance 5, 1-12.
     Allen, F., Qian, J., and Qian, M., 2005. Law, finance, and economic growth in China.
Journal of Financial Economics 77, 57-116.
     Allen, F., and Qian, J., 2014. China's financial system and the law. Cornell
International Law Journal 47, 499−553.
     Barth, J.R., Caprio, G., and Levine, R., 2001. The regulation and supervision of banks
around the world: A new database. Brookings-Wharton Papers on Financial Services,
Brookings Institution Press, 183-240.
     Barth, J.R., Caprio, G., and Levine, R., 2004. Bank regulation and supervision: What
works best? Journal of Financial Intermediation 13, 205-248.
     Barth, J.R., Caprio, J.G., and Levine, R., 2013. Bank regulation and supervision in
180 countries from 1999 to 2011. Journal of Financial Economic Policy 5, 111-219.
     Berger, A.N., Demirgüç-Kunt, A., Levine, R., and Haubrich, J.G., 2004. Bank
concentration and competition: An evolution in the making. Journal of Money, Credit,
and Banking 36, 433-451.
     Berger, A.N., and Hannan, T.H., 1989. The price-concentration relationship in
banking. Review of Economic and Statistics 71, 291-299.
     Berger, A.N., Demsetz, R., and Strahan, P., 1999. The consolidation of the financial
services industry: Causes, consequences, and implications for the future. Journal of
Banking and Finance 23, 135–194.
     Berger, A.N., Saunders, A., Scalise, J.M., and Udell, G.F., 1998. The effects of bank
mergers and acquisitions on small business lending. Journal of Financial Economics 50,
187-229.
     Bertrand, M., Schoar, A., and Thesmar, D., 2007. Banking deregulation and industry
structure: Evidence from the French banking reforms of 1985. Journal of Finance 62,
597-628.
     Black, S., and Strahan, P., 2002. Entrepreneurship and bank credit availability.
Journal of Finance 57, 2807–2833.
     Boot, A.W., and Thakor, A.V., 2000. Can relationship banking survive competition?
Journal of Finance 55, 679-713.
     Calvo, G., 1998. The simple economics of sudden stops. Journal of Applied
Economics 1, 35– 54.
     Cetorelli, N., 2001. Does bank concentration lead to concentration in industrial
sectors? Working Paper.
     Cetorelli, N., 2003. Life-cycle dynamics in industrial sectors: The role of banking
market structure. Quarterly Review, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 85, 135-147.
     Cetorelli, N., and Gambera, M., 2001. Banking market structure, financial
dependence and growth: International evidence from industry data. Journal of
Finance 56, 617-648.



                                            31
     Cetorelli, N., and Strahan, P., 2006. Finance as a barrier to entry: Bank competition
and industry structure in local U.S. markets. Journal of Finance 61, 437-461.
     Cetorelli, N., and Peretto, P., 2012. Credit quantity and credit quality: Bank
competition and capital accumulation. Journal of Economic Theory 147, 967–998.
     Chen, H., Petukhov, A., and Wang, J., 2017. The dark side of circuit breakers.
Working Paper, MIT.
     Chinn, M.D., and Ito, H., 2006. What matters for financial development? Capital
controls, institutions, and interactions. Journal of Development Economics 81, 163–192.
     Claessens, S., Demirgüç-Kunt, A., and Huizinga, H., 2001. How does foreign entry
affect domestic banking markets? Journal of Banking and Finance 25, 891-911.
     Demirgüç-Kunt, A., and Maksimovic, V., 1998. Law, finance, and firm growth.
Journal of Finance 53, 2107-2137.
     Dick, A., and Lehnert, A., 2010. Personal bankruptcy and credit market competition.
Journal of Finance 65, 655–686.
     Fischer, S., 1998. Capital account liberalization and the role of the IMF. Essays on
International Finance No. 207, Department of Economics, Princeton University.
     Goldsmith, R.W., 1969. Financial structure and development. Yale University Press.
     Gormley, T.A., 2010. The impact of foreign bank entry in emerging markets:
Evidence from India. Journal of Financial Intermediation 19, 26-51
     Gormley, T.A., 2014. Costly information, entry, and credit access. Journal of
Economic Theory 154, 633-667
     Gurley, J.G., and Shaw, E.S., 1955. Financial aspects of economic development.
American Economic Review 45, 515-538.
     Hachem, K., and Song, Z.M., 2016. Liquidity regulation and unintended financial
transformation in China. Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
     Hachem, K., and Song, Z.M., 2017. Liquidity rules and credit booms. Working Paper,
University of Chicago.
     Hakenes, H., and Schnabel, I., 2010. Credit risk transfer and bank competition.
Journal of Financial Intermediation 19, 308-332.
     Hannan, T.H., 1991. Foundations of the structure-conduct-performance paradigm in
banking. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 23, 68-84.
     Hellmann, T.F., Murdock, K.C., and Stiglitz, J.E., 2000. Liberalization, moral hazard
in banking, and prudential regulation: Are capital requirements enough? American
Economic Review 90, 147-165.
     Hsieh, C.T., and Klenow, P.J., 2009. Misallocation and manufacturing TFP in China
and India. Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, 1403-1448.
     Hsieh, C.T., and Song, Z., 2015. Grasp the large, let go of the small: The
transformation of the state sector in China. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 295-
366.
     Huang, Y., Pagano, M., Panizza, U., 2017. Local crowding out in China. Working
Paper.
     Jayaratne, J., and Strahan, P., 1996. The finance-growth nexus: Evidence from bank
branch deregulation. Quarterly Journal of Economics 111, 639-670.




                                           32
     Jayaratne, J., and Strahan, P., 1998. Entry restrictions, industry evolution, and
dynamic efficiency: Evidence from commercial banking. Journal of Law and Economics
41, 239–273.
     Jiang, L., Levine, R., and Lin, C., 2016. Competition and bank opacity. Review of
Financial Studies 29, 1911-1942.
     Kaminsky, G.L., and Schmukler, S.L., 2008. Short-run pain, long-run gain: Financial
liberalization and Stock Market Cycles. Review of Finance 12, 253-292.
     Keeley, M.C., 1990. Deposit insurance, risk, and market power in banking. American
Economic Review 80, 1183-1200.
     King, R.G., and Levine, R., 1993a. Finance and growth: Schumpeter might be right.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 717-737.
     King, R.G. and Levine, R., 1993b. Finance, entrepreneurship and growth. Journal of
Monetary Economics 32, 513-542.
     Levine, R., and Zervos, S., 1998. Stock markets, banks, and economic growth.
American Economic Review 88, 537-558.
     Levine, R., Loayza, N., and Beck, T., 2000. Financial intermediation and growth:
Causality and causes. Journal of Monetary Economics 46, 31-77.
     Liu, Z., Wang P., and Xu, Z., 2017. Interest-rate liberalization and capital
misallocation. Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
     Marquez, R., 2002. Competition, adverse selection, and information dispersion in
the banking industry. Review of Financial Studies 15, 901-926.
     McKinnon, R.I., 1973. Money and capital in economic development. Brookings
Institution Press.
     Neumark, D., and Sharpe, S.A., 1992. Market structure and the nature of price
rigidity: Evidence from the market for consumer deposits. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 107, 657-680.
     Petersen, M.A., and Rajan, R.G., 1995. The effect of credit market competition on
lending relationships. Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, 407-443.
     Petersen, M.A., and Rajan, R.G., 1994. The benefits of lending relationships:
Evidence from small business data. Journal of Finance 49, 3-37.
     Prasad, E., Rogoff, K., Wei, S., and Kose, A., 2003. Effects of financial globalization
on developing countries: Some empirical evidence. Occasional Paper No. 220, IMF.
     Qian, Y., and Roland, G., 1998. Federalism and the soft budget constraint. American
Economic Review 88, 1143-1162.
     Rajan, R.G., and Zingales, L., 1998. Financial dependence and growth. American
Economic Review 88, 559-586.
     Smith, R., 1998. Banking competition and macroeconomic performance. Journal of
Money, Credit, and Banking 30, 793-815.
     Song, Z., and Wu, G.L., 2015. Identifying capital misallocation. Working Paper.
     Song, Z., and Xiong, W., 2017. Risks in China’s financial system. Working Paper.
     Wang, H., Wang, H., Wang, L., and Zhou, H., 2017. Shadow banking: China’s dual-
track interest rate liberalization. Working paper, Tsinghua University.




                                            33
                           Panel A: By the Year 2008




                            Panel B: By the Year 2013


Figure 1: Heat Map of the Number of Joint-equity Branches across
Provinces, 2008 versus 2013. This figure illustrates the number of all twelve
joint-equity branches outstanding across all provinces in China at the end of 2008
(Panel A) and 2013 (Panel B). It covers 31 provinces including four centrally
administrated cities (i.e., Shanghai, Beijing, Tianjin, and Chongqing).




                                       34
 45.00%




 40.00%




 35.00%




 30.00%




 25.00%




 20.00%
           2007          2008          2009            2010      2011          2012          2013

          Outstanding Loan Share from Joint-equity Banks      New Loan Share from Joint-equity Banks




Figure 2: Expansion of Joint-equity Banks. This figure plots the annual
share of joint-equity banks from 2007 to 2013. The dotted line with circles exhibits
the joint equity banks’ share of loans outstanding, and the solid line with triangles
exhibits the share of new loan issuances. The share is calculated by the amount of
loans granted by joint-equity banks over the total amount of loans granted by both
joint-equity banks and big five commercial banks.




                                                  35
  7



  6



  5



  4



  3



  2



  1
                                 Feb-09




                                                                     Jun-09




                                                                                                 Sep-09




                                                                                                                                                Feb-10
                                          Mar-09




                                                                                                                                                         Mar-10
      Nov-08




                                                                                                                     Nov-09
                                                                              Jul-09
                        Jan-09




                                                                                                                                       Jan-10
                                                                                                            Oct-09
               Dec-08




                                                   Apr-09




                                                                                                                              Dec-09




                                                                                                                                                                  Apr-10
                                                                                        Aug-09
                                                            May-09




                                                       Control Groups                                     Treated Groups


Figure 3: Time Trends of Loans Outstanding: treatment vs. control
groups. This figure plots the amounts of loans outstanding between treatment
and control groups before and after the April 2009 bank entry deregulation. The
solid line with triangles exhibits the amount of loans outstanding in deregulated
bank-cities while the dotted line with circles represents those still in regulated
bank-cities. The vertical axis reports the demeaned amount of natural logarithm of
loans outstanding. The treated bank k in city j requires that the joint-equity bank
k has branches in this city or its capital city of the province before April 2009.




                                                                                   36
                                  Table 1: Summary Statistics
This table describes the summary statistics of the main variables used in this study. Panel A
reports the city-bank-month sample from 2007 to 2013, Panel B reports the loan contract
characteristics at loan level from January 2007 to June 2013, and Panel C reports the firm level
characteristics for merged China Industrial Census (CIC) data from 2004 to 2013. All variables
are defined in Appendix Table A1.

                                      N        Mean      Median Std. Dev.          P1       P99
                                                 Panel A: City-Bank-Month Level
Outstanding Branches               332,904      1.372      0.000      5.377       0.000     24.000
Outstanding Loans                  332,904      9.568      0.000     35.458       0.000    167.534
After2009.4                        332,904      0.654      1.000      0.476       0.000      1.000
Exposure                           332,904      0.533      1.000      0.499       0.000      1.000
Local GDP (Billion RMB)            332,904    145.044     82.504    197.413     48.155    1111.500
SOE-Share                          114,638      0.245      0.059      0.323       0.000      1.000
High-TFP                           114,638      0.507      0.477      0.354       0.000      1.000
                                                   Panel B: Loan Characteristics
Loan Amount (Million RMB)         1,863,445    14.778      3.924     30.056       0.050   200.000
Maturity (in Months)              1,863,445     9.422      6.000     16.810       2.000    72.000
Rating Dummy                      1,863,445     0.991      1.000      0.094       1.000     1.000
Guaranteed                        1,863,445     0.241      0.000      0.428       0.000     1.000
Default                           1,508,679     0.009      0.000      0.078       0.000     0.000
Existing Borrower                 1,863,445     0.804      1.000      0.397       1.000     1.000
                                                   Panel C: Firm Characteristics
Assets (Million RMB)               343,071    415.862 198.665      512.657        5.350   1772.061
Fixed Assets (Million RMB)         342,905    140.653     52.094   197.887        0.369   683.694
Leverage                           317,956      0.604      0.619      0.238       0.045      1.000
Sales (Million RMB)                343,114    400.077 183.548 503.864             5.520   1755.216
Employee                           341,464    582.631 347.000      619.757      17.000    2271.000
Private                            343,117      0.935      1.000      0.247       0.000      1.000
Fixed Assets Growth                293,321      0.599      0.021      2.502     -0.966      2.888
Employee Growth                    292,739      0.261      0.028      0.949     -0.850       1.514
Net Income Growth                  188,511      2.093      0.156      8.599      -0.979     8.869
ROA                                342,354      0.061      0.030      0.112      -0.143     0.634
HHI                                343,291      0.034      0.022      0.026       0.008     0.085




                                              37
                            Table 2: Joint Equity Bank Expansions
This table presents the results of the DID regressions of joint equity bank expansion at city-bank-
month level. The dependent variables are Log(1+No. Branches) for Panel A and
Log(1+Outstanding Loans) for Panel B, respectively. The main independent variable is the
interaction, After2009.4×Exposure, where After2009.4 equals one for observations after the
policy shock in April 2009 and zero before that. Exposure equals one when joint equity banks k
in city j has outstanding branches in city j or the capital city of the province that the city j is
located in before April 2009 (i.e., deregulated bank-city) and equals zero for joint equity banks
in still regulated cities and big five banks in cities where no joint equity banks are allowed to
freely expand after April 2009 (i.e., unaffected bank-city). We exclude the bank’s headquarter
cities. For each panel, the column (1) reports the regression estimates for 3-month before and
after the shock subsample (i.e., Jan 2009 to Jun 2009). The column (2), (3), and (4) report the
regression estimates for 6-month, 12-month, 24-month before and after the shock subsample,
respectively. Log(City GDP), Exposure and After2009.4 are included in all model specifications.
Coefficients of these control variables are omitted for brevity. All variables are defined in the
Appendix Table A1. City-, Bank-, and Year-fixed effects are included across all models. Fixed
effects estimates including the constants are omitted for brevity. The t-statistics in parentheses
are based on the two-way cluster-robust standard errors (cluster by city and bank) across all
these model specifications. *, **, and *** indicate statistical signiﬁcance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
levels, respectively.
Panel A: Number of Branches
                                    Dependent Variable: Log (1 + No. Branches)
                                       Shorter Window                          Longer Window
                            (1)              (2)                  (3)               (4)
                     [200901,200906] [200810,2009009] [200804,201003] [200704,201103]
After2009.4×Exposure       0.007***        0.017***              0.043***           0.086***
                          (4.94)          (8.59)               (13.73)            (17.13)
Controls                   YES               YES                  YES               YES
City FE                    YES               YES                  YES               YES
Bank FE                    YES               YES                  YES               YES
Year FE                    YES               YES                  YES               YES
Observations             20,850            41,700               83,349            166,596
Adjusted R-squared        0.639             0.639                0.637             0.635
Panel B: Outstanding Loan Amount
                                    Dependent Variable: Log (1 + Outstanding Loan)
                                         Shorter Window                         Longer Window
                             (1)               (2)                  (3)               (4)
                     [200901,200906] [200810,2009009] [200804,201003] [200704,201103]
After2009.4×Exposure       0.082***            0.144***             0.223***           0.312***
                         (10.73)             (13.60)              (15.95)            (17.63)
Controls                    YES                YES                 YES               YES
City FE                     YES                YES                 YES               YES
Bank FE                     YES                YES                 YES               YES
Year FE                     YES                YES                 YES               YES
Observations              20,850             41,700               83,349           166,596
Adjusted R-squared         0.695              0.695               0.693             0.688


                                                38
                                           Table 3: The Impacts of Deregulation on Loan Policy
This table reports the results of the DID regression estimates of loan contract terms. Panel A presents the firm-bank-month level regression
results. The dependent variables are average Default, Rating, Guaranteed, and Maturity weighted by loan amounts. Panel B presents the
loan-level regression results. The main independent variable is the interaction, After2009.4×Exposure, where After2009.4 equals one for
observations after the policy shock in April 2009 and zero before that. Exposure equals one when joint equity banks k in city j has outstanding
branches in city j or the capital city of the province that the city j is located in before April 2009 (i.e., deregulated bank-city) and equals zero
for joint equity banks in still regulated cities and big five banks in cities where no joint equity banks are allowed to freely expand after April
2009 (i.e., unaffected bank-city). We exclude the bank’s headquarter cities. Pretrend_1, Pretrend_2, and Pretrend_3 are the interactions
between Exposure and the time dummies indicating the 1-month, 2-month, and 3-month before April 2009, respectively. Log(Assets),
Leverage, Exposure, and After2009.4 are included in all model specifications. Coefficients of these control variables are omitted for brevity.
All variables are defined in the Appendix Table A1. Firm-, Bank-, and Year-fixed effects are included across all models. The t-statistics in
parentheses are based on the cluster-robust standard errors at firm level across all these model specifications. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
signiﬁcance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Panel A: Firm-Bank-Month Sample
                                       All                                  SOEs                                Non-SOEs
                        (1)     (2)         (3)      (4)        (5)   (6)       (7)      (8)       (9)     (10)        (11)     (12)
                     Default Rating    Guarantee   Maturity   Defaul Rating  Guarantee Maturity Default Rating      Guarantee Maturity
After2009.4×Exposure -0.007** 0.005***       d ***
                                           0.021                 t
                                                     0.106*** -0.004  0.005      d **
                                                                               0.014     0.193** -0.008*   0.005***     d ***
                                                                                                                      0.022     0.082***
                      (-2.22) (3.51)     (4.69)     (3.76) (-0.87) (1.17)     (2.13)    (2.21)    (-1.95) (3.66)     (4.04)    (3.53)
Controls               Yes      Yes         Yes      Yes        Yes   Yes       Yes      Yes       Yes      Yes        Yes      Yes
Firm FE                Yes      Yes         Yes      Yes        Yes   Yes       Yes      Yes       Yes      Yes        Yes      Yes
Bank FE                Yes      Yes         Yes      Yes        Yes   Yes       Yes      Yes       Yes      Yes        Yes      Yes
Year FE                Yes      Yes         Yes      Yes        Yes   Yes       Yes      Yes       Yes      Yes        Yes      Yes
Observations         248,331 260,125    260,125    260,125 36,291 39,008      39,008   39,008 212,04 221,117         221,117  221,117
Adjusted R-squared    0.277   0.266       0.474     0.639      0.187 0.206    0.408     0.598       0
                                                                                                  0.291    0.211      0.476    0.641

                                                                                                                                 (to be continued)




                                                                        39
                              Table 3: The Impacts of Deregulation on Loan Policy—continued
Panel B: Loan Sample
                                   All                                    SOEs                           Non-SOEs
                      (1)      (2)       (3)        (4)     (5)      (6)     (7)     (8)       (9)     (10)     (11)    (12)
                    Default Rating Guarantee Maturity Default Rating Guarantee Maturity Default Rating Guarantee Maturit
After2009.4×Exposur -0.003 0.006*** 0.014 d ***    0.043** 0.002 0.005 0.002   d                                 d ***
                                                                                    0.099*** -0.005* 0.008*** 0.017       y
                                                                                                                        0.030
e                   (-1.56) (4.00)     (4.19)     (2.44)   (0.77)   (1.36) (0.19)  (3.11)    (-1.94) (4.16)   (4.15)   (1.42)
Controls              Yes      Yes       Yes        Yes     Yes     Yes      Yes     Yes       Yes     Yes      Yes     Yes
Firm FE               Yes      Yes       Yes        Yes     Yes     Yes      Yes     Yes       Yes     Yes      Yes     Yes
Bank FE               Yes      Yes       Yes        Yes     Yes     Yes      Yes     Yes       Yes     Yes      Yes     Yes
Year FE               Yes      Yes       Yes        Yes     Yes     Yes      Yes     Yes       Yes     Yes      Yes     Yes
Observations        975,651 1,002,873 1,002,873 1,002,873 120,265 129,049 129,049 129,049 854,510 872,852 872,852 872,852
Adjusted R-squared   0.295    0.289     0.488      0.721   0.197   0.199    0.482  0.706     0.310    0.218    0.488   0.716




                                                              40
                                        Table 4: The Impacts of Deregulation on Firms
This table reports the results of the DID regressions of firm activities and performance. We merge the CIC firm-level data with the
CBRC loan data and restrict the sample to the firms which have ever borrowed bank loans between 2006 and 2013. The dependent
variable in column (1) and (2) is the growth of fixed assets. Column (3) and (4) are employee growth. The dependent variable in
Column (5) and (6) is Net Income Growth. Column (7) and (8) are ROA (Return on Assets) of the firm. Regression results over the
6-year window and 10-year window are reported. Our main independent variable is After2009×Exposure, where After2009 equals
one for observations after the year of 2009 and zero before and Exposure equals one for treated cities (at least one joint equity
bank can open branches freely in that city after the deregulation, i.e., either the city or its capital city has outstanding joint-equity
branches prior to the bank expansion policy shock) and zero for controlled cities. Pre-trendt-1 and Pre-trendt-2 are for parallel pre-
trends, where Pre-trendt-1 equals year dummy for 2008 times Exposure and Pre-trendt-2 equals year dummy for 2007 times
Exposure. Exposure, After2009, and time dummies are included in all model specifications. Coefficients of these control variables
are omitted for brevity. All regressions are controlled for firm fixed effect and year fixed effect. Standard errors are clustered at the
firm level, and the robust t-statistics are reported in parentheses across all these model specifications. *, **, and *** indicate
statistical signiﬁcance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                            (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)            (5)         (6)          (7)          (8)
                          Fixed Assets Growth        Employee Growth           Net Income Growth                ROA
                       [2006, 2011] [2004, 2013] [2006, 2011] [2004, 2013] [2006, 2011] [2004, 2013] [2006, 2011] [2004, 2013]
After2009×Exposure          0.341***      0.213***    0.148***    0.081***       0.872***    0.440***     0.019***   0.018***
                           (6.42)        (5.65)      (5.40)      (4.43)         (4.27)      (3.48)       (6.45)        (7.24)
Pre-trendt-1               -0.080        -0.071       0.027       0.007         -0.098      -0.073       -0.004       -0.005
                          (-1.48)       (-1.58)      (1.03)      (0.31)       (-0.54)      (-0.48)      (-1.10)      (-1.43)
Pre-trendt-2                0.005         0.015       0.039       0.018         -0.292      -0.256       -0.004      -0.006*
                           (0.10)        (0.37)      (1.43)      (0.80)        (-1.52)     (-1.53)      (-1.26)       (-1.75)
Controls                    Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
Firm FE                     Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
Year FE                     Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
Observations             174,275       293,125     173,104      292,545       96,386      188,434      205,658      342,096
Adjusted R-squared        0.053         0.050       0.058        0.051        0.006        0.008        0.019        0.015




                                                                   41
                                    Table 5: The Impacts of Deregulation on Firms across Cities
This table reports the results of the DID regressions of firm activities and performance. We merge the CIC firm-level data with the CBRC
loan data and restrict the sample to the firms which have ever borrowed bank loans between 2006 and 2013. The dependent variable in
column (1) and (2) is the growth of fixed assets. Column (3) and (4) are employee growth. The dependent variable in Column (5) and (6)
is Net Income Growth. Column (7) and (8) are ROA (Return on Assets) of the firm. Regression results over the 6-year window and 10-
year window are reported. Our main independent variable is After2009×Exposure, where After2009 equals one for observations after
the year of 2009 and zero before and Exposure equals one for treated cities (at least one joint equity bank can open branches freely in
that city after the deregulation, i.e., either the city or its capital city has outstanding Joint-equity branches prior to the bank expansion
policy shock) and zero for controlled cities. HHI is the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index of outstanding branch number before the shock for
each city. Pre-trendt-1 and Pre-trendt-2 are for parallel pre-trends, where Pre-trendt-1 equals year dummy for 2008 times Exposure, and
Pre-trendt-2 equals year dummy for 2007 times Exposure. Exposure, After2009, HHI, and time dummies are included in all model
specifications. Coefficients of these control variables are omitted for brevity. All regressions are controlled for firm fixed effect and year
fixed effect. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level, and the robust t-statistics are reported in parentheses across all these model
specifications. *, **, and *** indicate statistical signiﬁcance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                  (1)            (2)        (3)          (4)                (5)          (6)         (7)          (8)
                                Fixed Assets Growth        Employee Growth                Net Income Growth                ROA
                             [2006, 2011] [2004, 2013] [2006, 2011] [2004, 2013]      [2006, 2011] [2004, 2013] [2006, 2011] [2004, 2013]
After2009×Exposure×HHI           1.542*         1.962***   0.642        0.522**            4.270        0.695       0.226***     0.246***
                                (1.94)        (3.12)      (1.38)       (2.35)             (1.55)       (0.29)      (6.07)       (5.38)
After2009×Exposure               0.247***      0.108*      0.110***     0.055**            0.522*       0.237       0.015***     0.014***
                                (3.43)        (1.91)      (2.77)       (2.44)             (1.93)       (1.13)      (3.43)       (3.04)
Pre-trendt-1                    -0.078        -0.070       0.110        0.203             -1.726**     -1.108*     -0.017       -0.004
                               (-1.62)       (-1.64)      (0.43)       (0.95)           (-2.46)       (-1.71)     (-0.99)      (-0.24)
Pre-trendt-2                     0.005         0.014       0.029        0.008            -0.087        -0.060      -0.004       -0.005
                                (0.10)        (0.36)      (1.02)       (0.36)           (-0.44)      (-0.36)      (-0.96)      (-1.23)
Controls                         Yes            Yes        Yes           Yes               Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes
Firm FE                          Yes            Yes        Yes           Yes               Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes
Year FE                          Yes            Yes        Yes           Yes               Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes
Observations                   174,067       292,764     172,894      292,180            96,249       188,185     205,400      341,654
Adjusted R-squared              0.246          0.210      0.232         0.190            0.304         0.268       0.548         0.522




                                                                     42
            Table 6: The Impacts of Deregulation on Credit Allocation
This table reports the results of the DID regressions of the bank loan allocation between
SOEs and private firms. The dependent variables in Panel A are SOE loans outstanding
and the percentage of loans to SOEs at the city-bank-month level. In Panel B, the
dependent variables are the shares of outstanding loans to firms with higher TFP (i.e.,
High TFP Share) at city-bank-month level. The main independent variable is the
interaction, After2009.4×Exposure, where After2009.4 equals one for observations after
the policy shock in April 2009 and zero before that. Exposure equals one when joint
equity banks k in city j has outstanding branches in city j or the capital city of the province
that the city j is located in before April 2009 (i.e., deregulated bank-city) and equals zero
for joint equity banks in still regulated cities and big five banks in cities where no joint
equity banks are allowed to freely expand after April 2009 (i.e., unaffected bank-city). We
exclude the bank’s headquarter cities. Pre-trendt-1, Pre-trendt-2, and Pre-trendt-3 are the
interactions between Exposure and the time dummies indicating the 1-month, 2-month,
and 3-month before April 2009, respectively. Exposure, After2009.4 and time dummies
are included in all model specifications. Coefficients of these control variables are omitted
for brevity. All variables are defined in the Appendix Table A1. City-, Bank-, and Year-
fixed effects are included across all models. The t-statistics in parentheses are based on
the two-way cluster-robust standard errors (cluster by city and bank) across all these
model specifications. *, **, and *** indicate statistical signiﬁcance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
levels, respectively.

Panel A: Lending to SOEs
                                              Dependent Variable: Loans to SOE
                                             SOE-Share            Log(Outstanding Loans)
                                         (1)           (2)            (3)         (4)
                                       1-Year        2-Year         1-Year      2-Year
After2009.4×Exposure                   0.034**        0.041**        0.354***   0.497***
                                      (2.01)         (2.06)         (2.89)     (3.63)
Pre-trendt-1                                          0.001                     0.032
                                                    (0.03)                     (0.24)
Pre-trendt-2                                          0.015                     0.168
                                                    (0.82)                     (1.48)
Pre-trendt-3                                          0.011                     0.102
                                                    (0.64)                     (0.96)
Controls                                 Yes           Yes            Yes       0.032
City FE                                  Yes           Yes            Yes        Yes
Bank FE                                  Yes           Yes            Yes        Yes
Year FE                                  Yes           Yes            Yes        Yes
Observations                          27,940         58,690         27,947      58,701
Adjusted R-squared                     0.453          0.411         0.694       0.669


                                                                            (to be continued)



                                              43
    Table 6: The Impacts of Deregulation on Credit Allocation—continued

Panel B: Lending to Efficient Firms
                                      Dependent Variable: High TFP Share
                                       For SOEs                For Non-SOEs
                                   (1)           (2)           (3)        (4)
                                 1-Year       2-Year         1-Year     2-Year
After2009.4×Exposure            -0.043**        -0.047**      0.003       0.023
                               (-2.27)         (-2.00)       (0.17)      (0.88)
Pre-trendt-1                                    -0.021                   -0.003
                                               (-1.11)                  (-0.12)
Pre-trendt-2                                    -0.021                    0.001
                                               (-1.17)                   (0.03)
Pre-trendt-3                                    -0.014                   -0.010
                                              (-0.83)                   (-0.45)
Controls                           Yes           Yes           Yes        Yes
City FE                            Yes           Yes           Yes        Yes
Bank FE                            Yes           Yes           Yes        Yes
Year FE                            Yes           Yes           Yes        Yes
Observations                     15,245       32,047         24,999     52,769
Adjusted R-squared                0.551        0.509         0.433       0.385




                                      44
                               Table 7: The Impacts of Deregulation on SOEs vs. Private Firms
This table reports the results of the DID regressions of activities and performance for SOEs and private firms. We merge the CIC firm-
level data with the CBRC loan data and restrict the sample to the firms which have ever borrowed bank loans between 2006 and 2013.
The dependent variable in column (1) and (2) is the growth of fixed assets. Column (3) and (4) are employee growth. The dependent
variable in Column (5) and (6) is Net Income Growth. Column (7) and (8) are ROA (Return on Assets) of the firm. Regression results
over the 6-year window and 10-year window are reported. Our main independent variable is After2009×Exposure, where After2009
equals one for observations after the year of 2009 and zero before and Exposure equals one for treated cities (at least one joint equity
bank can open branches freely in that city after the deregulation, i.e., either the city or its capital city has outstanding Joint-equity
branches prior to the bank expansion policy shock) and zero for controlled cities. Private equals one if the firm is private-owned and
zero otherwise. Pre-trendt-1 and Pre-trendt-2 are for parallel pre-trends, where Pre-trendt-1 equals year dummy for 2008 times
Exposure, and Pre-Trendt-2 equals year dummy for 2007 times Exposure. Exposure, After2009, and time dummies are included in
all model specifications. Coefficients of these control variables are omitted for brevity. All regressions are controlled for firm fixed
effect and year fixed effect. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level, and the robust t-statistics are reported in parentheses
across all these model specifications. *, **, and *** indicate statistical signiﬁcance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                (1)           (2)        (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)
                              Fixed Assets Growth        Employee Growth          Net Income Growth                 ROA
                           [2006, 2011] [2004, 2013] [2006, 2011] [2004, 2013] [2006, 2011] [2004, 2013] [2006, 2011] [2004, 2013]
After2009×Exposure×Private      0.505***      0.336***   0.160***     0.112***      1.099**      0.918***     0.026***     0.026***
                               (4.31)        (4.05)     (2.71)       (2.91)        (2.22)       (2.85)       (4.39)       (5.02)
After2009×Exposure             -0.167        -0.117      0.020        0.002        -0.209       -0.435       -0.004       -0.003
                              (-1.56)       (-1.58)     (0.36)       (0.05)      (-0.45)       (-1.45)     (-0.65)      (-0.96)
Pre-trendt-1                   -0.084        -0.072      0.014        0.000        -0.109       -0.072       -0.004       -0.005
                              (-1.57)       (-1.61)     (0.62)       (0.00)      (-0.61)      (-0.48)       (-1.07)      (-1.41)
Pre-trendt-2                   -0.007         0.005      0.033        0.016        -0.288       -0.254       -0.004       -0.006*
                             (-0.14)         (0.13)     (1.41)       (0.83)       (-1.51)      (-1.53)      (-1.24)      (-1.78)
Controls                        Yes           Yes        Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Firm FE                         Yes           Yes        Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Year FE                         Yes           Yes        Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Observations                 174,067       292,764     172,894      292,180       96,249      188,185      205,400      341,654
Adjusted R-squared            0.055          0.051      0.060        0.053        0.006        0.008        0.020         0.015




                                                                   45
 Internet Appendix for “Rise of Bank Competition: Evidence from Banking
                             Deregulation in China”




                              Panel A: By the Year 2008




                              Panel B: By the Year 2013

Figure A1: Heat Map of the Number of Big Five Banks’ Branches across
Provinces, 2008 versus 2013. This figure illustrates the number of big five bank
branches outstanding for all provinces in China at the end of 2008 (Panel A) and 2013
(Panel B). It covers 31 provinces including four centrally administrated cities (i.e.,
Shanghai, Beijing, Tianjin, and Chongqing).


                                          1
                                   Table A1: Variables’ Definition and Construction
Variables             Definitions
After2009.4           A dummy variable that equals one if it is after the deregulation shock and zero otherwise.
Exposure              A dummy variable at city-bank level that equals one if the joint-equity bank has outstanding branches in this city or
                      its capital city of the province before the bank expansion policy shock and zero otherwise.
Loan Amount           The balance of each loan contract. The unit is in a million RMB.
Maturity              The term of each loan contract. The unit is in years.
Rating Dummy          The credit score placed by the loan officers in the bank. The larger the number, the worse the credit quality of the
                      borrower. It takes the value of one if the rating is at the first category and zero otherwise.
Guaranteed            A dummy variable that equals one if the bank requires third-party guarantee protections and zero otherwise.
Existing Borrower     A dummy variable that equals one if the bank had a lending relationship with the firm during the prior 12 months
                      and zero otherwise.
Delinquent            A loan performance measure that equals one if the loan is not repaid on time and zero otherwise.
Default               A loan performance measure that equals one if the loan is not repaid over three months after the due date and zero
                      otherwise.
ATR                   Asset turnover ratio is defined as the total operating income divided by total assets.
Higher ATR            A dummy indicates whether the assets turnover ratio is above the median value of the firms’ assets turnover ratio in
                      census 2008.
Assets                The total assets of firms. The unit is in a million RMB.
Fixed Assets          The amount of fixed assets. The unit is in a million RMB.
Liabilities           The total liabilities of firms. The unit is in a million RMB.
Leverage              Book leverage, measured as the ratio of total liabilities over total assets.
Sales                 The total amount of sales. The unit is in a million RMB.
Employee              The amount of employment.
Fixed Assets Growth   The year-on-year growth of fixed assets.
Employee Growth       The year-on-year growth of employees.
Net Income Growth     The year-on-year growth of net incomes.
ROA                   It is calculated by dividing a ﬁrm’s annual earnings by its total asset in the same year.
TFP                   A measure of firm-level efficiency, i.e., total factor productivity.
Interest Rate         The ratio of firm interest expense in CIC data divided by the total outstanding loans of the firm in year t-1 in CBRC
                      data. The sample is restricted to firms in CIC data with bank loans outstanding
HHI                   The Herfindahl-Hirschman Index of outstanding branch number before the shock for each city (i.e., higher HHI, less
                      competitive).
Local GDP             It is the city level GDP.




                                                                 2
            Table A2: Provincial Distributions of Joint-equity Banks
This table shows the snapshot distribution of joint-equity banks in April 2009 (right
before the deregulation). The table has 31 rows for 31 provinces respectively. For each
province, there are four columns: (1) total number of branches of all 12 joint-equity banks,
(2) total number of unique joint equity banks, (3) the total number of unique joint equity
banks which have branches in its capital city and (4) the number of cities.

                           (1)                (2)                    (3)               (4)
                    No. Joint-equity    No. Joint-equity   No. Joint-equity Banks      No.
 Province              Branches              Banks             in Capital City        Cities
 Beijing                  332                  10                    10                  1
 Tianjin                  128                  10                    10                  1
 Hebei                     49                   6                     5                 11
 Shanxi                    53                   8                     8                 11
 Inner Mongolia            14                   4                     4                 9
 Liaoning                 206                   9                     7                14
 Jilin                     13                   4                     4                 8
 Heilongjiang              55                   6                     5                13
 Shanghai                 379                  10                    10                  1
 Jiangsu                  311                  11                     11               13
 Zhejiang                 396                  12                    12                 11
 Anhui                     50                   6                     6                18
 Fujian                   237                   8                     8                 9
 Jiangxi                   29                   4                     4                 11
 Shandong                 291                  10                    10                 17
 Henan                     94                   7                     7                 17
 Hubei                    127                   8                     8                14
 Hunan                     72                   6                     6                14
 Guangdong                926                   9                     9                21
 Guangxi                   20                   6                     6                14
 Hainan                    14                   2                     2                 3
 Chongqing                119                   8                     8                  1
 Sichuan                  117                  11                     11               21
 Guizhou                    0                   0                     0                 9
 Yunnan                   104                   9                     9                16
 Xizang                     0                   0                     0                  7
 Shaanxi                   89                   8                     8                10
 Gansu                     17                   2                     2                14
 Qinghai                    0                   0                     0                 8
 Ningxia                    0                   0                     0                 5
 Xinjiang                  26                   4                     4                15




                                             3
                     Table A3: 4T Effect on Deregulated Bank-Cities and Regulated Bank-Cities
This table reports the comparisons of the growth rate of loans outstanding from Nov 2008 to Mar 2009 between deregulated
bank-cities (i.e., treated groups) and regulated bank-cities (i.e., control groups). The growth rate of loans outstanding is
calculated at the bank-city-month level. The t-test was employed to show the significance of mean differences, and t-
statistics are reported in parentheses.

                                         Before winsorization   After winsorization   After winsorization condition on Growth>0
From Nov 2008 to Mar 2009                  Mean Std. Dev.        Mean Std. Dev.              Mean                 Std. Dev.
Deregulated Joint Equity Bank-Cities (1) 34.42% 236.86%         26.81% 88.11%               69.51%                 94.86%
Deregulated Big Five Bank-Cities (2)     32.67% 89.96%          30.06% 61.61%               40.54%                 62.84%
Regulated Bank-Cities (3)                32.75% 121.47%         27.65% 89.37%               52.36%                103.97%
Mean Difference (1)-(3)                   1.66%                 -0.01%                      17.15%
t-statistics (1)-(3)                       (0.06)               (-0.09)                      (1.27)
Mean Difference (2)-(3)                  -0.08%                  2.40%                     -11.82%
t-statistics (2)-(3)                      (-0.01)                (0.34)                     (-1.29)




                                                                4
                       Table A4: Incumbent banks versus new entrant banks
This table provides the differences in loan- and firm-level characteristics between incumbent banks and
new entrant banks. The new entrant banks in a city are defined as those of which their earliest branches
in this city are set up in less than 12 months before the loan issuing month. Loan Amount is loan balance
in unit of Million RMB, Maturity is in unit of year, Rating Dummy measures the five-category loan
classification where it takes the value of one if the internal rating equals one and zero if the internal
rating is larger than 1, Guaranteed is a dummy indicating whether the loan is guaranteed by third-
parties, and Default is a dummy indicating whether the loan is repaid three months after due date.
Assets measure the size of borrowers in a unit of 100 Million RMB while Leverage for financial
conditions. We winsorize each of the above variables at the top and bottom 1% to reduce the effects of
outliers. T-tests are also performed to show the statistical significance of the mean differences and t-
statistics are reported in the last column. *, **, and *** indicate statistical signiﬁcance at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% levels, respectively.

                              Incumbent Banks       New Entrant Banks
                              N     Mean Media       N     Mean Media     Diff     t-statistics
                                            n       Overall Sample n
Loan Amount (Million RMB) 6,279,22 15.031 4.000 52,09 22.06 9.798        7.029***     50.96
Maturity                       0
                           6,279,22 0.997 0.500 52,098       0
                                                          0.950  0.583 -0.047***      -5.65
Rating Dummy                   0
                           6,279,22 0.979 1.000 52,098    0.995 1.000    0.016 ***    26.33
Guaranteed                     0
                           6,279,22 0.206 0.000 52,098    0.294 0.000 0.088***        49.06
Default                        0
                          5,111,093                  8
                                    0.011 0.000 41,780    0.006 0.000 -0.005***       -9.31
                                             Joint-equity Bank Subsample
Loan Amount (Million RMB) 1,925,172 14.43 3.213 51,375 22.220 10.000 7.785***         57.23
Maturity                              5
                          1,925,172 0.733 0.500   51,375  0.930 0.583    0.197 ***    35.34
Rating Dummy              1,925,172 0.993 1.000 51,375 0.996 1.000 0.003***            8.73
Guarantee Requirement     1,925,172 0.233 0.000 51,375 0.295 0.000 0.062       ***    33.28
Default                   1,567,829 0.006 0.000 41,175 0.006 0.000 -0.000             -0.51




                                                    5
                 Table A5: Bank Expansion Effect on Big Five Banks
This table presents the regression estimates of difference-in-differences analysis on the
impact of deregulation shock in joint equity bank expansion on big five banks. The
dependent variables are Log(1+Outstanding Loan) and Log(1+Number of Branches).
The main independent variable is the interaction, After2009.4Exposure, where
After2009.4 equals one for observations after the policy shock in April 2009 and zero
before and Exposure equals one for treated cities and zero for controlled cities. According
to the policy, an eligible city j free of regulation on new-branch entry is the city where at
least one of the joint-equity banks have outstanding branches in this city or in the capital
city of the province that the city j is located in prior to the bank expansion policy shock.
Column (1) and (3) report the regression estimates for subsample during Apr 2008 to Mar
2010 (two-year event window) and column (2) and (4) report the regression estimates for
subsample during Apr 2007 to Mar 2011 (four-year event window). Pretrend_1,
Pretrend_2, and Pretrend_3 are the interactions between Exposure and the time
dummies indicating the 1-month, 2-month, and 3-month before Apr 2009, respectively.
Exposure, After2009.4, time dummies and Log(City GDP) are included in all model
specifications. Coefficients of these control variables are omitted for brevity. All variables
are defined in the Appendix Table A1. City-, Bank-, and Year-fixed effects are included
across all models. Fixed effects estimates, including the constant, are omitted for brevity.
The t-statistics in parentheses are based on the two-way cluster-robust standard errors
(cluster by city and by bank) across all these model specifications. *, **, and *** indicate
statistical signiﬁcance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                           Log (1 + No. Branches)        Log (1 + Outstanding Loan)
                             (1)              (2)            (3)              (4)
                     [200804,201003] [200704,201103] [200804,201003] [200704,201103]
After2009.4×Exposure      0.016             0.021          0.002            -0.055
                         (1.48)            (1.03)         (0.04)           (-0.77)
Pre-trendt-1                                0.005                            0.032
                                           (0.37)                           (0.68)
Pre-trendt-2                                0.005                           -0.038
                                           (0.33)                          (-0.80)
Pre-trendt-3                                0.004                           -0.078*
                                           (0.30)                          (-1.65)
Controls                    YES               YES           YES               YES
City FE                     YES               YES           YES               YES
Bank FE                     YES               YES           YES               YES
Year FE                     YES               YES           YES               YES
Observations              34,185            68,340         34,185           68,340
Adjusted R-squared         0.862             0.861         0.851             0.853




                                              6
                   Table A6: Deregulation Effect on Local Deposits
This table presents the OLS regression estimates of difference-in-differences analysis of
the banking deregulation effect on local deposits. The overall sample includes 1,740 city-
year observations with no null values and the dependent variables are Log(1+ Local
Deposit) and Local Deposits/Local GDP. The main independent variable is the
interaction, After2009×Exposure, where After2009 equals one for observations after the
year of 2009 and zero before and Exposure equals one for treated cities (at least one joint
equity bank can open branches freely in that city after the deregulation, i.e., either the city
or its capital city has outstanding joint-equity branches prior to the bank expansion policy
shock) and zero for controlled cities. We exclude the bank headquarter cities. The column
(1) and (4) report the regression estimate only with year-fixed effect, the column (2) and
(5) further include the Province-fixed effects, and the column (3) and (6) report the
regression estimates with both City- and Year-fixed effects. Exposure, After2009.4, time
dummies and Log(City GDP) are included in all model specifications. Coefficients of these
control variables are omitted for brevity. All other variables are defined in the Appendix
Table A1. Fixed effects estimates, including the constant, are omitted for brevity. Standard
errors are clustered at the city level, and the robust t-statistics are reported in parentheses
across all these model specifications. *, **, and *** indicate statistical signiﬁcance at the
10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                    Local Deposits
                                Log(1+ Local Deposits)      Local Deposits/Local GDP
                                  (1)     (2)     (3)        (4)      (5)        (6)
After2009×Exposure              -0.089 -0.087 -0.151*       0.012    0.017     -0.121
                                (-1.20) (-1.16) (-1.89)    (0.22)   (0.32)    (-1.48)
Controls                         YES      YES     YES        YES      YES        YES
Province FE                      NO       YES     NO         NO       YES        NO
City FE                          NO       NO      YES        NO       NO         YES
Year FE                          YES      YES     YES        YES      YES        YES
Observations                    1,740    1,740   1,740      1,740    1,740      1,740
Adjusted R-squared              0.852   0.900    0.979      0.150    0.391      0.829




                                              7
                 Table A7: Impacts of Deregulation on Interest Rates
This table presents the OLS regression estimates of difference-in-differences analysis of
the banking deregulation effect on borrowing costs. The sample in Panel A restricts to CIC
firms with outstanding loans in a given year and covers 124,830 firm-year observations.
The dependent variable in Panel A is a proxy for interest rate, the ratio of interest
payments over the amount of loans. Panel B reports the interaction analyses between
deregulation effect and the firm’s state ownership. The sample in Panel C is from CSMAR
loan database and includes 457 loan contracts with null values. The dependent variable
in Panel C is the interest rate recorded in loan contracts. The main independent variable
is the interaction, After2009×Exposure, where After2009 equals one for observations
after 2009 and zero before and Exposure equals one for treated cities (at least one joint
equity bank can open branches freely in that city after the deregulation, i.e., either the city
or its capital city has outstanding joint-equity branches prior to the bank expansion policy
shock) and zero for controlled cities. Pre-trendt-1 and Pre-trendt-2 are for parallel pre-
trends, where Pre-trendt-1 equals year dummy for 2008 times Exposure and Pre-trendt-2
equals year dummy for 2007 times Exposure. Log(Assets), Leverage, Private, Exposure,
After2009, and time dummies are included in all model specifications. Coefficients of
these control variables are omitted for brevity. All other variables are defined in the
Appendix Table A1. Firm- and Year-fixed effects are included in Panel A and City- and
Industry-fixed effects are included in Panel B. Standard errors are clustered at the firm
level and the robust t-statistics are reported in parentheses across all these model
specifications. *, **, and *** indicate statistical signiﬁcance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.

Panel A: CIC Sample
                                                           Nominal Interest Rate (%)
                                                          (1)                       (2)
 After2009×Exposure                                    -1.019 ***                 -1.163 ***

                                                      (-2.92)                   (-2.70)
 Pre-trendt-1                                                                    -0.159
                                                                                (-0.27)
 Pre-trendt-2                                                                    -0.220
                                                                                (-0.33)
 Controls                                                YES                       YES
 Firm FE                                                 YES                       YES
 Year FE                                                 YES                       YES
 Observations                                         108,580                   108,580
 Adjusted R-squared                                     0.621                     0.621

                                                                              (to be continued)




                                              8
          Table A7: Deregulation Effect on Interest Rate—continued
Panel B: Interactions with Private Dummy for CIC Sample
                                                   Nominal Interest Rate (%)
                                                    (1)                  (2)
Private×After2009×Exposure                         -0.603***             -0.603***
                                                  (-2.91)               (-2.92)
After2009×Exposure                                 -0.460                -0.610
                                                  (-1.19)               (-1.30)
Pre-trendt-1                                                             -0.167
                                                                        (-0.28)
Pre-trendt-2                                                             -0.221
                                                                        (-0.33)
Controls                                           YES                   YES
Firm FE                                            YES                   YES
Year FE                                            YES                   YES
Observations                                     108,580              108,580
Adjusted R-squared                                0.621                0.621

Panel C: CSMAR Loan Sample
                                            Nominal Interest Rate (%)
                                   (1)        (2)            (3)            (4)
After2009.4×Exposure             -1.044**     -1.069 *      -8.005***      -6.083***
                                (-2.05)      (-1.89)       (-7.87)        (-2.86)
Controls                          YES         YES            YES           YES
City FE                           NO          NO             YES           YES
Industry FE                       YES         YES            YES           YES
Year FE                           YES         YES            YES           YES
Observations                      457         457            457            457
Adjusted R-squared               0.382       0.410         0.660          0.668




                                      9
 Table A8: The Impacts of Deregulation on Big Five Banks’ Credit Allocation
This table reports the results of the DID regressions of the big five bank loan allocation
between SOEs and private firms. The sample is restricted to big five banks. The dependent
variables in Panel A are SOE loans outstanding and the percentage of loans to SOEs at the
city-bank-month level. In Panel B, the dependent variables are the shares of outstanding
loans to firms with higher TFP (i.e., High TFP Share) at city-bank-month level. The main
independent variable is the interaction, After2009.4×Exposure, where After2009.4
equals one for observations after the policy shock in April 2009 and zero before that.
Exposure equals one in cities where some joint equity banks are allowed to freely expand
after April 2009 and zero otherwise (i.e., in those unaffected bank-city). We also exclude
the bank’s headquarter cities. Pretrend_1, Pretrend_2, and Pretrend_3 are the
interactions between Exposure and the time dummies indicating the 1-month, 2-month,
and 3-month before April 2009, respectively. Exposure, After2009.4, and time dummies
are included in all model specifications. Coefficients of these control variables are omitted
for brevity. All variables are defined in the Appendix Table A1. City-, Bank-, and Year-
fixed effects are included across all models. The t-statistics in parentheses are based on
the two-way cluster-robust standard errors (cluster by city and bank) across all these
model specifications. *, **, and *** indicate statistical signiﬁcance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
levels, respectively.

Panel A: Lending to SOEs
                                             Dependent Variable: Loans to SOE
                                      Log(Outstanding Loans)              SOE-Share
                                        (1)              (2)            (3)        (4)
                                      1-Year          2-Year         1-Year      2-Year
After2009.4×Exposure                  0.072            0.237          0.007      0.020
                                      (0.48)           (1.22)        (0.40)      (0.88)
Pre-trendt-1                                           0.058                     0.006
                                                       (0.31)                    (0.27)
Pre-trendt-2                                           0.195                     0.012
                                                       (1.34)                    (0.53)
Pre-trendt-3                                           0.121                     0.015
                                                      (0.89)                     (0.82)
Controls                                Yes             Yes            Yes        Yes
City FE                                 Yes             Yes            Yes        Yes
Bank FE                                 Yes             Yes            Yes        Yes
Year FE                                 Yes             Yes            Yes        Yes
Observations                          32,016          65,618         32,014      65,614
Adjusted R-squared                    0.685            0.672          0.518      0.490


                                                                          (to be continued)




                                             10
 Table A8: The Impacts of Deregulation on Big Five Banks’ Credit Allocation—continued

Panel B: Lending to Efficient Firms
                                               Dependent Variable: High TFP Share
                                             For SOEs                    For Non-SOEs
                                      1-Year         2-Year          1-Year        2-Year
After2009.4×Exposure                  -0.033         -0.044          -0.019        -0.010
                                      (-1.48)        (-1.61)         (-0.94)       (-0.39)
Pre-trendt-1                                         -0.008                         0.008
                                                    (-0.44)                         (0.35)
Pre-trendt-2                                         -0.026                         0.029
                                                     (-1.39)                        (1.47)
Pre-trendt-3                                         -0.015                        0.035*
                                                     (-0.91)                        (1.86)
Controls                                Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes
City FE                                 Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes
Bank FE                                 Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes
Year FE                                 Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes
Observations                          24,882         51,124          31,162        63,772
Adjusted R-squared                     0.581          0.556           0.435         0.401




                                            11
                  Table A9: Descriptive Statistics of Borrower Characteristics
This table reports the descriptive statistics of borrower characteristics. Panel A reports the mean
difference tests on operating efficiency variables between SOE borrowers and Non-SOE borrowers, i.e.,
ATR (Asset Turnover Ratio) and TFP. For SOE subsample, Panel B reports the mean difference tests
on the proportion of borrowers at higher hierarchy and size between the lower-TFP group and the
higher-TFP group. Borrowers in Lower TFP group are those of which TFP estimated is lower than the
median value. Higher Hierarchy takes the value of one if the borrower’s hierarchy is at the city level or
above. T-tests are also performed to show the statistical significance of the mean differences and t-
statistics are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical signiﬁcance at the 10%, 5%, and
1% levels, respectively.

                                                         Panel A: Overall Sample
                                         ATR                                          TFP
                                 N                 Mean                     N                  Mean
 SOE=0                       4,560,173          2.551                   4,560,173            2.856
 SOE=1                        376,607           2.189                    376,607             1.134
 Diff (1-0)                                    -0.362***                                    -0.722***
 t-statistics                                (-49.97)                                    (-124.24)
                                                       Panel B: SOE Subsample
                                   Higher Hierarchy                                  Assets
 Lower TFP                    229,637          0.627                     229,635             66.800
 Higher TFP                   147,007          0.606                     146,972             29.990
 Diff (H-L)                                   -0.021***                                     -36.810 ***
 t-statistics                                (-12.96)                                     (-113.46)




                                                    12
                                      Table A10: Pre-trend Analyses
This table reports the difference-in-differences regression estimates of the bank expansion effect on how
banks target borrowers. The dependent variables are the percentage of loans to SOEs and the logarithm of
SOE loans outstanding at city-bank-month level. The main independent variable is the interaction,
M_j×Exposure, where M_j equals one for observations in month j (j is from Apr 2008 to Mar 2010) and
zero otherwise. Exposure equals one when joint equity banks k in city j has outstanding branches in city j
or the capital city of the province that the city j is located in before April 2009 (i.e., deregulated bank-city)
and equals zero for joint equity banks in still regulated cities and big five banks in cities where no joint
equity banks are allowed to freely expand after April 2009 (i.e., unaffected bank-city). We also exclude the
bank’s headquarter cities. Time dummies are included in all model specifications. Coefficients of these
control variables are omitted for brevity. All variables are defined in the Appendix Table A1. City-, Bank-,
and Year-fixed effects are included across all models. The t-statistics in parentheses are based on the two-
way cluster-robust standard errors (cluster by city and by bank) across all these model specifications. *, **,
and *** indicate statistical signiﬁcance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                         Dependent Variable: Percentage of Loans to SOEs    Dependent Variable: Log(SOE Loans)
                                       [200704, 201103]                             [200704, 201103]
Exposure                                  0.004                                              -0.034
                                         (0.23)                                             (-0.91)
After2009.4                               0.003                                              -0.009
                                         (0.85)                                             (-0.52)
ExposureM2008.04                         0.012                                              -0.027
                                         (0.34)                                             (-0.13)
ExposureM2008.05                         0.004                                              -0.068
                                         (0.12)                                             (-0.31)
ExposureM2008.06                         0.007                                              -0.080
                                         (0.19)                                             (-0.36)
ExposureM2008.07                        -0.016                                              -0.163
                                        (-0.46)                                             (-0.75)
ExposureM2008.08                        -0.018                                              -0.087
                                        (-0.53)                                             (-0.41)
ExposureM2008.09                         0.005                                              -0.027
                                         (0.16)                                             (-0.13)
ExposureM2008.10                         0.007                                              -0.078
                                         (0.22)                                             (-0.40)
ExposureM2008.11                         0.010                                               0.035
                                         (0.33)                                              (0.19)
ExposureM2008.12                         0.024                                               0.125
                                         (0.89)                                              (0.73)
ExposureM2009.01                         0.017                                               0.048
                                         (0.74)                                              (0.33)
ExposureM2009.02                         0.016                                               0.058
                                         (0.77)                                              (0.42)
ExposureM2009.03                         0.025                                               0.118
                                         (1.28)                                              (0.89)
ExposureM2009.04                         0.030                                               0.302*
                                         (1.09)                                              (1.80)
ExposureM2009.05                         0.061**                                             0.486***
                                         (2.39)                                              (2.74)
                                                        13
ExposureM2009.06      0.071**          0.652***
                     (2.39)            (3.34)
ExposureM2009.07      0.064*           0.608***
                      (1.96)           (2.90)
ExposureM2009.08      0.074**          0.689***
                     (2.22)            (3.07)
ExposureM2009.09      0.066**          0.700***
                      (1.99)           (3.10)
ExposureM2009.10      0.073**          0.719***
                     (2.12)            (3.14)
ExposureM2009.11      0.090**          0.830***
                     (2.50)            (3.52)
ExposureM2009.12      0.082**          0.753***
                     (2.30)            (3.24)
ExposureM2010.01      0.080**          0.739***
                     (2.26)            (3.27)
ExposureM2010.02      0.083**          0.839***
                     (2.31)            (3.57)
ExposureM2010.03      0.066*           0.764***
                      (1.83)           (3.23)
Controls                Yes              Yes
City FE                 Yes              Yes
Bank FE                 Yes              Yes
Year FE                 Yes              Yes
Observations         55,155           55,166
Adjusted R-squared   0.406            0.665




                                 14
