                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           DO DISTRESSED BANKS REALLY GAMBLE FOR RESURRECTION?

                                        Itzhak Ben-David
                                          Ajay A. Palvia
                                          René M. Stulz

                                      Working Paper 25794
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25794


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2019




Ben-David and Stulz are at The Ohio State University and NBER, and Palvia is at the Office of
the Comptroller of the Currency. We thank seminar participants at Norges Bank for their
comments. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not reflect those of
the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the U.S. Treasury Department, or the national
Bureau of Economic Research. Ben-David has an ownership stake in a firm that trades securities.
Palvia is an employee of the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, which supervises banks.
Stulz serves on the board of a bank and consults and provides expert testimony services for
financial institutions. He also belongs to the board of trustees of the Global Association of Risk
Professionals.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Itzhak Ben-David, Ajay A. Palvia, and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Distressed Banks Really Gamble for Resurrection?
Itzhak Ben-David, Ajay A. Palvia, and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 25794
May 2019
JEL No. G11,G21,G33

                                            ABSTRACT

We explore the actions of financially distressed banks in two distinct periods that include
financial crises (1985-1994, 2005-2014) and differ in bank regulations, especially concerning
capital requirements and enforcement. In contrast to the widespread belief that distressed banks
gamble for resurrection, we document that distressed banks take actions to reduce leverage and
risk, such as reducing asset and loan growth, issuing equity, decreasing dividends, and lowering
deposit rates. Despite large differences in regulation between periods, the extent of deleveraging
is similar, suggesting that economic forces beyond formal regulations incentivize bank managers
to deleverage when their banks are in distress.

Itzhak Ben-David                                      René M. Stulz
The Ohio State University                             The Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business                            Fisher College of Business
606A Fisher Hall                                      806A Fisher Hall
Columbus, OH 43210-1144                               Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER                                              and NBER
ben-david.1@osu.edu                                   stulz@cob.osu.edu

Ajay A. Palvia
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency
400 7th St SW
Washington, DC 20024
Ajay.Palvia@occ.treas.gov
1. Introduction

   Many financial economists take the view that distressed banks have strong incentives to

gamble for resurrection by taking risks they would not otherwise take and to refrain from

deleveraging. For instance, Freixas, Rochet, and Parigi (2004) write that “We take into account

two well-acknowledged facts of the banking industry: first, that it is difficult to disentangle

liquidity shocks from solvency shocks, second, that moral hazard and gambling for resurrection

are typical behaviors of banks experiencing financial distress.” With this view, the shareholders

gain if the risks pay off and if the risks fail the bill is paid by the bondholders and the taxpayers.

A related view is that deleveraging by banks benefits the liability holders and hurts the

shareholders, so that shareholders try to avoid it (Admati (2014)). An alternative view is that there

are many forces that push shareholders of distressed banks to lower their risk and leverage to

reduce distress costs. These forces include, for instance, managerial reputation, managerial risk-

aversion, threat of runs, bond covenants, preservation of franchise value, and regulatory

interventions.

   In this study, we focus on two turbulent periods in the U.S. banking system, the late 1980s and

late 2000s, in which hundreds of banks faced financial distress, and explore in a systematic fashion

whether the behavior of distressed banks is consistent with gambling for resurrection or

deleveraging. Surprisingly, there is little existing evidence on the issues we address despite their

importance. The studies that exist do not reach a consensus regarding gambling for resurrection.

Our main finding is that despite regulatory differences between the two periods, banks took actions

to reduce their asset risk and leverage, rather than gamble for resurrection, in both periods.

   Banks do not make the choice to gamble for resurrection or deleverage in the abstract.

Regulations limit their room to manoeuver. For the first period we consider, banks did not have



                                                  2
formal capital requirements of the type we are now familiar with, as the Basel Accord was

concluded in 1989 and implemented in the 1990s in the U.S. Further, as a result of concerns about

moral hazard following the savings and loans crisis, the U.S. tightened regulations substantially.

FDICIA, adopted in 1991, introduced prompt corrective action (PCA) which was designed to

resolve banks before they could engage in actions detrimental to the deposit insurance fund (DIF).

These substantial differences in regulation arose partly because of the intent to reduce risk taking

by banks that could hurt the financial system or the DIF. It is therefore interesting that we find

little evidence of changes in the behavior of distressed banks.

    Our study has four parts. First, we propose two empirical indicators for bank distress and test

their usefulness in forecasting bank failure. These indicators are a low equity capital ratio and a

low Z-score. Banks with low equity capital ratio are those in the bottom decile of the equity-to-

assets distribution. Banks with low Z-scores are those who are in the bottom decile of a distance-

to-default measure (based on banks’ earnings). We show that these variables are good predictors

of future bank failure, and that their intersection is even a better predictor. A bank that is in the

lowest decile of the distribution of equity capital ratio and in the lowest decile of Z-score is about

17.8% and 19.3% more likely to fail within three years during both periods, respectively (relative

to an unconditional base rate of 2.0% and 1.7%, respectively).1 The probability of failure is even

stronger when distress happens during a crisis (19.4% and 22.7%, respectively). For the rest of the

analysis, we use the joint observation of a low equity capital ratio and a low Z-score as the main

indicator for bank distress.




1
  This is based on estimated likelihood of failure within 3 years for each of the two periods, all else equal. The base
rate represents the mean failure rate for each of the two panels.


                                                          3
   In the second part, we explore the dynamic behavior of distressed banks. Looking a year out

following a quarter when a bank is financially distressed, we document that distressed banks

increase their equity capital ratio by about 0.80% and 0.55% during the late 1980s and late 2000s,

respectively. This is an economically significant increase in equity capital which amounts to 54%

and 30% of the standard deviation of annual equity capital changes in the respective periods.

During the GFC, however, the response of distressed banks is weaker by about a half. It is plausible

that not being eligible for TARP made it difficult for a bank to raise equity. We examine whether

the government’s 2008 Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) is associated with the distressed

banks’ recapitalization, and indeed we find that distressed banks that received TARP funds

increased their equity capital ratio by an additional 55 basis points.

   In the third part, we shift the focus to the financial statements of banks and examine how

different balance sheet items change following distress. We show that deleveraging occurs through

actions taken across the entire balance sheet. Specifically, we document that banks in financial

distress shrink their assets (e.g., reduce the asset base, close branches, cut the employee

workforce), reduce their liabilities (e.g., shrink deposits, reduce deposit rates), and increase their

equity capital (e.g., add equity capital, cut dividends). Outside the crisis period, the behavior of

distressed banks is similar between the two periods that we examine. However, while during the

Savings and Loan (S&L) crisis there is no difference in bank deleveraging during and outside the

crisis, during the GFC distressed banks deleveraged to a lesser degree than they did in the

surrounding years. The primary reason for this is the lower propensity of distressed banks to raise

new equity during the crisis period. Dewatripont and Tirole (2012) explicitly discuss how

regulation could prevent “banks in trouble from ‘gambling for resurrection’ by raising interest

rates on deposits and attracting funds from depositors who ‘count’ on implicit or explicit support



                                                  4
from the authorities”. We find that this behavior is not typical of banks in distress. In fact, none of

our results is consistent with a gambling for resurrection strategy, which requires a bank to make

risky bets when insolvent or near insolvent. A possible reason for why our data is not supportive

of the gambling for resurrection hypothesis could be that regulation plays the role discussed by

Dewatripont and Tirole (2012).

   In the fourth and final part of the study, we examine how banks’ risk indicators evolve

following a quarter where they are in financial distress. We find that a variety of risk measures

show a decline in risk in the year following distress: banks’ distance-to-default increases, the non-

performing loan (NPL) ratio decreases, earnings volatility decreases, and risk-weighted assets

decline. Again, banks’ behavior is consistent across the periods that we examine.

   Overall, our findings indicate that, contrary to the widespread belief that distressed banks

gamble for resurrection, they actually deleverage on average. Our results are broadly consistent

across the two periods (late 1980s and late 2000s). Because the regulatory environments changed

dramatically between these periods, it is possible to conclude that economic forces besides

regulation incentivize bank managers to deleverage when banks are in distress.

   Our paper contributes to several strands of the literature. First, we contribute to the literature

on risk-taking and deleveraging by banks in distress. The literature on risk-taking by banks has

paid much attention to the relation between charter value and risk-taking (e.g., Keeley, 1990;

Demsetz, Saidenberg, and Strahan, 1996) as well as to the relation between various dimensions of

governance, including ownership concentration, and risk-taking (e.g., Demsetz, Saidenberg, and

Strahan, 1997; Laeven and Levine, 2009). However, there is little evidence on the risk-taking

choices of banks in distress and, especially, whether these banks take steps to deleverage. Despite

the importance of these issues for understanding the incentives and operations of banks, the



                                                  5
empirical literature is thin and existing results are mixed. For example, Bidder, Krainer, and

Shapiro (2017) find that banks that faced losses in the oil crisis of 2014 took steps to deleverage

their balance sheets. In contrast, Koudstaal and van Wijnbergen (2012) find that “Banks whose

share price has slumped tend to gamble for resurrection by increasing the riskiness of their asset

portfolios.” Baldursson and Portes (2013) document that banks in Iceland refinanced loans to their

owners and other big borrowers following the financial turmoil of August 2007, consistent with

gambling for resurrection behavior. Bonaccorsi di Patti and Kashyap (2017) analyze the fate of

Italian banks that exhibit large drops in profitability and find that about one third of the banks

recover. They find that the banks that recover are those that do not gamble for resurrection but

instead cut credit to their riskiest borrowers. Acharya, Gujral, Kulkani, and Shin (2011) argue that

banks redistributed wealth away from creditors to shareholders with dividend payments during the

crisis. Lastly, within the financial industry but outside banking, Kirti (2017) investigates risk-

taking by insurance companies hit hard by the crisis and finds that they reduce risk.

   Second, we contribute to the corporate finance literature on the behavior of firms in distress.

The views in this literature are mixed. Many authors present models of firm distress in which firms

gamble for resurrection (e.g., White, 1989; Rose-Ackerman, 1991; Adler, 1995; Eberhart and

Senbet, 1993; Akerlof and Romer, 1993; Downs and Rocke, 1994; Colonnello, Curatola, and

Hoang, 2017). Admati, DeMarzo, Hellwig, and Pfleiderer (2018) develop a model where, with

debt in place, shareholders resist leverage decreases and, if forced to deleverage, would rather use

asset sales. Their theory follows from the fact that, everything else equal, a decrease in leverage

benefits existing debtholders. They conclude that resistance to deleveraging is especially strong

for firms in distress. The empirical evidence, however, is inconsistent with the theory, i.e., there is

little evidence that corporations indeed gamble for resurrection or voluntarily choose to issue more



                                                  6
debt when their leverage is already excessive. DeAngelo, Gonçalves, and Stulz (2018) document

that following an episode of peak leverage firms deleverage sharply, so that after five or six years

their leverage is typically quite low.

   Third, we provide evidence on the predictions of the theoretical literature on risk-taking by

banks in distress (e.g., Kane, 1989; Corbett and Mitchell, 2000; Holmström and Tirole, 2000;

Morrison and White, 2013; Boyd and Hakenes, 2014; Bruche and Llobet, 2014). Rochet (1992)

and Hellmann, Murdock, and Stiglitz (2000) propose a theory arguing that more stringent capital

requirements reduce banks’ tendency to gamble for resurrection.

   Fourth, we contribute to the literature on the impact of regulatory changes in affecting banks’

risk-taking. The second period we look at is one when FDICIA was fully in effect. FDICIA was

adopted in part to prevent banks from gambling for resurrection by introducing early intervention

(Benston and Kaufman, 1997). Existing empirical evidence finds that poorly capitalized banks

experienced a reduction in risk following FDICIA (Akhigbe and Whyte, 2001). Despite these

changes, our paper shows that distressed banks behave similarly under the pre-FDICIA and the

post-FDICIA regimes. Furthermore, Laeven and Levine (2009) conduct a cross-country study of

bank behavior and regulatory environment and find that the regulatory environment shapes banks’

risk taking behavior. In contrast, our study does not find a material difference in the behavior of

distressed banks across different regulatory regimes within the U.S.

   The study proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the data used in the study, and introduces

the variables that measure bank distress. In Section 3, we explore the variables that are best at

predicting bank failure, and therefore are best suited to measure bank distress. In Section 4, we

test whether distressed banks reduce their leverage. In Section 5, we analyze the balance sheet




                                                 7
dynamics of distressed banks. Section 6 analyzes the evidence for whether distressed banks

increase risk taking activities. Section 7 concludes.



2. Data and Variables

2.1. Data Sources

       Our analysis is based on the Reports of Condition and Income, i.e., Call Reports. The Call

Report data comprise an exhaustive set of mandatory filings by banks at a quarterly frequency. We

include all the reporting commercial banks in our sample during two distinct periods: 1985-1994

and 2005-2014. These two periods include the two most recent banking crises to impact the U.S.

banking system, i.e., the S&L crisis of the late 1980s and early 1990s and the Global Financial

Crisis (GFC) during 2008-2010. Our analysis is based on two separate unbalanced panels over

these two distinct periods. The 1985-1994 and 2005-2014 panels contain 15,915 and 8,131 unique

banks corresponding to over 480,000 and over 260,000 bank-quarter observations, respectively.

      As part of the analysis, we contrast bank behavior in normal times and crisis times. To construct

an indicator of crisis periods, we plot the number of failed banks from 1980 to 2015 in Figure 1.

The figure shows that during this period there are two waves of bank failures. We define our crisis

variable as an indicator variable for the years 1988-1990 and 2009-2011. During these years, the

largest number of banks failed in the respective periods we consider.2

      We also use numerous financial and non-financial controls, including proxies for liquidity

(core deposit ratio and loan to asset ratio), size (log assets), too-big-to-fail indicator (assets of $50

billion or more in 2010 dollars), multi-bank holding company affiliation, bank age (chartered



2
    These periods witnessed 1351 and 362 bank failures respectively.




                                                          8
within prior 5 years), and metro location. Our tests further include logged per-capita income and

the unemployment rate as well as state indicator variables.3



2.2. Descriptive Statistics

    Table 1 presents summary statistics for the variables used in our analyses. Panels A and B

depict statistics for the 1985-1994 and 2005-2014 periods, respectively. Panels C and D show

correlation tables for the two periods. Panels E and F compare key variables between distressed

banks and non-distressed banks for the two periods (further discussed in Section 3). Panel G shows

a correlation table for the different measures of bank financial distress. All variables are defined

more precisely in Appendix A.

    Panels A and B show that 0.5%, 1.3%, and 2.0% of banks fail within 1, 2, and 3 years

respectively in the 1985-1994 period and 0.4%, 1.1%, and 1.7% in the 2005-2014 period; thus,

unconditional failure probabilities are roughly similar. Because the Basel capital requirements are

not in effect during almost all of our first period, we have to use a different measure of

capitalization than the commonly used Tier 1 ratio. We use the Equity capital ratio, which we

define as equity over assets, where equity is the bank’s book equity. It is known from the literature

that common shareholder equity is a better predictor of a bank’s returns during the GFC than the

more common risk-weighted measures (Demirguc-Kunt, Detragiache, and Merrouche, 2012).

Further, stress tests in 2009 placed considerable emphasis on book equity. The median Equity

capital ratio in the overall sample is 8.3% during the earlier period and it increases by 0.7 basis

points per year; the corresponding numbers for the 2005-2014 period are 10.1% and 5.1 basis



3
  These indicators are based on the state where the charter is located; the overwhelming majority of banks operate in
a single state.


                                                         9
points. Thus the median bank increases capital in both periods but capital is substantially higher

in the latter period, which is to be expected (see discussion in Flannery and Rangan, 2008, about

banks increasing their equity capital ratios in the 1990s).

    Our other key risk measure is the bank Z-score (Demsetz and Strahan, 1997).4 A higher bank

Z-score means that a bank is safer. This variable is often interpreted as a proxy for distance-to-

default and is a commonly used measure to proxy for bank risk.5 We measure Z-score as the mean

across four quarters of the return-on-assets (ROA) plus the equity capital ratio divided by the

standard deviation of ROA.6 The idea behind this definition is that this distress proxy measures

the depth of a bank’s equity capital, i.e., how many standard deviations of ROA losses would it

take to exhaust the equity capital. The Z-score has a median of 93.2 and 160.5 in the two periods

respectively. On average, banks are therefore less at risk of distress in the more recent period we

consider.

     In terms of asset growth, we observe log assets to grow on average (and median) overall and

for loans for both periods, but the median fixed assets decline somewhat. Deposits also tend to

grow during both periods, whereas the median non-deposit liabilities decline in the latter period.

All of these variables show substantial variation in their distribution; for example the range of log

loan growth ranges from the 1st to the 99th percentile is -0.35 to 0.23 for the first period and -0.28

to 0.20 for the second period. Other control variables summarized in Panels A and B also exhibit

substantial variation.




4
  Our Z-scores are estimated using quarterly ROA rather than annualized quarterly ROA; the means and medians are
therefore higher as a result. But the two measures are highly correlated (over 98%) and our inferences do not change
depending on which version we use.
5
  See Boyd and Runkle (1993), Laeven and Levine (2009), and Berger, El Ghoul, Guedhami, and Roman (2013).
6
  We use four quarters of data in computing the standard deviation of ROA.


                                                        10
       Panels C and D document that the bivariate correlations of our explanatory variables are

generally low. One exception is the correlation between debt/liabilities and log assets which is -

49% in the earlier period and -37% in the later period.



3. Measuring Bank Distress: Which Factors Predict Bank Failure?

       A key component of our analysis is identifying banks that are in distress. To do so, we use two

(imperfect) commonly-used proxies to categorize the level of financial distress: the Equity capital

ratio and the Z-score. Both measures rely on data that is available for all banks during both periods.

The equity capital ratio is a measure of bank solvency used by academics, investors, and regulators.

For example, Berger and Bouwman (2013) argue that higher capital buffers help banks survive

during financial crises and are even more important for smaller banks that are less able to absorb

external shocks. We define distressed banks as those with Equity capital ratio in the bottom decile

of the distribution for that period (Low equity capital ratio indicator).7 The 10th percentile cutoff

for Equity capital ratio is 6.06% in the earlier period and 7.66% in the latter period.

       Our second measure of distress is the bank Z-score, which captures the ability of earnings and

capital levels to serve as a buffer. For our analysis, we transform this variable to percentiles within

each observation period and define the Low Z-score indicator to denote whether the bank is in the

bottom decile of the Z-score distribution in the observation period. The 10th percentile cutoff for

Z-score is 18.3 in the earlier period and 31.6 in the latter period.

       We also consider a third proxy for distress, which we label Financial distress. The banks

flagged as in Financial distress during a period are the banks that are both in the bottom decile of




7
    We reach similar conclusions if we use the 5th percentile or the 15th percentile.


                                                             11
the Equity capital ratio distribution and the bottom decile of the Z-score distribution during that

period. The sample of banks that are flagged as in Financial distress includes about 3.8% of the

bank-quarters in the period 1985-1994 and about 2.7% of the bank-quarters in the period 2005-

2014.

   Table 1, Panels E and F, compare the Equity capital ratio and Z-score for banks that are

classified as distressed by each of the three indicators that we use, for each of the periods.

Naturally, flagging banks as distressed based on whether they are in the 1st decile of the Equity

capital ratio it creates is a sharp difference in the Equity capital ratio between the distressed and

non-distressed banks, but the difference in the Z-score between the two types of banks is weak. In

a similar fashion, flagging the 1st decile of the Z-score results in a sharp difference in Z-score, and

muted difference in the Equity capital ratio. The reason is that the correlation between the two

variables is relatively low as it is 0.23 for the first period and 0.35 for the second (Panel G). The

Financial distress variable, which is the interaction between the first two indicators, flags between

3.1% and 4.1% of bank-months observations, and captures the extreme tails of both the Equity

capital ratio and the Z-score.

   In Figure 2 we summarize the fraction of distressed banks by year for each of the two time

periods using all three distress indicators. The results suggest in each period that the proportion of

banks with Low equity capital ratio is somewhat higher prior to the peak crisis period (1988-1990)

and (2008-2010). Such an outcome may reflect that banks try to boost their capital during the

crisis, perhaps because the market demands it, but part of the explanation may also be that banks

whose capital falls sharply during the crisis do not stay in the sample. We discuss this sample

selection issue in Section 4. The fraction of banks with Low Z-score falls throughout most of the

first period but has an inverted U-shape in the second period, peaking in the first quarter of 2010.



                                                  12
The fraction of banks that have both a Low Z-score and Low equity capital ratio evolves similarly

to the fraction of banks with Low equity capital ratio in the first period and to the fraction of banks

with a Low Z-score in the second period.

       As we would expect if our proxies for financial distress are useful for capturing banks in

financial distress, the banks in our distressed bank samples differ substantially from the healthier

banks. Panels E and F of Table 1 show how our key variables of interest differ between distressed

and non-distressed banks. We find that distressed banks have lower growth of assets as well as of

liabilities. Depending on the measure of distress, distressed banks are larger or smaller than non-

distressed banks. Banks with assets greater than $50bn are equally likely to be distressed in 1985-

1994 but more likely to be distressed in 2005-2014. The ratio of loans to assets is generally higher

for distressed banks across distress measures. Distressed banks are more likely to be headquartered

in metro areas and to be relatively young in age.

       We would expect financially distressed banks to be more likely to fail than non-distressed

banks if our measures distinguish between distressed banks and other banks. We test whether the

banks we consider to be financially distressed are more likely to fail. We adopt the FDIC definition

of bank failure, which is a situation where a bank is unable to meet its obligations and is either

taken over by the FDIC or acquired by another bank (according to the FDIC failed bank list).8 Our

dataset for this analysis is at the quarterly level; thus, each observation represents a bank in a

specific quarter. The dependent variable is an indicator variable for whether the bank fails in future

quarters (4, 8, 12 future quarters). The explanatory variables include Low equity capital ratio, Low

Z-score, or Financial distress, bank characteristics, and fixed effects for state headquarters and



8
    https://www.fdic.gov/bank/individual/failed/banklist.html.




                                                           13
calendar quarter. Bank characteristics (X1) include logged assets, assets greater than $50 Billion,

an indicator whether the bank is part of a multibank holding company, the ratio of deposits-to-

liabilities, the ratio of loans-to-assets, the ratio of core deposits-to-total deposits, an indicator

whether the bank is headquartered in a metro area, an indicator whether the bank is less than 5

years old, and state-year level variables: logged per-capital income and the unemployment rate.

Table 2 reports estimates of the following model:



               Failure within K Quarters = f1(D, X1, Quarter FE, State FE)                    (1)



where D is the distress indicator, X1 represents the vector of controls, and FE denotes fixed effects.

   The regressions show that banks with Low equity capital ratio (Panel A) and banks with Low

Z-score (Panel B) are more likely to fail. Focusing on the three-year horizon (Columns (3) and (6)

in Panel A), banks with Low equity capital ratio are 8.7% and 6.3% more likely to default in the

next 3 years for the first period and the second period, respectively. A bank with a Low Z-score

indicator has a higher likelihood of failure within three years of 9.4% and 7.6% for the first and

second period, respectively.

   Next, we examine the predictive power of Financial distress, which is the interaction of Low

equity capital ratio and Low Z-score. We repeat the regressions with this variable; the results are

presented in Panel C of Table 2. Banks that are in the intersection of the deciles have a higher

likelihood of failure by 17.8% and 19.3% for the two periods, respectively. This is a particularly

large magnitude as it is roughly ten times the unconditional mean of bank failure of 2.0% in the

first period and 1.7% in the second period. We also note a material increase in the R2 of the

regressions in Panel C, relative to those in Panels A and B. In Internet Appendix Table A1, we



                                                 14
provide robustness analysis in which we include the Crisis interaction. Crisis is an indicator of the

crisis period of 1988-1990 or 2008-2010 depending on the sample period. The results show that

our three proxies for financial distress perform even better during a crisis period.

    Among our three proxies for financial distress, the proxy that classifies as distressed banks that

are both in the lowest decile of the Equity capital ratio and of the Z-score distributions is the best

predictor of bank failure. This is consistent with Panels E and F of Table 1, discussed earlier, which

compare the means of key variables for distressed banks and non-distressed banks. The statistics

in these panels show that the greatest difference in characteristics and behavior occur when using

banks in the Financial distress sample. There is also economic intuition for why financial

distressed banks that are both in the lowest decile of the Equity capital ratio and the lowest decile

of the Z-score are more likely to fail than banks that satisfy only one of the criteria. While the

Equity capital ratio measures the leverage of the bank, banks differ in their asset composition and

specifically in their volatility. A higher leverage would correspond to a higher probability of

distress for a bank with volatile assets compared to a bank with more stable assets. Z-score

measures the bank’s earnings scaled by the volatility of earnings, and thus controls for the volatility

of earnings, which is related to the riskiness of assets. In terms of the controls, we note expected

signs for some key coefficients. Banks with higher loan growth and lower core deposits are more

likely to fail. There is no consistent link between the other controls across periods and failure with

the exception of the local economic condition variables. These variables suggest higher

unemployment and lower per-capita income are generally associated with higher risk of failure.

    In conclusion, banks in the bottom deciles of the Equity capital ratio distribution or the Z-score

distribution are more likely to fail, but the financial distress classification that requires banks to be

in the bottom deciles of the distributions of both ratios results in a materially stronger predictor of



                                                   15
failure and thus a better proxy for bank distress than each of the variables alone. For the rest of the

analysis, we consider a bank to be in financial distress if both its Equity capital ratio and its Z-

score are in the bottom deciles of their respective distributions. In the main body of the study we

present analyses solely using the Financial distress indicator, and the corresponding analyses using

Low Equity capital ratio and Low Z-score are provided in the Internet Appendix.



4. Do Banks Deleverage?

   In this section, we assess whether banks deleverage after they have reached a state of financial

distress. Everything else equal, deleveraging is inconsistent with the gambling for resurrection

hypothesis. To test whether distressed banks deleverage, we measure the change in the Equity

capital ratio four quarters ahead and regress it on the Financial distress indicator and controls.

Our analysis is based on the following model where D denotes our distress indicator, Crisis is a

crisis period indicator, and X2 denotes the controls:



      Equity capital ratio (q, q+4) = f2(D, D*Crisis, X2, Quarter FE, State FE)                 (2)



   The estimated regressions are presented in Table 3. In addition to the distress variables, control

variables, and fixed effects, we add a crisis-period interaction in all regressions (Crisis). Further,

in Columns (5) and (6) we also add a TARP indicator variable for the 2005-2014 period for whether

a bank received a TARP infusion within the prior year. In some of the specifications, we add a

lagged version of the dependent variable to control for autocorrelation in the dependent variable.

Also, we use Driscroll-Kray standard errors for results reported in Tables 3 to 5 as in Fahlenbrach,

Prilmeier, and Stulz (2017) to deal with potential biases resulting from overlapping data.



                                                  16
   The results in Table 3 show that, on average, distressed banks increase their equity capital ratio

significantly by about 0.8 percentage points (relative to an average of 8.9 percentage points in

1985-1994 and 10.8 percentage points in 2005-2014). This is a very large increase in the equity

capital ratio as it represents about 55% of a standard deviation of the changes in the Equity capital

ratio in the first period (=0.8/1.46), and 44% of the standard deviation in the second period

(=0.8/1.83).

   Table 3 shows that the increase in the equity capital ratio is dampened during the GFC but not

during the S&L crisis. During the GFC, the increase in the capital ratio is reduced by roughly half

as it is lower by 0.5 percentage points. The slower increase in the capital ratio during the GFC is

surprising, since at least some of the distressed banks received TARP infusions. Using the TARP

indicator, we find that the TARP infusions offset the dampening of the increase in the equity capital

ratio due to the GFC. In other words, TARP-supported distressed banks increased their equity

capital ratio by 0.8 percentage points during the recent crisis, relative to non-TARP banks which

increased their capital ratio only by about 0.3 percentage points. The results are robust to the

inclusion of the lagged dependent variable (Columns (2), (4), and (6)); the positive association of

lagged capital changes with current capital changes suggests, as we would expect, that banks

gradually build up capital. Further research is required to understand better why the equity capital

ratio did not increase for non-TARP banks. It could well be that TARP banks were viewed as

banks that the official sector wanted to keep alive, so that banks that did not receive TARP found

it more difficult to raise equity (see further discussion in Section 5).

   We conduct several robustness tests for these results. In Internet Appendix Table A2, we

replace the Financial distress indicator with its components (Low equity capital ratio in Panel A,

and Low Z-score in Panel B). The statistical significance is high when using the Low equity capital



                                                  17
ratio, and weaker when the Low Z-score is used. We also present a set of results excluding the

Crisis interaction (Panels C, D, and E). Again, the results remain statistically and economically

significant.

    Banks can fail during the year following the quarter when they are recorded as distressed banks.

A concern is that bank failure could mechanically generate the deleveraging result, since the banks

that survive necessarily perform better than the ones that fail. DeAngelo, Goncalves, and Stulz

(2018) conduct an analysis of deleveraging for public non-financial firms and find that a

substantial fraction of firms are delisted at or shortly after reaching peak leverage. These firms

obviously cannot have had time to deleverage. If the same patterns were to hold for our sample,

the deleveraging behavior we observe would be the behavior of the banks that survived and not

that of the average distressed bank. To test whether attrition accounts for the results we have over

a four-quarter horizon, we shorten the horizon to one quarter and rerun the analysis (presented in

Internet Appendix Table A2, Panels F, G, and H). The results are noisier but the magnitude of

deleveraging is consistent with what we find for four quarters (the one-quarter results need to be

multiplied by four). Hence, we conclude that the impact of the survival bias on our results is

extremely limited.

    As discussed, regulations differ in the second period from the first period. An important

difference is that FDCIA applies throughout our second period. With FDICIA, banks that have

low capital ratios are constrained in the actions they can take. For instance, banks that are

undercapitalized cannot have brokered deposits and cannot pay dividends. They have to have in

place a capital restoration plan. Hence, it could be that our results are driven by the banks for which

prompt corrective action applies, i.e., the banks for which these restrictions apply. To examine this

possibility, we re-estimate Table 3 eliminating the banks that are constrained by FDCIA and



                                                  18
present the results in Internet Appendix Table A2, Panel I. Our inferences are unaffected when we

eliminate these banks, so that our results are not driven by banks subjected to prompt corrective

action.



5. How Do Banks Deleverage?

   In this section, we investigate how banks deleverage. In particular, we wish to understand

whether banks deleverage by taking different actions: by selling assets and using proceeds to

reduce liabilities, by raising new equity directly, or through retention that is accelerated by

dividend reductions. More specifically, a bank could sell assets, whether financial or physical, and

use the proceeds to pay back debt, so that its leverage would fall. DeAngelo, Gonçalves, and Stulz

(2018) show that an important tool for deleveraging is retention of earnings, so that banks could

deleverage by reducing their payouts. Further, banks could attempt to increase earnings by taking

steps to reduce expenses. In practice, we consider how assets, loans, and fixed-assets change for

distressed banks. We also investigate how liabilities evolve, because holding everything else

constant, decreases in liabilities correspond to a decrease in leverage. We consider the changes in

deposit and non-deposit liabilities. We consider how the number of employees evolves for

distressed banks as well as how their cost of deposits evolves. Finally, we investigate changes in

equity and changes in dividends.

   For our regression analysis, we estimate regressions that are the same as the ones estimated in

Table 3, except the dependent variables are outcome variables for banks that we consider to be

helpful in assessing how banks deleverage. In the following regression, D denotes our distress

indicator, Crisis is a crisis period indicator, and X3 denotes the controls:




                                                  19
      Balance Sheet Item (q, q+4) = f 3(D, D*Crisis, X3, Quarter FE, State FE)                   (3)



   We present the results of the analysis in Table 4 Panels A and B for periods 1985-1994 and

2005-2014, respectively. We find that distressed banks reduce both financial and physical assets.

They reduce total assets, loans, and fixed assets. They also reduce the number of branches. It is

then not surprising that employment shrinks as well. The magnitudes of the effects are large. In

the first period we consider, distressed banks decrease the size of their total assets by 8.2%, their

loan portfolio by 8.7%, their fixed assets by 6.6%, the number of their branches by 3.5%, and the

number of their employees by 7.0%. The magnitudes are similar in the later period. The decreases

are even larger during the GFC. During the recent crisis, distressed banks reduce the size of their

total assets by 11.2%, their loan portfolio by 9.3%, their fixed assets by 8.0%, the number of their

branches by 5.8%, and the number of their employees by 7.3%.

   Turning to the liabilities, Table 4, Panel A, Columns (6) to (9) show that banks deleverage by

reducing their liabilities: both deposits and other liabilities decline. We would expect banks

gambling for resurrection to attract more deposits through a higher rate, so that they can take more

risks and increase their leverage. As Benston and Kaufman (1997) discuss for the pre-FDICIA

period, “zombie” S&Ls “were making profitability difficult for solvent institutions by paying

higher-than-market interest rates to attract deposits and charging lower-than-market rates on their

loans, in a strategy of gambling the company.” Instead, in the period of 1985-1994 distressed banks

reduce their deposit rates by 0.026% (Panel A, Column (7)) and the quantity of deposits by 9.2%

(Panel A, Column (8)). The magnitudes for the later period, 2005-2014, are almost identical, with

the exception that the decline in the quantity of deposits during the crisis is steeper by an additional

3.4%. This evidence is consistent with Ben-David, Palvia, and Spatt (2017) who find that deposit



                                                  20
rates do not materially vary with equity capital ratio. Instead, they document that banks use

deposits as a tool to fund loan growth: they increase offered deposit rates to attract new deposits

when the demand for loans is high. Thus, when distressed banks do not seek to make new loans,

they also do not act to attract new deposits. Table 4, Column (8) show that other liabilities (e.g.,

long term debt) of distressed banks decline by about 19.2% and 20.9%, per year, in the two

respective periods that we study. It is important to note that the decrease in interest rates on deposits

is not due to economy-wide movements in interest rates. We control for such movements through

the use of quarter fixed effects, so that all our results have to interpreted as showing how distressed

banks differ in their behavior from non-distressed banks within a quarter.

    Lastly, we find that banks increase their equity capital through two channels: equity issuance

and retention. If banks intended to gamble for resurrection, then banks would want to pay out funds

to existing shareholders, which would make them riskier and increase shareholder wealth in case

of bank failure. Table 4, Panel A, Columns (10) and (11) show results that are inconsistent with

this assertion. Specifically, they show that, on average, common stock increases by 1.7% and by

2.7%, and dividends are cut by 26.1% and 30.2%, in the two periods, respectively. These results

are consistent with the findings of Dinger and Vallascas (2016), who document that, among

publicly-traded banks, the likelihood of equity issuance is higher when the bank is poorly

capitalized. However, while equity does not increase less during the S&L crisis, it does increase

less during the GFC. Acharya, Gujral, Kulkani, and Shin (2011) argue that banks by paying large

amounts in dividends during the crisis redistributed wealth away from creditors to shareholders.

The distressed banks in our sample reduced dividend payments during the GFC.

    Analyzing the deleveraging of distressed banks during the GFC reveals that banks deleveraged

less because they issued less equity during the crisis. Table 3 shows that banks increased their



                                                   21
Equity capital ratio following distress quarters, however, did less so during GFC. In an apparent

contrast, Table 4, Panel B, shows that both assets and liabilities of distressed banks shrank more

during the GFC than outside of it. In fact, the two results are consistent with each other. Distressed

banks deleveraged less during the GFC relative to distress banks outside the crisis because of two

reasons. First, distressed banks during the GFC reduced their liabilities by a smaller amount

relative to the extent that they reduced their assets. To see this, compare the coefficients on the

Crisis interaction in Column (1) to that in Column (6). Second, while distressed banks outside

crisis periods deleverage themselves through equity issuance (Column (10)), distressed banks

during the GFC did not issue equity. In fact, the coefficient on the Crisis interaction in Column

(10) nullifies the coefficient on the Financial distress indicator.

    A plausible explanation for the lower equity raising during the crisis is that banks eligible for

TARP funds were banks that the government wanted to survive, so that distressed banks that did

not receive TARP funds were considered likely to be ceased by regulators.9 We also explore the

impact on distressed banks of receiving TARP funds. Panel C of Table 4 shows that these banks

do not behave materially differently with respect to the management of assets except that they

decrease fixed assets less than non-TARP banks. Surprisingly, TARP banks offer higher deposit

rates by 0.072%, but at the same time shrink their deposits even further, by an additional 3.0%.

These banks also raise more equity. We observe no difference in the evolution of dividend payouts

for these banks relative to other distressed banks.

    We conduct several robustness tests for these results, presented in Internet Appendix Table

A3. In Panels A and B, we rerun the analysis for 1985-1994, but replace the main distress variable



9
 Internet Appendix Table A3, Panel K, shows that once we exclude bank-months that were impacted by regulatory
action (PCA), distressed banks during the GFC issue equity as much as distressed banks outside the GFC.


                                                     22
to be the Low equity capital ratio and the Low Z-score, respectively. In Panels C and D, we repeat

these tests for the period of 2005-2014. In Panels E, F, and G, we rerun the analysis for 1985-1994,

but excluding the crisis indicator, for the three distress variables. In Panels H, I, and J, we presents

the analysis for 2005-2014, excluding the crisis indicator, for the three distress variables. Finally,

in Panel K, we examine whether the decrease in dividends in the second period is due to FDCIA.

We find that the decrease in dividends is similar when we exclude the banks constrained by

FDICIA. It should be noted, however, that in both periods regulators can order banks to stop paying

dividends if they so choose. Across all the robustness tests, the picture is similar to the one arising

from the main tests in Table 4: banks in distress shrink their assets, reduce their liabilities, and

increase their equity.

    Overall, our results show that banks deleverage throughout their balance sheets. Contrary to

the widespread narrative from the S&L crisis that distressed banks increase their deposit rates in

order to attract deposits and invest them in risky assets, we find that deposits of distressed banks

shrink and that the interest rate they pay falls. As banks reduce their assets, their demand for

deposits falls and they offer lower rates. In addition, banks act to increase equity through cutting

dividends and raising new equity.



6. Bank Distress and Risk Taking

    Despite the results that, on average, distressed banks deleverage, it is still possible that they

increase their asset risk which would be supportive of the gambling for resurrection hypothesis.

To investigate whether this is the case, we test whether indicators of risk taking change for




                                                  23
distressed banks. Since we include both private and public banks in our sample, we can only use

indicators that are available in call reports.

    To investigate whether distressed banks increase risk taking, we consider how various

measures of bank asset risk evolve for distressed banks. We consider four measures. The first is

the logged Z-score which is a measure of distress risk. If banks take on riskier loans to gamble for

resurrection, we expect loan performance to worsen and the ratio of performing loans to total loans,

which we call the performing loans ratio, to fall. Similarly, we expect the volatility of earnings to

increase if banks take more risk. Lastly, for the 2005-2014 period, banks have capital requirements

that required them to weight assets differently depending on their risk. As a result, the change in

risk-weighted assets (RWAs) (scaled by lagged assets) is a measure of the change in the risk of

the assets. The lower this ratio, the safer the assets according to the regulatory risk-weights. In the

following regression, D denotes our distress indicator, Crisis is a crisis period indicator, and X4

denotes the controls:



      Risk Measure (q, q+4) = f 4(D, D*Crisis, X4, Quarter FE, State FE)                        (4)



    In Table 5, we estimate our regressions with proxies for asset risk on the left-hand side. We

find that the Z-score increases for banks in distress, which means that these banks become less

risky. Columns (1) to (3) provide regression estimates for the first period. In Column (1), the

increase in the Z-score is 83.9 percent, which is almost a doubling of the Z-score. Admittedly, the

Z-score of the distressed banks is low, as the average of the 1st decile of the Z-score for the first

period is 7.35 (Table 1, Panel E). The ratio of performing loans to total loans increases substantially

as well. Finally, Column (3) shows that there is a drop in earnings volatility of 0.329 for distressed



                                                  24
banks. For all regressions, we have a Crisis interaction. The Crisis interaction is insignificant for

all three regressions. Columns (4) to (6) are the regressions in Columns (1) to (3), estimated for

the second period. The results for the coefficients on Financial distress are similar, except that the

coefficient for the regression for the Performing loans ratio is insignificant. However, the Crisis

interaction is significantly negative for the Z-score and for Earnings volatility. Column (7) uses as

dependent variable the Change in risk-weighted assets (scaled by lagged assets). If risk-weights

are good adjustments for risk, we would expect this ratio to fall when banks decrease their asset

risk. We see that the coefficient on Financial distress is negative and the interaction with the Crisis

is negative as well.

   The results in Table 5 suggest that distressed banks increase their distance-to-default (Z-score)

and have lower earnings volatility in both sample periods (1985-1994) and (2005-2014). In the

latter period, distressed banks reduce their risk-weighted assets ratio, suggesting reduced holdings

of risky assets. The performing loans ratio increases for distressed banks for the first period but

not for the second one.

   For the GFC, it is important to assess whether derisking is different for the banks that receive

TARP injections as there is evidence in the literature that these banks take on more risk (Black and

Hazelwood, 2013). We estimate the regressions in Columns (4) to (7) adding an interaction with

TARP, which is an indicator variable for the banks that receive TARP funding. The estimates in

Columns (8) to (11) show that the distressed banks that received TARP injections increase their

Z-score more than other distressed banks and reduce their earnings volatility more than other




                                                  25
banks. However, these banks experience a decrease in their performing loans ratio compared to

other banks.

   We offer several robustness analyses. First, we present the results for the Low equity capital

ratio and Low Z-score distress indicators with Crisis indicator interactions (Internet Appendix

Table A4, Panels A and B), and for all three distress metrics without the interactions (Internet

Appendix Table A4, Panels C, D, and E). The results broadly remain consistent across

specifications. Then, to alleviate the concern that the results are driven by survival bias, we explore

one-quarter horizon instead of four-quarter horizon for the three distress variables, in Internet

Appendix Table A4, Panels F, G, and H. Again, the results broadly remain consistent. The only

variable that appears to materially weaken is the Performing loans ratio in the 1985-1994 period

(Panel H, Column (2)). In Internet Appendix Table A4, Panels I, J, and K, we also investigate how

the risk metrics change in the five to nine quarters after a bank is considered distressed (the twelve

months following the twelve months that we consider in most of our analyses). We see that banks

derisk for both periods for all measures except for the RWA/Assets(t-1) measure. However, in that

case, we find that banks that received TARP funds do not derisk. As earlier, we explore whether

our results are explained by PCA banks in the post-FDICIA period in Internet Appendix Table A4,

Panel L. We find that this is not the case. Our results hold if we drop all the banks constrained by

PCA.



7. Conclusion

   The view that distressed banks either “gamble for resurrection,” or at the least, have strong

incentives to do so, has been held widely in both regulatory and academic circles since the onset

of the S&L crisis. Our analysis systematically examines whether distressed banks take on more



                                                  26
risk or whether they deleverage during two periods that include crises. The first period is 1985-

1994 with the S&L crisis and the second period is 2005-2014 with the GFC. The periods are

separated by the implementation of important changes in regulation. In particular, prompt

corrective action was introduced with FDICIA and revised capital requirements based on the Basel

II Accord were implemented in the United States. Despite these dramatic changes in regulation

that were aimed at protecting the insurance fund from actions by distressed banks and improving

micro-prudential bank regulation more generally, we find more similarities than differences in how

banks respond to financial distress over the two periods. Our evidence shows that distressed banks

on average deleverage and derisk. During the GFC, there is some evidence that distressed banks

appear to deleverage less and derisk less, primarily because of lower equity issuance. Surprisingly

in light of the introduction of prompt corrective action, the fact that distressed banks deleverage

less and derisk less during a crisis is especially prominent during the most recent crisis.

   Our results are inconsistent with the “gambling for resurrection” view. Our results apply on

average to distressed banks, so that it is certainly possible, even likely, that some banks did gamble

for resurrection during the periods we examined. However, our evidence shows that this view is

not helpful to understand the behavior of the average distressed bank. Many factors can drive banks

to deleverage and derisk and we show that these factors seem more important than incentives to

gamble for resurrection. Banks in distress find it harder to operate normally, so that gambling for

resurrection would make it even harder for banks to operate. Banks gambling for resurrection

might find it difficult to attract and keep customers and counterparties would be reluctant to deal

with them. Irrespective of the regulatory regime, they would be under pressure from regulators.

Managerial reputations would be endangered. As a result, commercial and market incentives as




                                                 27
well as incentives on the part of managers may make it optimal for the typical distressed bank to

deleverage rather than gamble for resurrection.




                                                  28
References

Acharya, Viral V., Irvind Gujral, Nirupama Kulkarni, and Hyun Song Shin, 2011, Dividends and Bank
   Capital in the Financial Crisis of 2007-2009, Working Paper, New York University.
Admati, Anat R., 2014, The Compelling Case for Stronger and More Effective Leverage Regulation in
   Banking, Journal of Legal Studies 43, S35–S61.
Admati, Anat R., Peter M. Demarzo, Martin F. Hellwig, and Paul Pfleiderer, 2018, The Leverage Ratchet
   Effect, Journal of Finance 73(1), 145–198.
Adler, Barry E., 1995, A Re-Examination of Near-Bankruptcy Investment Incentives, University of
   Chicago Law Review 62(2), 575–606.
Akerlof, George A., Paul M. Romer, Robert E. Hall, and N. Gregory Mankiw, 1993, Looting: The
   Economic Underworld of Bankruptcy for Profit, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 1–73.
Akhigbe, Aigbe, and Ann Marie Whyte, 2001, The Impact of FDICIA on Bank Returns and Risk: Evidence
   from the Capital Market, Journal of Banking and Finance 25(2), 393–417.
Baldursson, Fridrik Mar, and Richard Portes, 2013, Gambling for Resurrection in Iceland: The Rise and
   Fall of the Banks, Working Paper, London Business School.
Ben-David, Itzhak, Ajay Palvia, and Chester Spatt, 2017, Banks’ Internal Capital Markets and Deposit
   Rates, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 52(5), 1797–1826.
Berger, Allen N., and Christa H. S. Bouwman, 2013, How Does Capital Affect Bank Performance During
   Financial Crises?, Journal of Financial Economics 109(1), 146–176.
Berger, Allen N., Sadok El Ghoul, Omrane Guedhami, and Raluca A. Roman, 2013, Internationalization
   and Bank Risk, Management Science 63(7), 2283–2301.
Bidder, Rhys M., John R. Krainer, and Adam H. Shapiro, 2017, De-Leveraging or De-Risking? How Banks
   Cope with Loss, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2017–03.
Bonaccorsi di Patti, Emilia, and Anil K. Kashyap, 2017, Which Banks Recover from Large Adverse
   Shocks? Working Paper, University of Chicago.
Boyd, John H., and Hendrik Hakenes, 2014, Looting and Gambling in Banking Crises, Journal of Economic
   Theory 149, 43–64.
Boyd, John H., and David E. Runkle, 1993, Size and Performance of Banking Firms: Testing the Predictions
   of Theory, Journal of Monetary Economics 31(1), 47–67.
Black, Lamont K., and Lieu N. Hazelwood, 2013, The Effect of TARP on Bank Risk-Taking, Journal of
    Financial Stability 9 (4), 790–803.
Bruche, Max, and Gerard Llobet, 2014, Preventing Zombie Lending, Review of Financial Studies 27, 923–
   956.
Colonnello, Stefano, Giuliano Curatola, and Ngoc Giang Hoang, 2017, Direct and Indirect Risk–Taking
   Incentives of Inside Debt, Journal of Corporate Finance 45(C), 428–466.
Corbett, Jenny, and Janet Mitchell, 2000, Banking Crises and Bank Rescues: The Effect of Reputation,
   Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 32, 474–512.


                                                  29
DeAngelo, Harry, Andrei S. Gonçalves, and René M. Stulz, 2018, Corporate Deleveraging and Financial
   Flexibility, Review of Financial Studies 31(8), 3122–3174.
Demirguc-Kunt, Asli, Enrica Detragiache, and Ouarda Merrouche, 2010, Lessons from the Financial Crisis,
   World Bank.
Demsetz, Rebecca, S., Marc Saidenberg, and Philip E. Strahan, 1996, Banks with Something to Lose: The
   Disciplinary Role of Franchise Value, FRBNY Economic Policy 2.2., 1–14.
Demsetz, Rebecca, S., Marc Saidenberg, and Philip E. Strahan, 1997, Agency Problems and Risk Taking
   at Banks, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report.
Demsetz, Rebecca S., and Philip E. Strahan, 1997, Diversification, Size, and Risk at Bank Holding
   Companies, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 29 (3), 300–313.
Dewatripont, Mathias, and Jean Tirole, 2012, Macroeconomic Shocks and Banking Regulation, Journal of
   Money, Credit and Banking 44(Supplement 2), 237–254.
Dinger, Valeriya, and Francesco Vallascas, 2016, Do Banks Issue Equity When They Are Poorly
   Capitalized?, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 51 (5), 1575–1609.
Downs, George W., and David M. Rocke, 1994, Conflict, Agency, and Gambling for Resurrection: The
   Principal-Agent Problem Goes to War, American Journal of Political Science 2, 362–380.
Driscoll, John C., and Aart C. Kraay, 1998, Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimation with Spatially
    Dependent Panel Data, Review of Economics and Statistics 80(4), 549–560.
Eberhart, Allan C., and Lemma W. Senbet, 1993, Absolute Priority Rule Violations and Risk Incentives for
   Financially Distressed Firms, Financial Management 101–116.
Fahlenbrach, Rüdiger, Robert Prilmeier, and René M. Stulz, 2017, Why Does Fast Loan Growth Predict
   Poor Performance for Banks?, Working Paper, The Ohio State University.
Flannery, Mark J., and Kasturi P. Rangan, 2008, What Caused the Bank Capital Build–up of the
    1990s?, Review of Finance 12, 391–429.
Freixas, Xavier, Bruno M. Parigi, and Jean–Charles Rochet, 2004, The Lender of Last Resort: A Twenty-
    First Century Approach, Journal of the European Economic Association 2, 1085–1115.
Hellmann, Thomas F., Kevin C. Murdock, and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 2000, Liberalization, Moral Hazard in
    Banking, and Prudential Regulation: Are Capital Requirements Enough?, American Economic Review
    90(1) 147–165.
Holmström, Bengt, and Jean Tirole, 2000, Liquidity and Risk Management, Journal of Money, Credit and
   Banking 32(3) 295–319.
Kane, Edward J., 1989, The S&L Insurance Mess: How Did It Happen?, The Urban Institute Press,
   Washington, D.C..
Keeley, Michael C., 1990, Deposit Insurance, Risk, and Market Power, American Economic Review 80,
   1183–1200.
Kirti, Divya, 2017, When Gambling for Resurrection is Too Risky, International Monetary Fund, Working
    Paper.




                                                  30
Koudstaal, Martin, and Sweder van Wijnbergen, 2012, On Risk, Leverage and Banks: Do Highly Leveraged
   Banks Take on Excessive Risk?, Working paper.
Laeven, Luc, and Ross Levine, 2009, Bank Governance, Regulation and Risk Taking, Journal of Financial
   Economics 93, 259–275.
Morrison, Alan D., and Lucy White, 2013, Reputational Contagion and Optimal Regulatory Forbearance,
   Journal of Financial Economics 110, 642–658.
Rochet, Jean-Charles, 1992, Capital Requirements and the Behaviour of Commercial Banks, European
   Economic Review 36, 1137–1170.
Rose-Ackerman, Susan, 1991, Risk Taking and Ruin: Bankruptcy and Investment Choice, Journal of Legal
   Studies 20, 277–310.
White, Michelle J., 1989, The Corporate Bankruptcy Decision, Journal of Economic Perspectives 3, 129–
   151.




                                                 31
                                                  Appendix A. Variable Definitions
Variable name                              Definition                                                                Source   Variables calculation
Variables of interest
Equity capital ratio                       Equity/Assets                                                               FDIC   EQ/ASSET
Z-score                                    [Mean(ROA) + Mean(Equity capital ratio)] / Std. deviation of return on FDIC        ROA=NETINC(qtr)/ASSET, Equity
                                           assets (ROA) (4 qtr)                                                               capital ratio=EQ/ASSET
Low equity capital ratio (1st decile)      Indicator variable to whether Equity capital ratio is in the 1st decile of
                                           bank-quarters
Low Z-score (1st decile)                   Indicator variable to whether Z-score is in the 1st decile of bank-quarters

Financial distress                         1st decile equity capital * 1st decile Z-score
Crisis                                     An indicator variable for the years 1988-1990 and 2009-2011
TARP                                       An indicator variable to whether the bank received TARP funds in the
                                           prior year

Dependent variables
Failure within k quarters                  Indicator to whether bank was categorized as Failed (in qtrs q+1 to q+k) FDIC      Failure as defined by FDIC

Change in equity capital ratio (q, q+k)    Equity capital ratio (q+k) - Equity capital ratio (q)
Change in log assets (q, q+k)              log(Assets) (q+k) - log(Assets) (q)                                       FDIC     Change in log(ASSET)
Change in log loans (q, q+k)               log(Loans and leases) (q+k) - log(Loans and leases) (q)                   FDIC     Change in log(LNLS)
Change in log fixed assets (q, q+k)        log(Fixed assets) (q+k) - log(Fixed assets) (q)                           FDIC     Change in log(BKPREM)
Change in log #branches (q, q+k)           log(#branches) (q+k) - log(#branches) (q)                                 FDIC     Change in log(OFFSOD)
Change in log #employees (q, q+k)          log(#employees) (q+k) - log(#employees) (q)                               FDIC     Change in log(NUMEMP)
Change in log liabilities (q, q+k)         log(Liabilities) (q+k) - log(Liabilities) (q)                             FDIC     Change in log(LIAB)
Change in log deposit rate (q, q+k)        log(Interest expense/Avg deposits) (q+k) - log(Interest expense/Avg       FDIC     Change in log(Annualized quarterly
                                           deposits) (q)                                                                      EINTEXP/Avg DEP )
Change in log deposits (q, q+k)            log(Deposits) (q+k) - log(Deposits) (q)                                   FDIC     Change in log(DEP)
Change in log other liabilities (q, q+k)   log(Other liabilities) (q+k) - log(Other liabilities) (q)                 FDIC     Change in log(LIAB-DEP)
Change in log common stock (q, q+k)        log(Common stock) (q+k) - log(Common stock) (q)                           FDIC     Change in log(EQCS)
Change in log dividends (q, q+k)           log(Dividends) (q+k) - log(Dividends) (q)                                 FDIC     Change in log(Annualized Quaretly
                                                                                                                              EQCDIV)
Change in ROA (q, q+k)                     Net income (qtr)/Total assets (q+k) - Net income (qtr)/Total assets (q)
Change in Z-score (q, q+k)                 Z-score (q+k) - Z-score (q)                                                        NETINC/ASSET
Change in performing loan ratio (q, q+k)   log(Performing loans/Assets) (q+k) - log(Performing loans/Assets) (q)     FDIC     Change in (NCLNLS/ASSET)
Change in earnings volatility (q, q+k)     (4-qtr volatility of (Earnings/Assets)) (q+k) - (4-qtr volatility of      FDIC     Change in (Std Dev of ROA)
                                           (Earnings/Assets)) (q)
Change in RWA(q, q+k)/Assets (q)           (Risk weighted-assets (q+k) - Risk weighted-assets (q))/Assets (q)        FDIC     (Change in RWA)/Assets (q)

Control variables
Log assets                                 Log(Assets)                                                                        Log(ASSET)
Assets > $50bn                             Assets greater than $50bn in 2010/Q4 qtr dollars                          FDIC     ASSET for consolidated bank or
                                                                                                                              BHC parent > $50bn
Part of MHC                                Indicator to whether parent is multibank holding company (MHC)            FDIC     HCTMULT
Deposits/Liabilities                       Ratio of Deposits to Liabilities                                          FDIC     DEP/LIAB
Loans/Assets                               Ratio of Loans to Assets                                                  FDIC     LNLS/ASSET
Core deposit ratio                         Ratio of Core deposits to Total deposits                                  FDIC     COREDEP/DEP
Metro location                             Bank headquartered in a metropolitan statistical area (MSA)               FDIC     METRO
De novo bank                               Indicator to whether the bank has a new charter from the last 5 years     FDIC     BNKAGE<=5
Charge-off rate                            Charge-Offs divided by Loan and Leases                                    FDIC     DRLNLS/LNLS
Log state per-capita income                log(Per-capita income, state level) (q-1)                                 BLS      Seasonally Adj Per Cap Income
State unemployment rate                    State unemployment rate (q-1)                                             BLS      Seasonally Adj Unemp Rate




                                                                               32
                                         Table 1. Summary Statistics
The table presents summary statistics for the samples used in the study. The data is a panel at the bank-quarter level.
Panels A and B present descriptive statistics for the sample of bank-quarters of 1985-1994 and 2005-2014,
respectively. Panels C and D present correlation tables for the sample of bank-quarters of 1985-1994 and 2005-2014,
respectively. Panel E shows summary statistics of distress variables for bank-quarters defined as distressed and non-
distressed by the different indicators. Panel F is a correlation table between variables measuring bank distress.

Panel A: Summary Statistics for 1985-1994 Sample

Variable                                         N      Mean     St Dev     p1      p10      p50      p90       p99
Equity capital ratio (%)                       487553   8.940     3.212   3.263    6.058    8.311    12.580    19.979
Z-score                                        487146   149.3    202.8      2.9     18.3     93.2    329.5     889.5
Financial distress indicator                   487553   0.041     0.198   0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000     1.000
Crisis (1988-1990)                             487553   0.303    0.460    0.000    0.000    0.000    1.000     1.000
Failure within 4 quarters                      487553   0.005     0.069   0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000     0.000
Failure within 8 quarters                      487553   0.013     0.114   0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000     1.000
Failure within 12 quarters                     487553   0.020     0.142   0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000     1.000
Change in equity capital ratio (%) (q, q+4)    469782   -0.008    1.485   -4.766   -1.221   0.107    1.084     3.253
Change in log assets (q, q+4)                  471216   0.065    0.173    -0.230   -0.046   0.048    0.181     0.605
Change in log loans (q, q+4)                   471123   0.069    0.220    -0.351   -0.106   0.060    0.234     0.691
Change in fixed assets (q, q+4)                469773   0.054     0.343   -0.511   -0.157   -0.025   0.355     1.430
Change in log #branches (q, q+4)               471135   0.037    0.185    -0.223   0.000    0.000    0.043     0.693
Change in log #employees (q, q+4)              471065   0.025    0.186    -0.336   -0.116   0.000    0.163     0.592
Change in log liabilities (q, q+4)             471208   0.065    0.191    -0.227   -0.052   0.047    0.188     0.630
Change in log deposit rate (q, q+4)            469719   -0.062   0.214    -0.517   -0.296   -0.065   0.167     0.411
Change in log deposits (q, q+4)                471148   0.064    0.195    -0.229   -0.052   0.046    0.187     0.640
Change in log other liabilities (q, q+4)       470750   0.058    0.671    -1.799   -0.566   0.016    0.750     2.239
Change in log common stock (q, q+4)            471076   0.020    0.240    -0.007   0.000    0.000    0.000     0.811
Change in log dividends (q, q+4)               467450   0.065    1.995    -6.217   -0.780   0.000    1.230     6.356
Change in log Z-score (q, q+4)                 469035   0.050    1.078    -2.839   -1.260   0.067    1.342     2.711
Change in performing-loan ratio (%) (q, q+4)   471216   0.032     1.286   -4.138   -0.936   0.029    1.060     3.574
Change in earnings volatility (q, q+4)         471199   -0.001   0.430    -1.071   -0.200   -0.004   0.175     1.215
Log assets                                     487553   6.243    1.246    3.977    4.882    6.099    7.705     10.594
Assets > $50bn                                 487553   0.014    0.117    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000     1.000
Part of MHC                                    487542   0.305    0.461    0.000    0.000    0.000    1.000     1.000
Deposits/Liabilities (%)                       487553   96.71      6.49   72.03    92.84    98.54    99.39     99.73
Loans/Assets (%)                               487459   53.88    15.12    15.80    33.34    55.26    71.89     85.07
Core deposit ratio (%)                         487553   88.59     10.37   51.21    76.57    91.29    97.72     100.00
Metro location                                 487553   0.539     0.499   0.000    0.000    1.000    1.000     1.000
De novo bank                                   487542   0.067    0.249    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000     1.000
Charge-off rate (%)                            487532   0.664    18.041   0.000    0.000    0.204    1.515     5.922
Log state per-capita income                    486923   9.755     0.184   9.347    9.525    9.759    9.988     10.142
State unemployment rate (%)                    486923   6.322     1.697   2.700    4.300    6.200    8.500     11.500




                                                          33
                                    Table 1. Summary Statistics (Cont.)

Panel B: Summary Statistics for 2005-2014 Sample

Variable                                         N      Mean     StDev     p1      p10      p50      p90      p99
Equity capital ratio (%)                       260640   10.846   3.643   4.909    7.666    10.050   14.967   24.205
Z-score                                        260340   242.4    306.8    5.0      31.6    160.5    521.8    1379.7
Financial distress indicator                   260640   0.031    0.173   0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    1.000
Crisis (2009-2011)                             260640   0.299    0.458   0.000    0.000    0.000    1.000    1.000
TARP                                           260640   0.012    0.110   0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    1.000
Failure within 4 quarters                      260640   0.004    0.067   0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000
Failure within 8 quarters                      260640   0.011    0.104   0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    1.000
Failure within 12 quarters                     260640   0.017    0.130   0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    1.000
Change in equity capital ratio (%) (q, q+4)    252508   -0.051   1.828 -5.976     -1.406   0.051    1.209    4.465
Change in log assets (q, q+4)                  252737   0.059    0.149 -0.211     -0.050   0.042    0.178    0.559
Change in log loans (q, q+4)                   252702   0.054    0.182 -0.281     -0.091   0.040    0.201    0.620
Change in fixed assets (q, q+4)                251875   0.042    0.305 -0.480     -0.125   -0.024   0.283    1.259
Change in log #branches (q, q+4)               252650   0.028    0.159 -0.288     0.000    0.000    0.095    0.693
Change in log #employees (q, q+4)              252633   0.021    0.159 -0.288     -0.095   0.000    0.141    0.542
Change in log liabilities (q, q+4)             252734   0.059    0.159 -0.219     -0.057   0.041    0.185    0.593
Change in log deposit rate (q, q+4)            251768   -0.160   0.318 -0.816     -0.472   -0.211   0.279    0.573
Change in log deposits (q, q+4)                252723   0.063    0.181 -0.218     -0.054   0.043    0.190    0.610
Change in log other liabilities (q, q+4)       252701   0.015    0.798 -2.515     -0.668   -0.005   0.723    2.767
Change in log common stock (q, q+4)            250490   0.006    0.256 -0.005     0.000    0.000    0.000    0.405
Change in log dividends (q, q+4)               251706   -0.001   2.344 -7.468     -1.061   0.000    1.041    7.473
Change in log Z-score (q, q+4)                 252160   -0.024   1.117 -3.064     -1.373   0.002    1.283    2.812
Change in performing-loan ratio (%) (q, q+4)   252737   -0.112   1.424 -5.167     -1.178   0.000    0.907    3.344
Change in earnings volatility (q, q+4)         252729   0.011    0.380 -0.936     -0.139   0.000    0.157    1.147
Change in RWA (q, q+4)/Assets (%) (q)          249808   5.224    24.718 -17.258   -5.241   2.820    15.416   57.557
Log assets                                     260640   7.390    1.333   4.929    5.913    7.241    8.941    11.845
Assets > $50bn                                 260640   0.009    0.092   0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000
Part of MHC                                    260622   0.185    0.389   0.000    0.000    0.000    1.000    1.000
Deposits/Liabilities (%)                       260640   93.45     8.14   66.39    84.38    95.88    99.63    99.90
Loans/Assets (%)                               260625   63.66    15.89   19.37    41.70    65.93    82.20    91.63
Core deposit ratio (%)                         260640   85.68    12.04   45.20    71.12    88.15    97.78    100.00
Metro location                                 260640   0.533    0.499   0.000    0.000    1.000    1.000    1.000
De novo bank                                   260622   0.053    0.224   0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    1.000
Charge-off rate (%)                            260630   0.456    49.188 0.000     0.000    0.096    0.890    3.919
Log state per-capita income                    260073   10.572   0.136 10.272     10.403   10.568   10.747   10.927
State unemployment rate (%)                    260073   6.370    2.162   3.000    4.000    5.800    9.600    11.800




                                                          34
                                         Table 1. Summary Statistics (Cont.)

Panel C: Correlation Table for 1985-1994 Sample

                                                 (1)    (2)     (3)     (4)     (5)     (6)     (7)     (8)     (9)    (10)   (11)   (12)   (13)
 (1)   Log assets                               1.00
 (2)   Assets > $50bn                           0.21    1.00
 (3)   Part of multibank holding company        0.32    0.09    1.00
 (4)   Deposits/liabilities                    -0.49   -0.22   -0.24    1.00
 (5)   Loans/assets                             0.21    0.03    0.14   -0.12    1.00
 (6)   Core deposit ratio                      -0.17   -0.10   -0.04    0.17   -0.15    1.00
 (7)   Metro location                           0.30    0.06    0.12   -0.17    0.21   -0.18    1.00
 (8)   De novo bank                            -0.10    0.00   -0.03    0.00    0.13   -0.29    0.16    1.00
 (9)   Charge-off rate                         -0.06    0.01   -0.02   -0.01    0.05   -0.11   -0.01    0.02    1.00
(10)   Log state per-capita income             -0.05   -0.01   -0.02   -0.02   -0.03    0.06   -0.14   -0.05    0.00    1.00
(11)   State unemployment rate                  0.07   -0.01    0.01    0.04   -0.03   -0.20    0.09    0.05    0.14   -0.07 1.00
(12)   Change in log state per-capita income    0.00    0.00   -0.01   -0.01    0.01    0.01   -0.03   -0.01   -0.02    0.21 -0.06 1.00
(13)   Change in state unemployment rate        0.01    0.01    0.01    0.00    0.06   -0.08    0.02    0.03   -0.02   -0.01 -0.13 0.04     1.00




Panel D: Correlation Table for 2005-2014 Sample

                                                 (1)    (2)     (3)     (4)     (5)     (6)     (7)     (8)     (9)    (10)   (11)   (12)   (13)
 (1)   Log assets                               1.00
 (2)   Assets > $50bn                           0.24    1.00
 (3)   Part of multibank holding company        0.12    0.16    1.00
 (4)   Deposits/liabilities                    -0.37   -0.15   -0.13    1.00
 (5)   Loans/assets                             0.19   -0.01    0.02   -0.16    1.00
 (6)   Core deposit ratio                      -0.13   -0.08   -0.03    0.21   -0.23    1.00
 (7)   Metro location                           0.31    0.08    0.02   -0.11    0.16   -0.12    1.00
 (8)   De novo bank                            -0.05    0.00   -0.03    0.01    0.10   -0.17    0.17    1.00
 (9)   Charge-off rate                          0.12    0.08    0.02   -0.05    0.07   -0.04    0.10    0.00    1.00
(10)   Log state per-capita income             -0.05    0.01   -0.01   -0.04   -0.02    0.05   -0.14   -0.05   -0.03    1.00
(11)   State unemployment rate                  0.16    0.02   -0.06    0.05    0.02    0.08    0.12    0.08    0.26   -0.18 1.00
(12)   Change in log state per-capita income   -0.02    0.01    0.00   -0.01    0.00    0.02   -0.03   -0.01   -0.01    0.18 -0.06 1.00
(13)   Change in state unemployment rate        0.00    0.00    0.03   -0.12    0.10   -0.27    0.02    0.07    0.01   -0.01 -0.08 -0.04 1.00




                                                                       35
                                          Table 1. Summary Statistics (Cont.)

Panel E: Summary Statistics for Distressed and Non-Distressed Banks, 1985-1994
Classification variable: Low quity capital ratio (1st decile) (q)     Low Z-score (1st decile) (q)           Financial distress (q)
                          Distressed Non-distressed t-test          Distressed Non-distressed t-test   Distressed Non-distressed      t-test
Observations:               48756           438797                   48715        438431                20193          466953
Equity capital ratio        4.970            9.381          ***       6.729        9.182        ***      4.287          9.138         ***
Z-score                    76.049           157.459         ***       9.868      164.836        ***      7.354        155.479         ***
Log assets                  6.826            6.179          ***       5.872        6.285        ***      6.167          6.247         ***
Assets > $50bn              0.035            0.012          ***       0.013        0.014         **      0.015          0.014
Part of MHC                 0.431            0.291          ***       0.241        0.313        ***      0.281          0.307         ***
Deposits/Liabilities       94.905            96.911         ***      96.999       96.684        ***     96.816         96.711         **
Loans/Assets               58.663            53.349         ***      56.820       53.554        ***     59.286         53.647         ***
Core deposit ratio         84.574            89.035         ***      86.051       88.878        ***     84.520         88.772         ***
Metro location              0.739             0.516         ***       0.577        0.534        ***      0.665          0.533         ***
De novo bank                0.085            0.065          ***       0.108        0.062        ***      0.111          0.064         ***




Panel F: Summary Statistics for Distressed and Non-Distressed Banks, 2004-2015
Classification variable: Low quity capital ratio (1st decile) (q)     Low Z-score (1st decile) (q)           Financial distress (q)
                          Distressed Non-distressed t-test          Distressed Non-distressed t-test   Distressed Non-distressed      t-test
Observations:               26064           234576                   26034        234306                 8049          252291
Equity capital ratio        6.577           11.320          ***       9.169       11.010        ***      5.656         10.991         ***
Z-score                    147.764          252.889         ***      16.996      267.412        ***     12.256        249.712         ***
Log assets                  7.627            7.364          ***       7.431        7.387        ***      7.571          7.386         ***
Assets > $50bn              0.011            0.008          ***       0.010        0.008         *       0.006          0.009         ***
Part of MHC                 0.220            0.182          ***       0.161        0.188        ***      0.128          0.187         ***
Deposits/Liabilities        91.391           93.674         ***      93.186       93.480        ***     92.844         93.470         ***
Loans/Assets               63.649           63.665                   66.668       63.331        ***     67.240         63.551         ***
Core deposit ratio          84.261           85.840         ***      85.014       85.773        ***     85.890         85.691
Metro location              0.640            0.521          ***       0.681        0.516        ***      0.746          0.525         ***
De novo bank                0.033            0.055          ***       0.081        0.049        ***      0.054          0.052




Panel G: Correlations between Bank Distress Indicators

                                                                           1985-1994                    2005-2014
                                                                     (1)      (2)    (3)          (1)      (2)    (3)
            (1) Low equity capital ratio (1st decile)               1.00                         1.00
            (2) Low Z-score (1st decile)                            0.35     1.00                0.23      1.00
            (3) Financial distress                                  0.62     0.62     1.00       0.54      0.54       1.00




                                                                    36
                           Table 2. Bank Distress Indicators and Future Failure
The table explores the ability of our indicators of bank financial distress to predict bank failure. Bank failure is defined
using the FDIC failed bank list. The data is a panel at the bank-quarter level. In Panel A, bank distress is proxied by
Low equity capital ratio, an indicator for whether the bank’s Equity capital ratio is in the bottom decile of the
distribution of the Equity capital ratio. In Panel B, bank distressed is proxied by Low Z-score, an indicator for whether
the bank’s Z-score is in the bottom decile of the distribution of the Z-score. In Panel C, Financial distress is an
indicator for whether the bank’s Equity capital ratio is in the bottom decile of the distribution of the Equity capital
ratio and Z-score is at the bottom decile of the distribution of Z-score. Standard errors are clustered by bank and
adjusted using the Driscoll-Kraay (1998) procedure for overlapping data. t-statistics are presented in parentheses.
Variable definitions are provided in Appendix A. *, **, *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
level, respectively.

Panel A: Distress Measured by Low Equity Capital Ratio

  Sample period:                                           1985-1994                              2005-2014
  Dependent variable:                                   Failure within…                        Failure within…
                                              4 quarters 8 quarters 12 quarters      4 quarters 8 quarters 12 quarters
                                                 (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)         (6)
  Low equity capital ratio (1st decile) (q-1) 0.034*** 0.074*** 0.087***             0.034*** 0.056*** 0.063***
                                               (26.36)      (27.55)     (25.63)       (18.29)      (16.84)     (15.34)

  Log assets (q-1)                          -0.002***    -0.005***    -0.006***        0.000       0.001*       0.002**
                                             (-12.70)     (-11.85)      (-10.07)      (1.09)       (1.68)        (2.03)
  Assets > $50bn (q-1)                      -0.003***    -0.006***    -0.008***       0.009*        0.012         0.015
                                              (-3.96)      (-3.38)       (-3.04)      (1.86)       (1.25)        (1.04)
  Part of MHC (q-1)                         -0.002***    -0.005***    -0.007***     -0.002***    -0.006***    -0.009***
                                              (-5.21)      (-6.15)       (-5.32)      (-3.94)      (-4.43)       (-4.87)
  Deposits/Liabilities (%) (q-1)            0.000***     0.000***      0.000***        0.000       -0.000        -0.000
                                               (2.87)       (5.57)       (6.08)       (0.42)       (-0.81)       (-1.08)
  Loans/Assets (%) (q-1)                    0.000***     0.001***      0.001***     0.000***     0.000***      0.000***
                                              (13.57)      (18.62)      (20.83)       (5.37)       (7.62)        (8.21)
  Core deposit ratio (%) (q-1)              -0.000***    -0.001***    -0.001***     -0.000***    -0.000***    -0.001***
                                              (-7.51)     (-10.87)      (-12.20)      (-3.15)      (-3.48)       (-4.94)
  Metro location (q-1)                         0.000      0.002**      0.003***     0.001***     0.004***      0.006***
                                               (0.85)       (2.11)       (2.82)       (3.21)       (3.70)        (4.03)
  De novo bank (q-1)                          -0.000      0.006**      0.014***       -0.001        0.002         0.005
                                              (-0.20)       (2.49)       (3.72)       (-0.59)      (0.45)        (1.04)
  Log state per-capita income (q-1)           0.015*     0.125***      0.372***       -0.002      0.026**      0.090***
                                               (1.65)       (5.80)      (12.13)       (-0.24)      (1.98)        (4.85)
  State unemployment rate (q-1)             0.003***     0.009***      0.013***     0.003***     0.004***       0.002**
                                              (13.39)      (16.32)      (17.27)       (7.15)       (5.34)        (2.18)

  Quarter fixed effects                        Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
  State fixed effects                          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes

  N                                           486829      486829       486829         260058      260058       260058
  R2                                           0.033       0.077        0.105          0.038       0.058        0.068



                                                            37
                      Table 2. Bank Distress Variables and Future Failure (Cont.)

Panel B: Distress Measured by Low Z-score


Sample period:                                     1985-1994                             2005-2014
Dependent variable:                             Failure within…                       Failure within…
                                      4 quarters 8 quarters 12 quarters     4 quarters 8 quarters 12 quarters
                                         (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)
Low Z-score (1st decile) (q-1)        0.035*** 0.078*** 0.094***            0.036*** 0.065*** 0.076***
                                       (27.90)      (29.68)     (28.41)      (19.46)      (18.72)     (17.54)

Log assets (q-1)                      -0.000***    -0.001**     -0.001**    0.001***    0.002***     0.003***
                                        (-2.68)      (-2.32)      (-2.32)      (3.57)     (3.67)       (3.55)
Assets > $50bn (q-1)                  -0.003***   -0.007***    -0.009***       0.006       0.007        0.009
                                        (-5.61)      (-4.70)      (-4.04)      (1.23)     (0.71)       (0.62)
Part of MHC (q-1)                       -0.001    -0.002***    -0.004***    -0.001***   -0.004***   -0.008***
                                        (-1.47)      (-2.82)      (-2.70)     (-2.83)     (-3.62)      (-4.27)
Deposits/Liabilities (%) (q-1)         0.000**    0.000***      0.000***      -0.000     -0.000*      -0.000*
                                         (2.21)      (4.92)       (5.53)      (-1.00)     (-1.78)      (-1.82)
Loans/Assets (%) (q-1)                0.000***    0.001***      0.001***     0.000**    0.000***     0.000***
                                        (12.55)     (17.78)      (20.14)       (2.03)     (5.09)       (6.32)
Core deposit ratio (%) (q-1)          -0.000***   -0.001***    -0.001***    -0.000***   -0.000***   -0.000***
                                        (-7.71)     (-11.08)     (-12.38)     (-2.79)     (-3.20)      (-4.73)
Metro location (q-1)                   0.001**    0.003***      0.004***     0.001**    0.003***     0.005***
                                         (2.35)      (3.47)       (3.87)       (2.17)     (2.67)       (3.22)
De novo bank (q-1)                      -0.001      0.005**     0.012***      -0.002      -0.001        0.003
                                        (-0.80)      (2.02)       (3.39)      (-1.63)     (-0.23)      (0.59)
Log state per-capita income (q-1)       -0.010    0.072***      0.310***       0.009    0.046***     0.113***
                                        (-1.09)      (3.38)      (10.24)       (1.42)     (3.55)       (6.13)
State unemployment rate (q-1)         0.002***    0.006***      0.010***    0.002***    0.002***        0.000
                                         (8.41)     (11.68)      (13.15)       (4.97)      (3.18)      (0.24)

Quarter fixed effects                    Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
State fixed effects                      Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes

N                                      486426      486426       486426       259758      259758      259758
R2                                      0.034       0.082        0.111        0.039       0.065       0.076




                                                     38
                   Table 2. Bank Distress Variables and Future Failure (Cont.)

Panel C: Distress Measured by Financial Distress

Sample period:                                  1985-1994                           2005-2014
Dependent variable:                          Failure within…                     Failure within…
                                    4 quarters 8 quarters 12 quarters   4 quarters 8 quarters 12 quarters
                                       (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)         (5)        (6)
Financial distress (q-1)            0.073*** 0.154*** 0.178***          0.108*** 0.174*** 0.193***
                                     (26.61)     (28.60)    (27.60)      (18.95)     (18.21)    (17.44)

Log assets (q-1)                    -0.001***   -0.002***   -0.003***   0.001***    0.002***     0.003***
                                      (-6.66)     (-6.20)     (-5.51)     (3.16)      (3.23)       (3.16)
Assets > $50bn (q-1)                -0.002***    -0.004**    -0.005**      0.008       0.010       0.012
                                      (-3.12)     (-2.53)     (-2.25)     (1.64)      (1.05)       (0.89)
Part of MHC (q-1)                    -0.001*    -0.003***   -0.004***     -0.001    -0.003***   -0.007***
                                      (-1.74)     (-3.17)     (-3.02)     (-1.56)     (-2.89)     (-3.80)
Deposits/Liabilities (%) (q-1)         0.000    0.000***     0.000***     -0.000      -0.000      -0.000*
                                      (1.31)       (4.05)      (4.78)     (-0.57)     (-1.55)     (-1.67)
Loans/Assets (%) (q-1)              0.000***    0.001***     0.001***     0.000*    0.000***     0.000***
                                     (11.00)      (16.90)     (19.73)     (1.83)      (5.30)       (6.58)
Core deposit ratio (%) (q-1)        -0.000***   -0.001***   -0.001***   -0.000***   -0.000***   -0.001***
                                      (-7.97)    (-11.46)    (-12.74)     (-3.42)     (-3.73)     (-5.18)
Metro location (q-1)                   0.000    0.002***     0.004***      0.000     0.002**     0.004***
                                      (1.32)       (2.69)      (3.32)     (0.68)      (2.06)       (2.94)
De novo bank (q-1)                    -0.000      0.005**    0.013***      0.000       0.003       0.007
                                      (-0.47)      (2.32)      (3.62)     (0.18)      (0.96)       (1.44)
Log state per-capita income (q-1)      0.004    0.101***     0.343***   0.018***    0.057***     0.125***
                                      (0.42)       (4.83)     (11.49)     (2.80)      (4.56)       (6.87)
State unemployment rate (q-1)       0.002***    0.007***     0.010***   0.001***    0.002***       -0.000
                                      (9.21)      (12.72)     (14.23)     (3.92)      (2.68)      (-0.14)

Quarter fixed effects                  Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes
State fixed effects                    Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes

N                                    486426      486426      486426      259758      259758      259758
 2
R                                     0.055       0.112       0.134       0.090       0.113      0.110




                                                   39
                                    Table 3. Do Distressed Banks Deleverage?
The table explores whether distressed banks deleverage. The dependent variable is the change in Equity capital ratio
over the four quarters following the distress quarter. The data is a panel at the bank-quarter level. Financial distress
denotes a bank that is both in the bottom decile of the distribution of the Equity capital ratio and in the bottom decile
of the Z-score distribution. Standard errors are clustered by bank and adjusted using the Driscoll-Kraay (1998)
procedure for overlapping data. t-statistics are presented in parentheses. Variable definitions are provided in Appendix
A. *, **, *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

         Dependent variable:                                        Change in equity capital ratio (%) (q, q+4)
         Sample period:                                      1985-1994              2005-2014                 2005-2014
                                                           (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)        (6)
         Financial distress (q-1)                      0.818*** 0.870*** 0.798*** 0.819*** 0.798*** 0.819***
                                                         (6.70)     (7.37)     (13.98)     (16.40)       (13.99) (16.41)
             × Crisis (q-1)                             -0.185      -0.190    -0.507*** -0.494*** -0.525*** -0.512***
                                                        (-1.16)    (-1.23)      (-4.47)    (-4.15)       (-4.74)    (-4.45)
             × TARP (q-1)                                                                               0.518*** 0.546***
                                                                                                          (3.87)     (3.97)

         Change in equity capital ratio (%) (q-4, q)                0.046***                  0.026                   0.026
                                                                      (4.27)                  (1.51)                 (1.51)
         Log assets (q-1)                               0.101***    0.094***    0.075***    0.066***   0.075***    0.066***
                                                          (9.30)      (9.37)      (4.27)      (4.46)     (4.27)      (4.43)
         Assets > $50bn (q-1)                             -0.028      -0.030      -0.171      -0.159    -0.173*      -0.161
                                                         (-0.25)     (-0.27)     (-1.69)     (-1.59)     (-1.72)     (-1.61)
         Part of MHC (q-1)                             -0.063***   -0.060***      0.027       0.027       0.027       0.027
                                                         (-3.28)     (-3.13)      (1.06)      (1.09)     (1.06)      (1.09)
         Deposits/Liabilities (%) (q-1)                  -0.007*     -0.007*     -0.005*     -0.005*    -0.004*     -0.005*
                                                         (-2.00)     (-2.02)     (-1.77)     (-1.93)     (-1.77)     (-1.93)
         Loans/Assets (%) (q-1)                        -0.008***   -0.009***      -0.001      -0.002     -0.001      -0.002
                                                         (-4.65)     (-4.82)     (-0.54)     (-0.70)     (-0.53)     (-0.69)
         Core deposit ratio (%) (q-1)                   0.006***    0.005***    0.002**       0.002     0.002**       0.002
                                                          (4.99)      (4.13)      (2.31)      (1.60)     (2.32)      (1.60)
         Metro location (q-1)                          -0.069***   -0.062***      -0.048      -0.041     -0.048      -0.041
                                                         (-6.07)     (-5.63)     (-1.38)     (-1.22)     (-1.37)     (-1.22)
         De novo bank (q-1)                            -0.910***   -0.774***   -1.354***   -1.113***   -1.354***   -1.113***
                                                        (-27.37)    (-27.84)     (-5.17)     (-5.50)     (-5.17)     (-5.51)
         TARP (q-1)                                                                                      -0.006      -0.031
                                                                                                         (-0.18)     (-0.90)
         Log state per-capita income (q-1)              -1.528** -1.461**        0.834       0.877        0.832       0.879
                                                         (-2.29)   (-2.25)       (1.18)      (1.28)      (1.18)      (1.28)
         State unemployment rate (q-1)                 -0.068*** -0.068***      -0.002      -0.004       -0.002      -0.003
                                                         (-4.55)   (-4.73)      (-0.05)     (-0.09)      (-0.05)     (-0.09)

         Quarter fixed effects                           Yes            Yes      Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
         State fixed effects                             Yes            Yes      Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes

         N                                              468728      468395      251668      251275      251668      251275
             2
         R                                               0.081      0.083        0.064       0.058       0.064       0.059




                                                                   40
                                      Table 4. How Do Distressed Banks Deleverage?
The table explores how balance sheet items evolved for distressed banks in the four quarters following distress
quarters. The data is a panel at the bank-quarter level. Panel A presents regressions for the period of 1985-1994. Panel
B presents regressions for the period of 2005-2014. The dependent variables are different balance sheet items.
Financial distress denotes a bank that is both in the bottom decile of the distribution of the Equity capital ratio and in
the bottom decile of the Z-score distribution. Standard errors are clustered by bank and adjusted using the Driscoll-
Kraay (1998) procedure for overlapping data. t-statistics are presented in parentheses. Variable definitions are
provided in Appendix A. *, **, *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel A: 1985-1994
                                                            Assets                                                    Liabilities                               Equity
Dependent variable:                                   Change in… (q, q+4)                                        Change in… (q, q+4)                      Change in… (q, q+4)
                                      Log         Log     Log fixed     Log              Log        Log         Log deposit       Log    Log other      Log common      Log
                                      assets       loans      assets  #branches     #employees    liabilities       rate      deposits    liabilities      stock     dividends
                                        (1)         (2)         (3)       (4)            (5)          (6)            (7)         (8)          (9)           (10)         (11)
Financial distress (q-1)            -0.082***   -0.087***   -0.066*** -0.035***      -0.070***   -0.094***      -0.026***    -0.092***   -0.192***        0.017*     -0.261***
                                     (-15.98)    (-14.56)     (-8.95)   (-8.00)       (-20.19)    (-13.76)        (-6.86)     (-13.19)      (-7.15)        (1.81)     (-14.20)
    × Crisis (q-1)                     0.001      -0.008      -0.002     0.000         0.005        0.007         -0.006        0.007        0.026        -0.009       -0.069
                                      (0.09)      (-0.62)     (-0.19)   (0.09)         (0.73)       (0.77)        (-0.67)      (0.75)       (0.78)        (-0.96)      (-1.47)

Lagged dependent variable (q-4,q)   0.124***    0.156***    0.032***      0.002        0.000     0.119***       -0.166***    0.107***    -0.228***       -0.045***   -0.374***
                                      (17.75)     (18.17)     (7.45)      (0.64)       (0.05)     (18.96)         (-9.05)     (10.91)     (-14.56)         (-6.35)    (-75.48)
Log assets (q-1)                    -0.007***   -0.005***     -0.000    0.005***    -0.004***    -0.006***         -0.001    -0.011***   0.031***           0.001       0.021
                                     (-10.75)     (-5.25)     (-0.18)     (9.23)      (-4.65)      (-8.30)        (-0.64)      (-7.73)      (5.82)          (1.31)     (0.95)
Assets > $50bn (q-1)                  -0.001      -0.001    -0.026***    -0.017*     -0.023**      -0.007          0.009     -0.029***      0.070           0.018       0.131
                                      (-0.11)     (-0.13)     (-3.54)    (-1.97)      (-2.41)      (-0.70)         (0.35)      (-3.05)      (1.54)          (1.18)     (0.59)
Part of MHC (q-1)                   0.015***    0.019***    0.006***    0.015***       -0.004    0.013***        0.007***    0.010***    0.051***         0.008***     -0.014
                                      (11.09)      (9.63)     (3.22)      (6.51)      (-1.19)      (8.38)          (3.97)      (7.07)       (7.57)          (3.03)     (-0.49)
Deposits/Liabilities (%) (q-1)         0.000       0.000       0.000      0.000        -0.000       0.001          0.001     -0.002***   0.015***          -0.000       0.000
                                       (0.83)      (0.01)     (0.72)      (0.09)      (-1.34)      (1.54)          (0.72)      (-5.33)     (14.23)         (-1.64)     (0.21)
Loans/Assets (%) (q-1)              0.001***    -0.001***   0.000***    0.000***     0.000***    0.001***        0.000***    0.001***      -0.000           0.000    -0.003***
                                       (4.82)    (-21.74)     (4.12)      (4.44)       (4.14)      (5.96)          (3.05)      (6.62)      (-0.08)          (0.70)     (-4.16)
Core deposit ratio (%) (q-1)        0.000***       0.000     -0.000**   -0.000**     -0.000**    0.000***         -0.001*    0.001***    -0.002***          0.000    0.004***
                                       (2.94)      (1.03)     (-2.60)    (-2.24)      (-2.68)      (2.86)         (-1.89)      (6.12)      (-9.34)          (0.85)     (4.18)
Metro location (q-1)                0.016***    0.019***    0.012***    0.010***     0.009***    0.015***          -0.000    0.016***    0.028***           0.003      -0.010
                                       (8.93)      (5.89)     (4.70)     (11.87)       (7.91)      (8.51)         (-0.00)      (9.92)       (5.44)          (1.70)     (-0.82)
De novo bank (q-1)                  0.053***    0.057***    0.028***    0.035***     0.077***    0.061***        -0.010**    0.063***    0.197***          -0.001    0.232***
                                      (16.71)     (14.03)     (3.79)      (7.62)      (30.78)     (18.72)         (-2.40)     (14.65)      (20.79)         (-0.43)     (9.68)
Log deposit rate (q-1)                                                                                                          0.007
                                                                                                                               (1.19)
Charge-off rate (q+4)               -0.001***   -0.002***
                                      (-7.59)     (-3.60)
Log state per-capita income (q-1)   -0.352***   -0.499***   -0.384***   -0.240***   -0.428***    -0.335***        -0.076     -0.319***   -0.815***          0.043    -1.940***
                                      (-3.35)     (-3.35)     (-4.17)     (-3.80)     (-3.59)      (-3.22)        (-0.83)      (-3.02)     (-4.78)          (0.92)     (-3.15)
State unemployment rate (q-1)       -0.014***   -0.028***   -0.018***   -0.005***   -0.012***    -0.014***      -0.006***    -0.013***   -0.033***       -0.004***    -0.050**
                                      (-9.46)     (-9.96)     (-7.86)     (-4.70)     (-8.16)      (-8.68)        (-2.94)      (-9.91)     (-5.98)         (-4.22)     (-2.42)

Quarter fixed effects                 Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes        Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes
State fixed effects                   Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes        Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes

N                                    470055      469992      468419      469893       469956      470133          454183      469335      468385          469962       464286
 2
R                                     0.078       0.107       0.012       0.017       0.028        0.063          0.591        0.064       0.104           0.012       0.136




                                                                                    41
                                    Table 4. How Do Distressed Banks Deleverage? (Cont.)

Panel B: 2005-2014
                                                            Assets                                                 Liabilities                            Equity
Dependent variable:                                   Change in… (q, q+4)                                     Change in… (q, q+4)                   Change in… (q, q+4)
                                        Log        Log Log fixed      Log            Log          Log         Log deposit      Log     Log other   Log common     Log
                                        assets    loans     assets #branches #employees         liabilities       rate      deposits liabilities      stock     dividends
                                          (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)              (6)             (7)         (8)       (9)           (10)         (11)
Financial distress (q-1)              -0.077*** -0.078*** -0.073*** -0.050*** -0.056***        -0.095***      -0.027***    -0.093*** -0.209***       0.027*     -0.302***
                                       (-15.31) (-12.04) (-5.44)      (-8.44)  (-19.89)         (-17.35)        (-2.88)     (-19.09) (-12.96)         (1.82)      (-4.55)
    × Crisis (q-1)                    -0.035*** -0.016** -0.006       -0.008  -0.018***        -0.033***        -0.007     -0.034*** -0.030         -0.031**      -0.130
                                        (-4.50) (-2.60) (-0.49)       (-1.41)   (-4.10)          (-4.15)        (-0.57)      (-4.81)   (-1.44)       (-2.09)      (-1.28)

Lagged dependent variable (q-4,q)     0.178***    0.200*** 0.068***     0.013***    0.031***   0.173***         0.054*     0.139***    -0.194***    -0.037***   -0.364***
                                       (23.08)     (13.64)    (8.90)      (3.08)      (3.44)    (23.78)          (1.81)      (9.49)     (-16.38)      (-3.77)    (-28.59)
Log assets (q-1)                        -0.002     0.003*     0.001     0.003***    0.003***     -0.002        -0.005**    -0.007***   0.026***       -0.001      -0.001
                                       (-1.40)      (1.88)    (0.33)      (4.18)      (3.27)    (-1.42)         (-2.22)      (-3.06)      (3.77)      (-0.92)     (-0.01)
Assets > $50bn (q-1)                    0.007       -0.012   -0.005    -0.045***    -0.025**     0.007         -0.095**       0.054       0.015       -0.008      -0.112
                                        (0.45)     (-0.78) (-0.22)       (-3.54)     (-2.12)     (0.47)         (-2.28)      (1.58)       (0.26)      (-0.57)     (-0.35)
Part of MHC (q-1)                     0.018***    0.017*** 0.024***     0.022***    0.015***   0.016***          -0.006    0.014***       0.012      0.009***     -0.014
                                       (10.94)      (7.28) (11.96)       (11.45)     (13.81)     (9.19)         (-0.94)      (7.53)       (1.46)       (2.81)     (-0.44)
Deposits/Liabilities (%) (q-1)          0.000       0.000 -0.000**        -0.000      -0.000    0.000*         0.003***    -0.003***   0.014***        0.000     0.002**
                                        (1.08)      (0.85)   (-2.27)     (-1.41)     (-1.15)     (1.83)          (4.03)      (-5.91)     (12.84)       (1.08)     (2.34)
Loans/Assets (%) (q-1)                0.001***   -0.001*** 0.000***     0.000***    0.000***   0.001***         0.001**    0.001***       0.000      0.000**       0.001
                                        (4.79)     (-3.90)    (3.08)      (3.45)      (3.67)     (4.72)          (2.67)      (3.33)       (0.23)       (2.71)     (0.56)
Core deposit ratio (%) (q-1)            -0.000   -0.000*** -0.001***   -0.000***   -0.000***     -0.000          -0.000       0.000    -0.002***       0.000      -0.002
                                       (-0.95)     (-3.57) (-2.75)       (-4.01)     (-3.39)    (-0.04)         (-1.12)      (0.14)      (-6.17)       (0.35)     (-1.30)
Metro location (q-1)                    0.002     0.007*** 0.003          0.002      0.002*      0.001           -0.000      -0.001       0.017       -0.001      -0.017
                                        (1.04)      (2.96)    (1.08)      (1.35)      (1.85)     (0.56)         (-0.04)      (-0.47)      (1.54)      (-0.94)     (-1.06)
De novo bank (q-1)                    0.080***    0.087*** 0.040***     0.073***    0.086***   0.087***          -0.009    0.095***    0.429***      0.015***   0.344***
                                        (9.51)      (7.97)    (3.84)      (7.84)      (7.82)     (8.75)         (-0.86)     (11.85)       (7.27)       (3.00)     (3.34)
Log deposit rate (q-1)                                                                                                        0.009
                                                                                                                             (0.87)
Charge-off rate (q+4)                 -0.011*** -0.024***
                                        (-2.86) (-4.58)
Log state per-capita income (q-1)       -0.034    0.042 0.089*** -0.001              -0.007      -0.044        0.112**       -0.054 0.439***          -0.031     -1.122*
                                        (-0.94)   (1.19)    (2.92)    (-0.09)       (-0.23)      (-1.27)        (2.18)       (-1.19)   (2.89)         (-0.70)     (-1.85)
State unemployment rate (q-1)         -0.007*** -0.006*** -0.010*** -0.007***       -0.003*    -0.008***      -0.008***    -0.006*** -0.038***      -0.002***   -0.058***
                                        (-4.32) (-4.83) (-9.07)       (-6.72)       (-1.73)      (-5.12)        (-2.76)      (-3.24)   (-5.67)        (-3.08)     (-3.99)

Quarter fixed effects                   Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes
State fixed effects                     Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes

N                                      251854     251829   250951       251548      251782      251885          250166      251486      251833       249568      250402
    2
R                                       0.149      0.197    0.026       0.036        0.041       0.127           0.603       0.105       0.108        0.004       0.140




                                                                                    42
                                    Table 4. How Do Distressed Banks Deleverage? (Cont.)

Panel C: 2005-2014, with TARP Interaction
                                                               Assets                                                 Liabilities                                Equity
Dependent variable:                                      Change in… (q, q+4)                                    Change in… (q, q+4)                     Change in… (q, q+4)
                                           Log       Log    Log Fixed      Log       Log               Log      Log Deposit        Log     Log Other   Log Common         Log
                                         Assets    Loans     Assets #Branches #Employees            liabilities     Rate        Deposits       Liab       Shares      Dividends
                                           (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)      (5)                (6)          (7)           (8)         (9)          (10)          (11)
Financial distress (q-1)               -0.077*** -0.078*** -0.073*** -0.050*** -0.056***           -0.095*** -0.027*** -0.093***           -0.209***      0.027*      -0.302***
                                        (-15.33) (-12.04)    (-5.44)     (-8.44)  (-19.85)          (-17.35)      (-2.89)       (-19.10)    (-12.99)       (1.81)       (-4.54)
    × Crisis                           -0.035*** -0.017** -0.007         -0.008  -0.017***         -0.033***      -0.009       -0.034***    -0.039**     -0.032**       -0.139
                                         (-4.51)   (-2.60)   (-0.57)     (-1.43)   (-4.07)           (-4.17)      (-0.75)        (-4.82)     (-2.10)      (-2.17)       (-1.38)
    × TARP                               -0.002     0.006    0.027*       0.001    -0.010             -0.009     0.072*** -0.030**         0.226***      0.023**         0.160
                                         (-0.17)   (0.34)     (1.82)      (0.25)   (-1.26)           (-0.63)       (3.22)        (-2.18)     (7.56)        (2.43)       (0.64)

Lagged dependent variable (q-4,q)      0.178***    0.200***    0.068***     0.013***    0.031***    0.173***      0.054*     0.139***      -0.194***    -0.037***    -0.364***
                                        (23.05)     (13.64)       (8.90)      (3.08)      (3.44)     (23.77)       (1.80)      (9.52)       (-16.45)      (-3.78)     (-28.66)
Log assets (q-1)                         -0.002      0.003*       0.001     0.003***    0.003***      -0.002     -0.005**    -0.007***     0.026***       -0.001         0.001
                                         (-1.33)     (1.94)       (0.34)      (4.14)      (3.14)     (-1.37)      (-2.14)      (-3.06)        (3.79)      (-0.90)       (0.02)
Assets > $50bn (q-1)                      0.007      -0.012      -0.005    -0.045***    -0.025**      0.008      -0.095**       0.055         0.015       -0.008        -0.106
                                         (0.48)      (-0.77)     (-0.22)     (-3.55)     (-2.15)      (0.50)      (-2.27)      (1.58)         (0.27)      (-0.58)      (-0.33)
Part of MHC (q-1)                      0.018***    0.017***    0.024***     0.022***    0.015***    0.016***      -0.006     0.014***         0.012      0.009***       -0.013
                                        (11.03)      (7.37)      (12.00)     (11.49)     (13.91)      (9.38)      (-0.92)      (7.52)         (1.50)       (2.82)      (-0.38)
Deposits/Liabilities (%) (q-1)            0.000       0.000     -0.000**      -0.000      -0.000     0.000*      0.003***    -0.003***     0.014***        0.000       0.002**
                                         (1.07)      (0.85)      (-2.27)     (-1.41)     (-1.15)      (1.83)       (4.01)      (-5.91)       (12.81)       (1.08)       (2.33)
Loans/Assets (%) (q-1)                 0.001***    -0.001***   0.000***     0.000***    0.000***    0.001***     0.001**     0.001***         0.000      0.000**         0.001
                                         (4.81)      (-3.90)      (3.08)      (3.45)      (3.65)      (4.74)       (2.69)      (3.34)         (0.24)       (2.72)       (0.58)
Core deposit ratio (%) (q-1)             -0.000    -0.000***   -0.001***   -0.000***   -0.000***      -0.000      -0.000        0.000      -0.002***       0.000        -0.002
                                         (-0.95)     (-3.58)     (-2.75)     (-4.01)     (-3.38)     (-0.05)      (-1.12)      (0.14)        (-6.20)       (0.35)      (-1.31)
Metro location (q-1)                      0.002    0.007***       0.003       0.002      0.002*       0.001       -0.000       -0.001         0.017       -0.001        -0.016
                                         (1.08)      (2.99)       (1.08)      (1.34)      (1.83)      (0.60)      (-0.01)      (-0.45)        (1.57)      (-0.92)      (-1.00)
De novo bank (q-1)                     0.080***    0.087***    0.040***     0.073***    0.086***    0.087***      -0.009     0.095***      0.429***      0.015***    0.344***
                                         (9.49)      (7.97)       (3.84)      (7.84)      (7.83)      (8.74)      (-0.86)     (11.84)         (7.26)       (3.00)       (3.35)
TARP (q-1)                             -0.017***    -0.009*      -0.003       0.000     0.008***   -0.017***     -0.022**     -0.012*      -0.063***      -0.003      -0.234**
                                         (-4.02)     (-2.03)     (-0.73)      (0.32)      (3.42)     (-4.45)      (-2.61)      (-1.93)       (-4.63)      (-0.61)      (-2.13)
Log deposit rate (q-1)                                                                                                          0.010
                                                                                                                               (0.87)
Charge-off rate (q+4)                  -0.011*** -0.024***
                                         (-2.86)   (-4.58)
Log state per-capita income (q-1)        -0.032     0.043  0.089***    -0.001            -0.008      -0.042      0.114**    -0.053 0.444***               -0.031      -1.098*
                                         (-0.90)   (1.22)    (2.92)    (-0.09)          (-0.26)      (-1.22)       (2.21)   (-1.16)   (2.90)              (-0.70)      (-1.82)
State unemployment rate (q-1)          -0.007*** -0.006*** -0.010*** -0.007***          -0.003*    -0.008***    -0.008*** -0.006*** -0.037***           -0.002***    -0.056***
                                         (-4.19)   (-4.78)   (-9.03)   (-6.75)          (-1.78)      (-4.97)      (-2.74)   (-3.21)   (-5.59)             (-2.98)      (-4.01)

Quarter FE                               Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes      Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
State FE                                 Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes      Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes

N                                       251854      251829      250951      251548      251782      251885        250166       251486       251833        249568      250402
    2
R                                       0.149        0.197       0.027       0.037       0.042       0.127         0.603        0.105        0.108        0.005        0.141




                                                                                       43
                                              Table 5. Risk Taking by Distressed Banks
The table explores how banks’ risk profiles change following distress quarters. The data is a panel at the bank-quarter
level. The dependent variables are measures of risk: logged Z-score, performing loans ratio, earnings volatility, and
risk-weighted-assets ratio. Financial distress denotes a bank that is both in the bottom decile of the distribution of the
Equity capital ratio and in the bottom decile of the Z-score distribution. Standard errors are clustered by bank and
adjusted using the Driscoll-Kraay (1998) procedure for overlapping data. t-statistics are presented in parentheses.
Variable definitions are provided in Appendix A. *, **, *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
level, respectively.

Sample period:                                  1985-1994                                 2005-2014                                   2005-2014
Dependent variable:                         Change in… (q, q+4)                     Change in… (q, q+4)                         Change in… (q, q+4)
                                     Log Z- Performing- Earnings      Log Z- Performing- Earnings RWA/ Assets Log Z- Performing- Earnings RWA/ Assets
                                      score loan ratio (%) volatility   score loan ratio (%) volatility  (q) (%)     score loan ratio (%) volatility (q) (%)
                                        (1)        (2)          (3)      (4)        (5)           (6)       (7)        (8)       (9)          (10)      (11)
Financial distress (q-1)            0.839*** 0.504*** -0.329*** 0.841***           0.242      -0.236*** -7.061***  0.841***     0.242     -0.236*** -7.065***
                                     (15.93)     (6.45)      (-38.80) (13.75)     (0.92)       (-10.90)   (-8.87)   (13.74)    (0.92)      (-10.88)   (-8.87)
    × Crisis (q-1)                    0.086      -0.045       -0.013 -0.349***    -0.298      -0.090*** -2.624*** -0.359***    -0.281     -0.076*** -2.718***
                                      (1.16)     (-0.71)      (-0.75)  (-4.62)    (-0.90)       (-3.44)   (-3.67)   (-4.67)    (-0.86)      (-2.91)   (-3.82)
    × TARP (q-1)                                                                                                   0.363**    -0.557*     -0.449***    1.667
                                                                                                                     (2.44)    (-1.98)      (-5.58)   (1.28)

Log assets (q-1)                     -0.016**   -0.008    0.006***     -0.002     -0.030     0.002       0.048      -0.003     -0.029       0.003       0.067
                                      (-2.30)   (-1.38)      (3.71)   (-0.14)     (-1.21)    (0.84)      (0.18)    (-0.20)     (-1.15)      (1.03)     (0.26)
Assets > $50bn (q-1)                 0.112*** 0.153***     -0.029**    0.109      0.281*     -0.015      -2.162     0.103      0.288*      -0.011      -2.081
                                       (2.88)   (3.90)      (-2.47)    (1.10)     (1.97)    (-0.34)     (-1.15)     (1.08)     (2.00)      (-0.27)     (-1.08)
Part of MHC (q-1)                      0.008     0.017      -0.008*    0.013       0.010     -0.002    2.796***     0.012       0.011      -0.002    2.816***
                                       (0.99)   (0.83)      (-1.76)    (1.33)     (1.06)    (-0.48)     (18.85)     (1.18)     (1.23)      (-0.38)    (18.49)
Deposits/Liabilities (%) (q-1)         0.001   -0.001**      -0.000   0.003**   0.002***    -0.001*      -0.016   0.003**    0.002***     -0.001*      -0.017
                                       (1.31)   (-2.51)     (-0.93)    (2.65)     (2.95)    (-1.81)     (-0.98)     (2.69)     (2.90)      (-1.86)     (-1.02)
Loans/Assets (%) (q-1)              -0.005*** -0.005***   0.002***    -0.002*    -0.005*    0.001**     0.044*     -0.002*    -0.005*     0.001**      0.044*
                                      (-4.91)   (-4.31)      (5.18)   (-1.93)     (-2.04)    (2.35)      (1.95)    (-1.93)     (-2.03)      (2.34)     (1.98)
Core deposit ratio (%) (q-1)         0.006*** 0.011***    -0.002***   0.001**   0.005***     -0.000   -0.053***   0.001**    0.005***      -0.000    -0.053***
                                       (4.92)   (4.62)      (-2.76)    (2.13)     (7.40)    (-1.59)     (-3.50)     (2.16)     (7.39)      (-1.61)     (-3.53)
Metro location (q-1)                  -0.019    -0.022        0.005   -0.023*     -0.031     0.009     0.632**     -0.024*     -0.030       0.009     0.642**
                                      (-1.57)   (-0.90)      (1.25)   (-1.93)     (-0.82)    (1.69)      (2.27)    (-1.94)     (-0.81)      (1.69)     (2.34)
De novo bank (q-1)                   -0.035** -0.183***       0.010    0.054    -0.216***    -0.017   14.288***     0.054    -0.216***     -0.017    14.284***
                                      (-2.51)   (-9.11)      (1.42)    (0.97)     (-3.72)   (-1.62)     (11.06)     (0.98)     (-3.69)     (-1.61)    (11.04)
TARP (q-1)                                                                                                        0.151***    -0.163*    -0.058***   -2.981***
                                                                                                                    (3.20)     (-1.97)     (-2.83)     (-5.94)
Log state per-capita income (q-1)   -1.644*** -4.226***   0.465***    -0.338    -2.720***   0.124       6.976*      -0.355   -2.701***      0.132     7.266**
                                      (-3.12)   (-3.51)    (3.24)     (-0.70)     (-3.05)   (1.03)       (1.98)    (-0.74)     (-3.03)      (1.09)     (2.05)
State unemployment rate (q-1)       -0.029***   -0.025    0.012***     0.004      -0.008    0.000     -0.984***     0.003      -0.007       0.001    -0.963***
                                      (-2.81)   (-0.98)    (3.67)      (0.21)     (-0.27)   (0.09)      (-6.44)     (0.15)     (-0.23)      (0.17)     (-6.03)

Quarter fixed effects                 Yes       Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes
State fixed effects                   Yes       Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes

N                                    468337    470142      470127     251607     251889     251881     248988     251607      252181      252173      249274
    2
R                                    0.039      0.040      0.031       0.056      0.081      0.033      0.045      0.056      0.081       0.034        0.045




                                                                                44
                        Figure 1. Bank Failures over Time and Crisis Periods
The chart presents the number of bank failures over time (all bars). The yellow bars (with dark frame) represent the
years we define as crisis years.




                                                         45
                                   Figure 2. Distressed Banks over Time
The chart presents the fraction of distressed banks over time. Our indicators of financial distress are banks in the
bottom decile of the Equity capital ratio, in the bottom decile of the Z-score, and banks that are in the bottom decile
of both the Equity capital ratio and the Z-score (Financial distress indicator).

Figure 2a. Fraction of Distressed Banks, by Distress Measure (1985-1994)




Figure 2b. Fraction of Distressed Banks, by Distress Measure (2005-2014)




                                                          46
Do Distressed Banks Really Gamble for Resurrection?
        Itzhak Ben-David, Ajay A. Palvia, and René M. Stulz*




                      Internet Appendix




                                47
                   Internet Appendix Table A1. Additional Specifications of Table 2
The table presents additional variations to the main analysis presented in Table 2: exploring the ability of measures of
bank distress to predict bank failure. Bank failure is defined using the FDIC failed bank list. Standard errors are
clustered by bank and adjusted using the Driscoll-Kraay (1998) procedure for overlapping data. t-statistics are
presented in parentheses. Variable definitions are provided in Appendix A. *, **, *** denote statistical significance
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel A: Main Distress Variable: Low Equity Capital Ratio, with a Crisis Interaction

Sample period:                                            1985-1994                            2005-2014
Dependent variable:                                    Failure within…                      Failure within…
                                              4 quarters 8 quarters 12 quarters    4 quarters 8 quarters 12 quarters
                                                  (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)
Low equity capital ratio (1st decile) (q-1)   0.032*** 0.068*** 0.081***           0.017*** 0.029*** 0.032***
                                               (20.79)      (23.04)    (22.45)      (11.25)      (10.88)     (9.29)
  × Crisis (q-1)                              0.007*** 0.018*** 0.017***           0.057*** 0.091*** 0.102***
                                                (2.86)       (3.87)     (3.03)      (11.64)      (11.60)    (11.58)

Bank-quarter and state-quarter controls         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
Quarter fixed effects                           Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
State fixed effects                             Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes

N                                              486829     486829       486829        260058      260058      260058
R2                                              0.033      0.078        0.105         0.052       0.072       0.079

Panel B: Main Distress Variable: Low Z-score, with a Crisis Interaction

Sample period:                                            1985-1994                             2005-2014
Dependent variable:                                    Failure within…                       Failure within…
                                              4 quarters 8 quarters 12 quarters     4 quarters 8 quarters 12 quarters
                                                  (1)          (2)       (3)            (4)          (5)        (6)
Low Z-score (1st decile) (q-1)                0.031*** 0.068*** 0.085***            0.028*** 0.057*** 0.068***
                                               (21.87)      (24.20)    (24.77)       (12.26)      (13.85)    (13.52)
  × Crisis (q-1)                              0.011*** 0.032*** 0.028***            0.015*** 0.016*** 0.017***
                                                (4.11)       (5.74)     (4.46)        (4.17)       (2.84)     (2.69)

Bank-quarter and state-quarter controls         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
Quarter fixed effects                           Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
State fixed effects                             Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes

N                                              486426     486426       486426        259758      259758      259758
R2                                              0.034      0.083        0.112         0.040       0.066       0.076




                                                          48
            Internet Appendix Table A1. Additional Specifications of Table 2 (Cont.)

Panel C: Main Distress Variable: Financial Distress, with a Crisis Interaction

Sample period:                                     1985-1994                          2005-2014
Dependent variable:                             Failure within…                    Failure within…
                                        4 quarters 8 quarters 12 quarters 4 quarters 8 quarters 12 quarters
                                            (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)          (5)       (6)
Financial distress (q-1)                0.070*** 0.143*** 0.169*** 0.084*** 0.136*** 0.149***
                                         (20.63)     (23.33)    (23.68)    (11.72)      (12.15)   (11.71)
    × Crisis (q-1)                        0.009     0.031*** 0.025**      0.042*** 0.066*** 0.078***
                                          (1.63)      (3.20)     (2.33)     (4.15)       (4.41)    (4.83)

Bank-quarter and state-quarter contro     Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes
Quarter fixed effects                     Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes
State fixed effects                       Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes

N                                        486426     486426     486426      259758     259758     259758
 2
R                                         0.055      0.112      0.135       0.093      0.116      0.113




                                                     49
                   Internet Appendix Table A2. Additional Specifications of Table 3
The table presents additional variations to the main analysis presented in Table 3: exploring whether distressed banks
deleverage. Standard errors are clustered by bank and adjusted using the Driscoll-Kraay (1998) procedure for
overlapping data. t-statistics are presented in parentheses. Variable definitions are provided in Appendix A. *, **, ***
denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel A: Main Distress Variable: Low Equity Capital Ratio, with Crisis Interaction

Dependent variable:                                           Change in equity capital ratio (%) (q, q+4)
Sample period:                                      1985-1994                 2005-2014                   2005-2014
                                                  (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)             (5)        (6)
Low equity capital ratio (1st decile) (q-1)   0.651*** 0.676***        0.618*** 0.615***           0.618*** 0.615***
                                               (11.28)     (12.50)        (8.53)       (8.21)         (8.53)      (8.22)
  × Crisis (q-1)                                -0.068      -0.079       -0.157       -0.141         -0.173*     -0.159*
                                               (-0.84)     (-1.01)       (-1.51)      (-1.48)        (-1.73)     (-1.75)
  × TARP (q-1)                                                                                     0.477*** 0.494***
                                                                                                      (4.78)      (5.14)
Change in equity capital ratio (%) (q-4, q)               0.043***                     0.025                      0.025
                                                            (4.00)                     (1.40)                     (1.40)

Bank-quarter and state-quarter controls          Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes
Quarter fixed effects                            Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes
State fixed effects                              Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes

N                                              469080      468554        251954      251320        251668       251275
R2                                              0.085       0.087         0.075       0.064         0.075        0.064

Panel B: Main Distress Variable: Low Z-score, with Crisis Interaction

Dependent variable:                                           Change in equity capital ratio (%) (q, q+4)
Sample period:                                      1985-1994                 2005-2014                   2005-2014
                                                  (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)            (5)         (6)
Low Z-score (1st decile) (q-1)                 0.233** 0.254***           0.154       0.160*          0.155      0.160*
                                                (2.68)      (3.07)        (1.59)       (1.71)         (1.59)      (1.71)
  × Crisis (q-1)                                0.048       0.052        -0.005       -0.013          0.008      -0.002
                                                (0.43)      (0.48)       (-0.04)      (-0.11)         (0.07)     (-0.02)
  × TARP (q-1)                                                                                       -0.215*     -0.179
                                                                                                     (-1.82)     (-1.59)
Change in equity capital ratio (%) (q-4, q)               0.040***                     0.023                      0.023
                                                            (3.81)                     (1.36)                     (1.36)

Bank-quarter and state-quarter controls          Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes
Quarter fixed effects                            Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes
State fixed effects                              Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes

N                                               468728      468395       251668       251275        251668      251275
R2                                               0.075       0.076        0.062        0.056         0.062       0.056



                                                          50
           Internet Appendix Table A2. Additional Specifications of Table 3 (Cont.)

Panel C: Main Distress Variable: Low Equity Capital Ratio, without Crisis Interaction

      Dependent variable:                              Change in equity capital ratio (%) (q, q+4)
      Sample period:                                     1985-1994                   2005-2014
                                                       (1)         (2)             (3)         (4)
      Low equity capital ratio (1st decile) (q-1)   0.627*** 0.648***         0.572*** 0.574***
                                                     (22.18)     (24.18)         (9.19)       (8.78)
      Change in equity capital ratio (%) (q-4, q)               0.043***                      0.025
                                                                  (3.99)                      (1.43)

      Bank-quarter and state-quarter controls         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
      Quarter fixed effects                           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
      State fixed effects                             Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes

      N                                              469080      468554        251954      251320
      R2                                              0.085       0.087         0.075       0.064

Panel D: Main Distress Variable: Low Z-score, without Crisis Interaction

      Dependent variable:                              Change in equity capital ratio (%) (q, q+4)
      Sample period:                                      1985-1994                  2005-2014
                                                        (1)        (2)            (3)           (4)
      Low Z-score (1st decile) (q-1)                0.247*** 0.269***         0.152*** 0.153***
                                                      (4.35)      (4.99)         (3.27)       (3.57)
      Change in equity capital ratio (%) (q-4, q)               0.040***                      0.023
                                                                  (3.81)                      (1.37)

      Bank-quarter and state-quarter controls         Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes
      Quarter fixed effects                           Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes
      State fixed effects                             Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes

      N                                              468728      468395        251668      251275
      R2                                              0.075       0.076         0.062       0.056




                                                    51
            Internet Appendix Table A2. Additional Specifications of Table 3 (Cont.)

Panel E: Main Distress Variable: Financial Distress, without Crisis Interaction

        Dependent variable:                             Change in equity capital ratio (%) (q, q+4)
        Sample period:                                      1985-1994                2005-2014
                                                          (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)
        Financial distress (q-1)                       0.751*** 0.801*** 0.519*** 0.548***
                                                        (11.65)    (12.42)       (4.90)     (5.48)
        Change in equity capital ratio (%) (q-4, q)               0.046***                  0.027
                                                                    (4.27)                  (1.56)

        Bank-quarter and state-quarter controls             Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes
        Quarter fixed effects                               Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes
        State fixed effects                                 Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes

        N                                                  468728    468395     251668      251275
          2
        R                                                  0.081     0.083       0.063       0.058

Panel F: Main Distress Variable: Low Equity Capital Ratio; 1-Quarter Horizon

Dependent variable:                                          Change in equity capital ratio (%) (q, q+1)
Sample period:                                    1985-1994                  2005-2014                   2005-2014
                                                (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)            (5)         (6)
Low equity capital ratio (1st decile) (q-1) 0.190*** 0.166***         0.191*** 0.186***           0.191*** 0.186***
                                             (10.52)       (8.59)       (14.84)      (12.82)        (14.84)     (12.82)
 × Crisis (q-1)                               -0.030      -0.024      -0.102*** -0.108*** -0.112*** -0.118***
                                             (-1.13)      (-0.89)       (-5.19)      (-4.89)        (-6.66)     (-6.30)
 × TARP (q-1)                                                                                     0.274*** 0.268***
                                                                                                     (4.51)      (4.12)
Change in equity capital ratio (%) (q-4, q)             -0.081***                     -0.027                     -0.027
                                                         (-13.39)                    (-1.34)                    (-1.34)

Bank-quarter and state-quarter controls        Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes             Yes       Yes
Quarter fixed effects                          Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes             Yes       Yes
State fixed effects                            Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes             Yes       Yes

N                                            486829         486829     260058      260058        260058       260058
R2                                            0.061          0.067      0.046       0.047         0.047        0.047




                                                      52
              Internet Appendix Table A2. Additional Specifications of Table 3 (Cont.)

Panel G: Main Distress Variable: Low Z-score; 1-Quarter Horizon

Dependent variable:                                                 Change in equity capital ratio (%) (q, q+1)
Sample period:                                           1985-1994                  2005-2014                   2005-2014
                                                      (1)          (2)            (3)          (4)            (5)        (6)
Low Z-score (1st decile) (q-1)                     0.043**        0.030       0.063**      0.062**        0.063**     0.062**
                                                    (2.17)        (1.26)        (2.46)       (2.13)         (2.46)     (2.13)
 × Crisis (q-1)                                     -0.011       -0.013        -0.071*     -0.077*         -0.069*    -0.075*
                                                    (-0.39)      (-0.40)       (-2.04)      (-1.97)        (-2.01)     (-1.94)
 × TARP (q-1)                                                                                               -0.036    -0.045*
                                                                                                           (-1.63)     (-1.90)
Change in equity capital ratio (%) (q-4, q)                    -0.092***                  -0.054***                  -0.054***
                                                                (-15.81)                    (-3.33)                    (-3.33)

Bank-quarter and state-quarter controls              Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes
Quarter fixed effects                                Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes
State fixed effects                                  Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes

N                                                  486426      486426        259758       259758        259758       259758
R2                                                  0.058       0.066         0.042        0.045         0.042        0.045

Panel H: Main Distress Variable: Financial Distress; 1-Quarter Horizon

     Dependent variable:                                          Change in equity capital ratio (%) (q, q+1)
     Sample period:                                        1985-1994               2005-2014                2005-2014
                                                         (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)
     Financial distress (q-1)                        0.179*** 0.136*** 0.192*** 0.172*** 0.192*** 0.172***
                                                       (4.88)      (3.52)      (5.05)      (4.57)       (5.04)     (4.56)
         × Crisis (q-1)                               -0.062      -0.052    -0.220*** -0.233*** -0.230*** -0.242***
                                                      (-1.33)     (-1.05)     (-5.20)     (-4.99)      (-5.26)     (-5.10)
         × TARP (q-1)                                                                                 0.274*** 0.254***
                                                                                                        (3.38)     (2.89)
     Change in equity capital ratio (%) (q-4, q)                -0.090***               -0.053***                -0.053***
                                                                 (-15.39)                 (-3.32)                  (-3.31)

     Bank-quarter and state-quarter controls            Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
     Quarter fixed effects                              Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
     State fixed effects                                Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes

     N                                                486426     486426       259758     259758       259758     259758
      2
     R                                                 0.059      0.067        0.042      0.045        0.042      0.045




                                                               53
             Internet Appendix Table A2. Additional Specifications of Table 3 (Cont.)

Panel I: Main Distress Variable: Financial Distress; PCA Banks Excluded

Dependent variable:                                            Change in equity capital ratio (%) (q, q+1)
Sample period:                                                                  2005-2014
Distress indicator:                            Equity capital ratio            Z-score
                                                (1st decile) (q-1)       (1st decile) (q-1)      Financial distress (q-1)
                                                  (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)            (6)
Distress indicator (q-1)                      0.181*** 0.177***         0.046*        0.049      0.209***       0.196***
                                               (12.08)     (10.72)       (1.79)       (1.67)       (6.25)         (6.03)
    × Crisis (q-1)                              0.025       0.024       -0.005       -0.005        -0.063         -0.065
                                                (0.92)      (0.84)      (-0.15)      (-0.14)      (-1.50)        (-1.47)
    × TARP (q-1)                              0.240*** 0.233*** -0.063*** -0.077***              0.256***        0.234**
                                                (4.45)      (4.09)      (-3.01)      (-3.44)       (3.15)         (2.73)
Change in equity capital ratio (%) (q-4, q)                 -0.029                 -0.056***                   -0.055***
                                                           (-1.40)                   (-3.42)                     (-3.38)

Bank-quarter and state-quarter controls         Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes            Yes           Yes
Quarter fixed effects                           Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes            Yes           Yes
State fixed effects                             Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes            Yes           Yes

N                                             253921      253921       253627      253627        253627        253627
    2
R                                              0.050       0.051        0.045       0.048         0.046         0.049




                                                           54
                         Internet Appendix Table A3. Additional Specifications of Table 4
The table presents additional variations to the main analysis presented in Table 4: exploring how the balance sheet
items of banks in distress change over time. Standard errors are clustered by bank and adjusted using the Driscoll-
Kraay (1998) procedure for overlapping data. t-statistics are presented in parentheses. Variable definitions are
provided in Appendix A. *, **, *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel A: Main Distress Variable: Low Equity Capital Ratio, with Crisis Interaction; 1985-
1994
                                                                    Assets                                         Liabilities                              Equity
Dependent variable:                                           Change in… (q, q+4)                            Change in… (q, q+4)                   Change in… (q, q+4)
                                                 Log      Log     Log fixed      Log     Log        Log     Log deposit       Log     Log other Log common           Log
                                                assets   loans      assets #branches #employees liabilities     rate       deposits    liabilities    stock      dividends
                                                 (1)      (2)         (3)        (4)     (5)        (6)         (7)           (8)          (9)         (10)          (11)
Low equity capital ratio (1st decile) (q-1) -0.033*** -0.022*** St Dev -0.019*** -0.024*** -0.043*** -0.010* -0.041***                -0.059***    0.016*** -0.247***
                                              (-12.31)  (-4.38)    (-5.42)    (-13.26) (-5.07)   (-19.65)     (-1.93)      (-21.39)      (-5.80)     (2.85)        (-7.86)
 × Crisis (q-1)                              -0.016** -0.024** -0.022*** -0.008***     -0.009    -0.011*      -0.011        -0.010     -0.042**      -0.005        -0.054
                                               (-2.57)  (-2.35)    (-4.08)     (-3.12) (-1.09)    (-1.79)     (-1.00)       (-1.67)      (-2.16)    (-0.92)        (-0.88)

Bank-quarter and state-quarter controls     Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Quarter fixed effects                       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
State fixed effects                         Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes

N                                          470419    470337     468768     470261        470316    470501      454498     469679       468744        470326      464651
R2                                          0.075     0.102      0.011      0.017         0.026     0.059       0.590      0.061        0.102         0.012       0.136


Panel B: Main Distress Variable: Low Z-score, with Crisis Interaction; 1985-1994
                                                                  Assets                                         Liabilities                          Equity
Dependent variable:                                         Change in… (q, q+4)                            Change in… (q, q+4)                Change in… (q, q+4)
                                              Log       Log     Log fixed      Log      Log       Log     Log deposit       Log   Log other Log common         Log
                                             assets    loans      assets #branches #employees liabilities     rate       deposits liabilities   stock      dividends
                                              (1)       (2)         (3)        (4)      (5)       (6)         (7)           (8)       (9)        (10)          (11)
Low Z-score (1st decile) (q-1)            -0.054*** -0.066*** -0.052*** -0.022*** -0.045*** -0.059*** -0.019*** -0.060*** -0.108***             0.004      -0.141***
                                           (-19.15) (-14.99) (-12.52) (-10.10)       (-25.44)  (-12.87)     (-7.27)      (-16.73)   (-6.17)    (1.12)        (-7.45)
 × Crisis (q-1)                             -0.008    -0.012     -0.004     -0.007**  -0.009    -0.007      -0.008        -0.000    -0.009     -0.003       -0.079*
                                            (-1.61)   (-1.57)    (-0.45)     (-2.71)  (-1.64)   (-1.10)     (-1.24)       (-0.08)   (-0.35)    (-0.53)       (-1.93)

Bank-quarter and state-quarter controls     Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes
Quarter fixed effects                       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes
State fixed effects                         Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes

N                                          470055    469992     468419     469893        469956    470133      454183     469335       468385       469962       464286
R2                                          0.079     0.110      0.013      0.017         0.029     0.063       0.591      0.064        0.103        0.011        0.135




                                                                                    55
                  Internet Appendix Table A3. Additional Specifications of Table 4 (Cont.)

Panel C: Main Distress Variable: Low Equity Capital Ratio, with Crisis Interaction; 2005-
2014
                                                                    Assets                                            Liabilities                                 Equity
Dependent variable:                                           Change in… (q, q+4)                               Change in… (q, q+4)                      Change in… (q, q+4)
                                                Log       Log     Log fixed     Log      Log           Log     Log deposit       Log     Log other      Log common         Log
                                               assets    loans      assets #branches #employees    liabilities     rate       deposits   liabilities        stock      dividends
                                                (1)       (2)         (3)       (4)      (5)           (6)         (7)           (8)         (9)             (10)          (11)
Low equity capital ratio (1st decile) (q-1) -0.024*** -0.014* -0.018** -0.013*** -0.009**         -0.032*** -0.012*** -0.032***          -0.055**         0.008*       -0.187***
                                              (-3.68)   (-2.03)    (-2.13)    (-2.75)  (-2.27)       (-3.97)     (-4.74)       (-4.35)     (-2.50)         (1.85)        (-8.08)
 × Crisis (q-1)                             -0.047*** -0.038*** -0.023** -0.020*** -0.031***      -0.051*** -0.015*** -0.046***          -0.073**          -0.002       -0.136**
                                              (-6.24)   (-4.90)    (-2.45)    (-3.42)  (-6.18)       (-5.69)     (-4.53)       (-5.93)     (-2.44)        (-0.19)        (-2.44)

Bank-quarter and state-quarter controls     Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes
Quarter fixed effects                       Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes
State fixed effects                         Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes

N                                          252146    252102    251234     251835     252071        252177       250387      251772        252125          249850       250691
R2                                          0.149     0.194     0.025      0.035      0.039         0.130        0.602       0.106         0.106           0.005        0.140


Panel D: Main Distress Variable: Low Z-score, with Crisis Interaction; 2005-2014
                                                                  Assets                                              Liabilities                                 Equity
Dependent variable:                                         Change in… (q, q+4)                                 Change in… (q, q+4)                      Change in… (q, q+4)
                                              Log       Log     Log fixed     Log      Log             Log     Log deposit       Log     Log other      Log common         Log
                                             assets    loans      assets #branches #employees      liabilities     rate       deposits    liabilities       stock      dividends
                                              (1)       (2)         (3)        (4)     (5)             (6)         (7)           (8)          (9)            (10)          (11)
Low Z-score (1st decile) (q-1)            -0.035*** -0.036*** -0.040*** -0.028*** -0.035***       -0.044*** -0.008* -0.045***            -0.101***         0.007       -0.241**
                                            (-6.68)   (-7.30)    (-6.39)    (-8.33)  (-5.58)         (-7.62)     (-1.71)       (-9.54)      (-4.23)        (1.66)        (-2.70)
 × Crisis (q-1)                           -0.034*** -0.025*** -0.006         -0.007  -0.006       -0.035*** -0.019*** -0.037***          -0.078***       -0.012**        -0.101
                                            (-4.50)   (-3.72)    (-0.87)    (-1.31)  (-0.74)         (-4.12)     (-3.05)       (-4.87)      (-2.78)       (-2.07)        (-0.90)

Bank-quarter and state-quarter controls     Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes              Yes         Yes
Quarter fixed effects                       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes              Yes         Yes
State fixed effects                         Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes              Yes         Yes

N                                          251854    251829    250951     251548        251782      251885      250166       251486        251833          249568       250402
R2                                          0.149     0.197     0.026      0.036         0.041       0.127       0.603        0.106         0.108           0.004        0.141




                                                                                   56
                 Internet Appendix Table A3. Additional Specifications of Table 4 (Cont.)

Panel E: Main Distress Variable: Low Equity Capital Ratio, without Crisis Interaction;
1985-1994
                                                                     Assets                                           Liabilities                             Equity
Dependent variable:                                           Change in… (q, q+4)                               Change in… (q, q+4)                   Change in… (q, q+4)
                                                Log       Log     Log fixed    Log       Log          Log      Log deposit      Log    Log other     Log common       Log
                                              assets     loans      assets #branches #employees    liabilities     rate       deposits liabilities       stock     dividends
                                                (1)       (2)         (3)       (4)      (5)           (6)         (7)           (8)       (9)           (10)         (11)
Low equity capital ratio (1st decile) (q-1) -0.039*** -0.031*** -0.025*** -0.021*** -0.027***     -0.047*** -0.014*** -0.044*** -0.074***             0.014*** -0.266***
                                             (-14.46)   (-7.97)    (-11.00) (-11.95)   (-9.10)      (-18.05)     (-4.52)      (-14.92)   (-7.57)        (3.53)      (-14.73)

Bank-quarter and state-quarter controls     Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes
Quarter fixed effects                       Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes
State fixed effects                         Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes

N                                          470419    470337    468768     470261        470316     470501       454498      469679      468744         470326      464651
R2                                          0.074     0.102     0.011      0.017         0.026      0.059        0.590       0.061       0.102          0.012       0.136


Panel F: Main Distress Variable: Low Z-score, without Crisis Interaction; 1985-1994
                                                                  Assets                                             Liabilities                              Equity
Dependent variable:                                         Change in… (q, q+4)                                 Change in… (q, q+4)                   Change in… (q, q+4)
                                              Log       Log     Log fixed    Log       Log            Log      Log deposit     Log    Log other      Log common        Log
                                            assets     loans      assets #branches #employees      liabilities    rate       deposits liabilities       stock      dividends
                                              (1)       (2)         (3)       (4)       (5)            (6)         (7)          (8)       (9)            (10)         (11)
Low Z-score (1st decile) (q-1)            -0.082*** -0.090*** -0.067*** -0.035*** -0.068***       -0.061*** -0.028*** -0.089*** -0.182***              0.014*      -0.286***
                                           (-19.66) (-12.42) (-11.05) (-11.75)       (-23.39)       (-14.87)    (-10.26)     (-15.64)   (-8.35)         (2.04)      (-15.87)

Bank-quarter and state-quarter controls     Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes
Quarter fixed effects                       Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes
State fixed effects                         Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes

N                                          470055    469992    468419     469893        469956     470133       454183      469335      468385         469962      464286
R2                                          0.079     0.110     0.013      0.017         0.029      0.063        0.591       0.064       0.103          0.011       0.135




                                                                                   57
                 Internet Appendix Table A3. Additional Specifications of Table 4 (Cont.)

Panel G: Main Distress Variable: Financial Distress, without Crisis Interaction; 1985-1994
                                                                 Assets                                             Liabilities                               Equity
Dependent variable:                                        Change in… (q, q+4)                                Change in… (q, q+4)                     Change in… (q, q+4)
                                             Log       Log     Log fixed    Log      Log             Log      Log deposit Log         Log other     Log common         Log
                                            assets    loans     assets #branches #employees       liabilities    rate        deposits liabilities      stock       dividends
                                              (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)            (6)          (7)           (8)       (9)           (10)           (11)
Financial Distress                        -0.056*** -0.069*** -0.053*** -0.024*** -0.048***      -0.091*** -0.022*** -0.060*** -0.111***               0.003       -0.164***
                                           (-18.27) (-13.55) (-15.94) (-10.48) (-16.18)           (-17.08)     (-10.28) (-18.34)        (-6.83)        (1.16)        (-8.74)

Bank-quarter and state-quarter controls     Yes       Yes      Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes
Quarter fixed effects                       Yes       Yes      Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes
State fixed effects                         Yes       Yes      Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes

N                                          470055   469992    468419     469893     469956        470133       454183      469335      468385         469962       464286
 2
R                                          0.078     0.107     0.012     0.017       0.028         0.063        0.591       0.064       0.104          0.012        0.136


Panel H: Main Distress Variable: Low Equity Capital Ratio, without Crisis Interaction;
2005-2014
                                                                   Assets                                            Liabilities                             Equity
Dependent variable:                                          Change in… (q, q+4)                               Change in… (q, q+4)                   Change in… (q, q+4)
                                               Log       Log     Log fixed     Log      Log           Log     Log deposit       Log   Log other     Log common        Log
                                              assets    loans      assets #branches #employees    liabilities     rate       deposits liabilities       stock     dividends
                                               (1)       (2)         (3)       (4)      (5)           (6)         (7)           (8)       (9)           (10)          (11)
Low equity capital ratio (1st decile) (q-1 -0.038*** -0.025*** -0.025*** -0.019*** -0.018***     -0.047*** -0.016*** -0.046*** -0.076***              0.007*      -0.226***
                                             (-4.25)   (-3.11)    (-3.22)    (-3.68)  (-3.04)       (-4.52)     (-5.71)       (-4.60)   (-3.40)        (1.74)       (-7.95)

Bank-quarter and state-quarter controls    Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes
Quarter fixed effects                      Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes
State fixed effects                        Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes

N                                         252146    252102    251234     251835     252071        252177       250387       251772      252125         249850       250691
R2                                         0.147     0.193     0.025      0.035      0.038         0.128        0.602        0.105       0.106          0.005        0.140




                                                                                  58
                 Internet Appendix Table A3. Additional Specifications of Table 4 (Cont.)

Panel I: Main Distress Variable: Low Z-score, without Crisis Interaction; 2005-2014
                                                                  Assets                                                Liabilities                             Equity
Dependent variable:                                         Change in… (q, q+4)                                   Change in… (q, q+4)                   Change in… (q, q+4)
                                             Log        Log     Log fixed    Log       Log              Log      Log deposit       Log   Log other     Log common        Log
                                            assets     loans      assets #branches #employees        liabilities     rate       deposits liabilities       stock     dividends
                                              (1)       (2)         (3)       (4)       (5)              (6)         (7)           (8)       (9)           (10)          (11)
Low Z-score (1st decile) (q-1)            -0.052*** -0.049*** -0.043*** -0.032*** -0.038***         -0.061*** -0.018*** -0.064*** -0.140***               0.001      -0.292***
                                           (-10.06) (-13.09) (-12.81) (-12.74)       (-14.81)         (-10.35)     (-5.32)       (-8.48)   (-9.67)        (0.33)       (-8.32)

Bank-quarter and state-quarter controls     Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes             Yes          Yes
Quarter fixed effects                       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes             Yes          Yes
State fixed effects                         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes             Yes          Yes

N                                          251854     251829     250951     251548     251782        251885       250166      251486      251833          249568       250402
R2                                          0.147      0.197      0.026      0.036      0.041         0.126        0.603       0.105       0.108           0.004        0.141


Panel J: Main Distress Variable: Financial Distress, without Crisis Interaction; 2005-2014
                                                                   Assets                                         Liabilities                                   Equity
Dependent variable:                                          Change in… (q, q+4)                          Change in… (q, q+4)                           Change in… (q, q+4)
                                              Log        Log    Log fixed     Log      Log      Log      Log deposit         Log    Log other          Log common         Log
                                             assets     loans    assets #branches #employees liabilities     rate          deposits liabilities           stock        dividends
                                               (1)       (2)       (3)         (4)      (5)      (6)          (7)             (8)      (9)                 (10)           (11)
Financial Distress                         -0.096*** -0.087*** -0.076*** -0.055*** -0.066*** -0.113*** -0.031*** -0.112*** -0.226***                      0.010       -0.373***
                                            (-17.30) (-16.86) (-8.72)       (-12.74) (-14.65) (-19.11)     (-6.41)         (-15.13) (-15.48)              (0.90)       (-11.51)

Bank-quarter and state-quarter controls      Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes             Yes           Yes
Quarter fixed effects                        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes             Yes           Yes
State fixed effects                          Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes             Yes           Yes

N                                           251854    251829    250951     251548      251782      251885       250166       251486      251833          249568        250402
 2
R                                            0.148     0.197     0.026      0.036       0.041       0.127        0.603        0.105       0.108           0.004         0.140




                                                                                     59
                  Internet Appendix Table A3. Additional Specifications of Table 4 (Cont.)

Panel K: Main Distress Variable: Financial Distress, PCA Banks Excluded; 2005-2014
                                                                 Assets                                              Liabilities                                  Equity
Dependent variable:                                       Change in… (q, q+4)                                 Change in… (q, q+4)                        Change in… (q, q+4)
                                            Log       Log     Log fixed     Log      Log           Log       Log deposit         Log     Log other      Log common         Log
                                          assets     loans      assets #branches #employees    liabilities        rate        deposits    liabilities       stock       dividends
                                            (1)       (2)         (3)       (4)      (5)           (6)             (7)           (8)          (9)            (10)          (11)
Financial distress (q-1)                -0.063*** -0.057*** -0.058*** -0.035*** -0.039***     -0.076***       -0.074*** -0.032***        -0.160***          0.019      -0.363***
                                         (-10.65)   (-9.05)    (-5.18)    (-5.00)  (-7.71)     (-11.71)        (-13.33)        (-3.48)      (-7.18)        (1.66)        (-3.76)
    × Crisis                            -0.025*** -0.009        0.003     -0.002   -0.006     -0.024***         -0.014         -0.009       -0.002         -0.006        -0.159
                                          (-3.13)   (-1.27)     (0.22)    (-0.31)  (-1.03)       (-2.76)        (-1.48)        (-1.02)      (-0.10)       (-0.47)        (-1.31)
    × TARP                                -0.012    -0.008     0.040** -0.026*** -0.026*         -0.020       -0.058*** 0.071***         0.174***          -0.010         0.375
                                          (-0.82)   (-0.46)     (2.46)    (-3.44)  (-1.80)       (-1.36)        (-2.92)        (3.88)       (5.29)        (-0.69)         (1.21)

Bank-quarter and state-quarter contro     Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes
Quarter fixed effects                     Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes
State fixed effects                       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes

N                                        246944    246919    246041    246640     246872       245300          246588       245300        246922           244715       245506
 2
R                                        0.136      0.185     0.025     0.034      0.039        0.605           0.098        0.605         0.107           0.005         0.141




                                                                                60
                             Internet Appendix Table A4. Additional Specifications of Table 5
The table presents additional variations to the main analysis presented in Table 5: exploring whether distress banks
increase their risk-taking activities. Standard errors are clustered by bank and adjusted using the Driscoll-Kraay (1998)
procedure for overlapping data. t-statistics are presented in parentheses. Variable definitions are provided in Appendix
A. *, **, *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel A: Main Distress Variable: Low Equity Capital Ratio; with Crisis Interaction
Sample period:                                               1985-1994                                       2005-2014                                        2005-2014
Dependent variable:                                      Change in… (q, q+4)                           Change in… (q, q+4)                              Change in… (q, q+4)
                                                 Log Z-     Performing- Earnings          Log Z-   Performing- Earnings RWA/ Assets        Log Z-    Performing- Earnings RWA/ Assets
                                                   score   loan ratio (%) volatility       score  loan ratio (%) volatility   (q) (%)       score   loan ratio (%) volatility  (q) (%)
                                                    (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)        (5)           (6)       (7)          (8)          (9)           (10)      (11)
Low equity capital ratio (1st decile) (q-1)     0.230***     0.236***     -0.103***        0.042      0.075        -0.019*  -1.910***       0.042       0.074        -0.020*  -1.919***
                                                  (9.88)       (6.96)       (-9.88)        (1.40)     (1.35)        (-1.72)   (-3.16)      (1.41)       (1.34)        (-1.74)   (-3.18)
 × Crisis (q-1)                                   0.029        -0.040       -0.002       0.118***     -0.127      -0.124*** -3.326***     0.114**       -0.122      -0.117*** -3.432***
                                                  (0.60)      (-0.90)       (-0.25)        (2.77)    (-0.87)        (-6.93)   (-4.93)      (2.56)      (-0.83)        (-6.16)   (-5.05)
 × TARP (q-1)                                                                                                                              0.177*       -0.212      -0.217***    1.940
                                                                                                                                           (1.98)      (-1.01)       (-10.17)   (1.20)

Bank-quarter and state-quarter controls           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
Quarter fixed effects                             Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
State fixed effects                               Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes

N                                                468337       470510       470493        251607        251889    252173     249274        251607      252181      252173      249274
R2                                                0.021        0.037        0.014         0.047         0.081     0.022      0.043         0.048       0.081       0.023       0.044



Panel B: Main Distress Variable: Low Z-score; with Crisis Interaction
Sample period:                                             1985-1994                                        2005-2014                                        2005-2014
Dependent variable:                                    Change in… (q, q+4)                            Change in… (q, q+4)                              Change in… (q, q+4)
                                               Log Z-     Performing- Earnings           Log Z-   Performing- Earnings RWA/ Assets        Log Z-   Performing- Earnings RWA/ Assets
                                                 score   loan ratio (%) volatility        score  loan ratio (%) volatility  (q) (%)        score  loan ratio (%) volatility   (q) (%)
                                                  (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)         (5)           (6)       (7)           (8)        (9)           (10)      (11)
Low Z-score (1st decile) (q-1)                1.014***     0.362***     -0.409***       1.247***     0.150       -0.358*** -3.399***     1.247***     0.150       -0.358*** -3.399***
                                               (17.43)       (7.95)      (-34.16)        (18.74)     (0.86)       (-18.75)   (-5.92)      (18.74)     (0.86)       (-18.77)   (-5.91)
 × Crisis (q-1)                                 0.086        0.032        -0.011       -0.265***     0.062         -0.024  -3.492***    -0.288***     0.082         -0.006  -3.522***
                                                (1.19)       (0.62)       (-0.65)        (-3.13)     (0.27)        (-0.95)   (-4.03)      (-3.22)     (0.36)        (-0.22)   (-4.05)
 × TARP (q-1)                                                                                                                            0.358***     -0.266      -0.294***  1.374***
                                                                                                                                           (6.17)    (-1.63)        (-5.37)    (3.97)

Bank-quarter and state-quarter controls         Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes       Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Quarter fixed effects                           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes       Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
State fixed effects                             Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes       Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes

N                                              468337       470510       470493         251607     251889       251881     248988        251607      251889     251881       248988
R2                                              0.021        0.037        0.014          0.126      0.082        0.094      0.046         0.126       0.082      0.096        0.046




                                                                                                  61
              Internet Appendix Table A4. Additional Specifications of Table 5 (Cont.)

Panel C: Main Distress Variable: Low Equity Capital Ratio; without Crisis Interaction
Sample period:                                               1985-1994                                            2005-2014
Dependent variable:                                      Change in… (q, q+4)                                  Change in… (q, q+4)
                                                                                                                                           RWA/
                                                Log Z-       Performing-        Earnings        Log Z-      Performing-     Earnings     Assets (q)
                                                 score      loan ratio (%)      volatility       score       loan ratio     volatility       (%)
                                                  (1)             (2)              (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)           (7)
Low equity capital ratio (1st decile) (q-1)    0.240***       0.222***         -0.104***       0.077**         0.036        -0.056**     -2.885***
                                                (14.81)         (6.35)          (-10.08)        (2.55)         (0.59)        (-2.50)       (-4.11)

Bank-quarter and state-quarter controls           Yes            Yes               Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
Quarter fixed effects                             Yes            Yes               Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
State fixed effects                               Yes            Yes               Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes

N                                               468337         470510            470493         251607        252181         252173        249274
R2                                               0.021          0.037             0.014          0.047         0.081          0.021         0.043


Panel D: Main Distress Variable: Low Z-score; without Crisis Interaction
Sample period:                                             1985-1994                                             2005-2014
Dependent variable:                                    Change in… (q, q+4)                                   Change in… (q, q+4)
                                                                                                                                           RWA/
                                               Log Z-      Performing-        Earnings        Log Z-      Performing-      Earnings      Assets (q)
                                                score     loan ratio (%)      volatility       score     loan ratio (%)    volatility        (%)
                                                 (1)            (2)              (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)
Low Z-score (1st decile) (q-1)                1.039***      0.371***         -0.413***       1.111***       0.183*        -0.370***      -5.153***
                                               (24.40)       (10.53)          (-48.53)        (19.98)        (1.72)        (-43.14)        (-8.91)

Bank-quarter and state-quarter controls         Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
Quarter fixed effects                           Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
State fixed effects                             Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes

N                                             468337         470142           470127         251607         251889         251881         248988
R2                                             0.090          0.042            0.087          0.124          0.082          0.094          0.046




                                                                        62
                Internet Appendix Table A4. Additional Specifications of Table 5 (Cont.)

Panel E: Main Distress Variable: Financial Distress, without Crisis Interaction

Sample period:                                             1985-1994                                     2005-2014
Dependent variable:                                    Change in… (q, q+4)                         Change in… (q, q+4)
                                                 Log Z- Performing- Earnings            Log Z- Performing- Earnings          RWA/
                                                  score loan ratio (%) volatility        score loan ratio (%) volatility   Assets (q)
                                                   (1)        (2)           (3)            (4)       (5)          (6)          (7)
Financial distress (q-1)                        0.870***   0.488***     -0.334***      0.649***    0.078      -0.286***    -8.506***
                                                 (25.97)    (7.30)       (-32.67)        (8.72)    (0.42)      (-12.65)     (-15.38)

Bank-quarter and state-quarter controls            Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Quarter fixed effects                              Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
State fixed effects                                Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes

N                                                468337       470142       470127       251607     251889       251881      248988
 2
R                                                 0.038        0.040        0.031       0.055       0.080       0.032        0.044

Panel F: Main Distress Variable: Low Equity Capital Ratio; 1-Quarter Horizon
Sample period:                                              1985-1994                                    2005-2014
Dependent variable:                                    Change in… (q, q+1)                         Change in… (q, q+1)
                                               Log Z-      Performing- Earnings         Log Z-   Performing- Earnings Assets (q)
                                                score     loan ratio (%) volatility      score  loan ratio (%) volatility      (%)
                                                 (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)           (6)         (7)
Low equity capital ratio (1st decile) (q-1)   0.077***        0.006      -0.064***    0.147***      -0.060      -0.048*** -2.260***
                                                (3.61)        (0.15)       (-9.83)      (5.52)     (-0.48)        (-3.98)   (-10.58)
    × Crisis (q-1)                              0.046         0.038       -0.027**    -0.146***     -0.151        -0.009   -0.782**
                                                (1.55)        (0.79)       (-2.57)      (-3.72)    (-1.03)        (-0.56)    (-2.73)

Bank-quarter and state-quarter controls         Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
Quarter fixed effects                           Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
State fixed effects                             Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes

N                                              486197       486426        486425       259740       259758      259758       257085
R2                                              0.007        0.015         0.008        0.015        0.022       0.011        0.011




                                                                     63
               Internet Appendix Table A4. Additional Specifications of Table 5 (Cont.)

Panel G: Main Distress Variable: Low Z-score; 1-Quarter Horizon
Sample period:                                          1985-1994                                     2005-2014
Dependent variable:                                Change in… (q, q+1)                          Change in… (q, q+1)
                                           Log Z-      Performing- Earnings       Log Z-     Performing- Earnings RWA/ Assets
                                            score     loan ratio (%) volatility    score    loan ratio (%) volatility   (q) (%)
                                              (1)           (2)          (3)        (4)           (5)          (6)        (7)
Low Z-score (1st decile) (q-1)             -0.008         0.012      -0.019***    -0.007        -0.003       -0.004   -0.678***
                                           (-0.96)        (0.77)       (-4.75)    (-0.85)      (-0.15)       (-1.28)    (-3.67)
 × Crisis (q-1)                             0.015         0.014       -0.010*     -0.024      -0.121**      -0.020**  -1.043***
                                            (1.02)        (0.62)       (-1.96)    (-1.42)      (-2.23)       (-2.56)    (-4.72)

Bank-quarter and state-quarter controls     Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
Quarter fixed effects                       Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
State fixed effects                         Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes

N                                         486197        486829        486827      259740      260058      260058      257381
R2                                         0.006         0.015         0.004       0.015       0.022       0.009       0.011




Panel H: Main Distress Variable: Financial Distress; 1-Quarter Horizon

Sample period:                                        1985-1994                                2005-2014
Dependent variable:                               Change in… (q, q+1)                    Change in… (q, q+1)
                                           Log Z- Performing- Earnings       Log Z- Performing- Earnings        RWA/
                                            score loan ratio (%) volatility   score loan ratio (%) volatility Assets (q)
                                              (1)        (2)          (3)       (4)       (5)           (6)       (7)
Financial distress (q-1)                  0.217***      0.040     -0.103*** 0.293***    -0.024      -0.084*** -1.183***
                                            (9.66)     (1.63)      (-14.57)   (8.73)    (-0.33)       (-5.42)   (-7.29)
    × Crisis (q-1)                          0.013       0.015       -0.014   -0.073     -0.023        -0.011  -0.819***
                                            (0.42)     (0.43)       (-1.37)  (-1.62)    (-0.27)       (-0.62)   (-3.45)

Bank-quarter and state-quarter controls     Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes
Quarter fixed effects                       Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes
State fixed effects                         Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes

N                                         486197       486426         486425      259740     259758      259758      257085
    2
R                                          0.018        0.016         0.027       0.029       0.021       0.027       0.011




                                                                 64
                    Internet Appendix Table A4. Additional Specifications of Table 5 (Cont.)

Panel I: Main Distress Variable: Low Equity Capital Ratio; 8-Quarters Horizon
Sample period:                                               1985-1994                                     2005-2014                                      2005-2014
Dependent variable:                                     Change in… (q, q+8)                          Change in… (q, q+8)                            Change in… (q, q+8)
                                                Log Z-      Performing- Earnings          Log Z-   Performing- Earnings Assets (q)       Log Z-   Performing- Earnings Assets (q)
                                                 score     loan ratio (%) volatility       score  loan ratio (%) volatility     (%)        score loan ratio (%) volatility    (%)
                                                  (1)             (2)         (3)           (4)         (5)           (6)       (7)         (4)        (5)          (6)       (7)
Low equity capital ratio (1st decile) (q-1)    0.483***      0.592***     -0.157***      0.126***    0.214**     -0.032*** -3.037***    0.127***    0.214**     -0.032*** -3.050***
                                                (10.76)         (9.46)      (-7.77)        (3.82)     (2.48)        (-3.19)   (-3.27)     (3.86)     (2.48)       (-3.21)   (-3.29)
 × Crisis (q-1)                                  0.031        -0.143**      -0.011       0.252***     0.186       -0.144*** -4.951***   0.258***      0.212     -0.140*** -5.143***
                                                 (0.42)        (-2.68)      (-0.95)        (3.27)     (0.97)        (-5.58)   (-3.93)     (3.34)     (1.13)       (-5.19)   (-4.30)
 × TARP (q-1)                                                                                                                             -0.069   -0.734*** -0.125***       4.210
                                                                                                                                         (-1.00)     (-3.52)      (-4.17)   (1.64)

Bank-quarter and state-quarter controls           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes       Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes
Quarter fixed effects                             Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes       Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes
State fixed effects                               Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes       Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes

N                                               444902        447357        447336        241048       241673     241662     228739      241048      241673     241662     228739
R2                                               0.045         0.063         0.026         0.113        0.145      0.049      0.056       0.114       0.145      0.050      0.056



Panel J: Main Distress Variable: Low Z-score; 8-Quarters Horizon
Sample period:                                              1985-1994                                     2005-2014                                        2005-2014
Dependent variable:                                    Change in… (q, q+8)                           Change in… (q, q+8)                              Change in… (q, q+8)
                                               Log Z-      Performing- Earnings         Log Z-   Performing- Earnings RWA/ Assets        Log Z-   Performing- Earnings RWA/ Assets
                                                score     loan ratio (%) volatility      score  loan ratio (%) volatility  (q) (%)        score  loan ratio (%) volatility  (q) (%)
                                                  (1)            (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)       (7)           (4)         (5)          (6)        (7)
Low Z-score (1st decile) (q-1)                1.397***       0.949***    -0.541***     1.479***   0.562***     -0.420***  -2.766**      1.479***   0.562***     -0.420***  -2.766**
                                               (25.50)        (16.55)     (-59.13)      (32.09)     (3.00)      (-40.17)   (-2.22)       (32.16)     (3.00)      (-40.23)   (-2.22)
 × Crisis (q-1)                                0.172**         0.001     -0.032***     -0.173**     0.301      -0.067*** -6.912***      -0.190**      0.344     -0.055*** -6.901***
                                                (2.15)         (0.02)      (-3.48)      (-2.39)     (1.11)       (-4.59)   (-4.00)       (-2.41)     (1.29)       (-3.46)   (-3.97)
 × TARP (q-1)                                                                                                                            0.173*     -0.632**    -0.178***    1.035
                                                                                                                                          (1.83)     (-2.68)      (-3.73)    (1.14)

Bank-quarter and state-quarter controls         Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes
Quarter fixed effects                           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes
State fixed effects                             Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes

N                                              444902       447018        446999       241048      241402       241391     228476       241048      241402     241391     228476
R2                                              0.143        0.084         0.141        0.201       0.155        0.140      0.057        0.201       0.155      0.141      0.057




                                                                                                 65
                     Internet Appendix Table A4. Additional Specifications of Table 5 (Cont.)

Panel K: Main Distress Variable: Financial Distress; 8-Quarters Horizon
Sample period:                                       1985-1994                               2005-2014                                            2005-2014
Dependent variable:                              Change in… (q, q+8)                    Change in… (q, q+8)                                  Change in… (q, q+8)
                                          Log Z- Performing- Earnings       Log Z- Performing- Earnings        RWA/          Log Z-     Performing- Earnings        RWA/
                                           score     loan ratio  volatility  score  loan ratio    volatility Assets (q)       score      loan ratio    volatility Assets (q)
                                             (1)          (2)        (3)      (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)            (4)           (5)         (6)          (7)
Financial distress (q-1)                 1.407*** 1.400*** -0.491*** 1.161*** 0.928*** -0.297***              -8.078**      1.162***      0.928*** -0.297***       -8.085**
                                          (38.36)       (9.71)    (-18.10)  (12.08)    (3.39)      (-8.20)     (-2.65)       (12.08)        (3.40)      (-8.19)     (-2.65)
    × Crisis (q-1)                        0.120*      -0.215**     -0.021   -0.184*   -0.013     -0.142***    -7.034**       -0.185*        0.034     -0.131***    -7.167**
                                           (1.81)      (-2.11)     (-1.01)  (-1.87)   (-0.03)      (-4.03)     (-2.51)       (-1.87)        (0.09)      (-3.55)     (-2.59)
    × TARP (q-1)                                                                                                              0.131      -1.299*** -0.327***         2.689
                                                                                                                              (0.87)       (-4.66)      (-5.19)      (1.17)

Bank-quarter and state-quarter control Yes            Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes             Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes
Quarter fixed effects                  Yes            Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes             Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes
State fixed effects                    Yes            Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes             Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes

N                                        444902     447018      446999     241048      241402     241391      228476        241048        241402      241391       228476
 2
R                                         0.076       0.077      0.058      0.126      0.149       0.064       0.057            0.127      0.149       0.065        0.057


Panel L: Main Distress Variable: Financial Distress; PCA Banks Excluded; 2005-2014
                           Sample period:                                                              2005-2014
                           Dependent variable:                                                   Change in… (q, q+4)
                                                                                           Performing-loan      Earnings                  RWA/
                                                                               Log Z-score    ratio (%)         volatility              Assets (q)
                                                                                    (1)           (2)              (3)                      (4)
                           Financial distress (q-1)                             0.949***        0.140          -0.231***                -4.941***
                                                                                 (16.12)        (0.80)          (-11.77)                  (-5.36)
                               × Crisis (q-1)                                   -0.317***      -0.221            St Dev                  -2.042**
                                                                                  (-4.06)      (-0.96)           (-0.95)                  (-2.18)
                               × TARP (q-1)                                        0.235       -0.457          -0.449***                   0.515
                                                                                  (1.01)       (-1.52)           (-4.03)                  (0.32)

                           Bank-quarter and state-quarter controls                   Yes            Yes                   Yes              Yes
                           Quarter fixed effects                                     Yes            Yes                   Yes              Yes
                           State fixed effects                                       Yes            Yes                   Yes              Yes

                           N                                                        246781         246978              246970             244414
                               2
                           R                                                        0.054           0.083              0.028               0.042




                                                                                     66
