                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             ASSETS AND JOB CHOICE:
                        STUDENT DEBT, WAGES AND AMENITIES

                                           Mi Luo
                                        Simon Mongey

                                      Working Paper 25801
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25801


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2019




We thank Katka Borovickova, Jarda Borovicka, Greg Kaplan, Phillip Kircher, Tom Sargent,
Kevin Thom, and Gianluca Violante for useful comments and suggestions. We also thank
seminar participants at the NYU Macroeconomics Student Lunch, NYU Search and Matching
Workshop, Barcelona GSE Summer Forum, Econometrics Summer Forum, APPAM Annual
Meeting, GRIPS-UT Macroeconomics and Policy Workshop, and Singapore Management
University. The authors have no additional sources of finance to disclose. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Mi Luo and Simon Mongey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Assets and Job Choice: Student Debt, Wages and Amenities
Mi Luo and Simon Mongey
NBER Working Paper No. 25801
May 2019
JEL No. E21,E24,J32,J38

                                          ABSTRACT

If consumption and non-wage amenities of work enter utility, holding few assets may induce a
trade-off between wages and amenities when searching for a job. We establish this in a model of
search with asset accumulation, extended to accommodate amenities. We then provide empirical
evidence of this trade-off in the context of student debt, finding that higher debt causes graduates
to accept jobs with higher wages and lower job satisfaction. In a representative sample of college
graduates, we infer causality by exploiting within-college, across cohort changes in financial aid.
A quantitative extension of our theoretical framework that explicitly models student debt
accounts well for our empirical results. Identifying the utility value of amenities through observed
search behavior, we find that high satisfaction jobs are valued at 6 percent of lifetime
consumption relative to low satisfaction jobs. This trade-off is economically significant; a policy
maker using only wage data to assess the welfare effects of with an income-based repayment
policy would mistakenly conclude that graduates prefer a fixed repayment policy.


Mi Luo
Emory University
1602 Fishburne Ln.
Rm 330
Atlanta, GA 30307
mluo26@emory.edu

Simon Mongey
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
mongey@uchicago.edu
1 Introduction

How does the asset position of an individual affect the way that they choose between jobs? Does
the substitutable role of wages and assets in providing consumption lead individuals with lower
assets (or more debt) to accept jobs with higher pay but lower amenity value? A recent litera-
ture studying job choice in consumption-savings models has abstracted from non-wage amenities
(Herkenhoff et al., 2016; Lise, 2013). A number of recent papers have attributed an important role
to non-wage amenities in job choice (Hall and Mueller, 2018; Sorkin, 2018; Mas and Pallais, 2017).
Bringing these literatures together, we study the amenity-wage trade-off induced by assets in the
context of student debt and job choice in the US. We ground this trade-off in theory, then show
that it is both empirically observed and quantitatively relevant for the decisions and welfare of
college graduates.
     We focus on student debt for two reasons. First, a unique dataset positions us well to an-
swer these questions. We merge restricted-use microdata from the National Center for Education
Statistics’ (NCES) Baccalaureate and Beyond surveys (BBS) with publicly available college financial
data. These data allows us to (i) directly observe debt and earnings, as well as responses to a set
of questions regarding job satisfaction which we view as reflecting amenities, (ii) exploit within-
college across-time variation in institutional grants (i.e. those issued by the college) to construct
instruments for individual assets (student debt), a crucial step in assessing the causal effect of as-
sets on job choice in an empirical framework, (iii) exploit observed search behavior conditional on
income and job satisfaction to identify the utility value of non-wage amenities, a crucial step in
quantifying the welfare effect of assets on job choice in a quantitative model.
     Second, student debt in the US has increased substantially over time (Figure 1A), with most
the majority of this increase due to higher loans per borrower (Figure 1B). Understanding the
effect of student debt on job choice is therefore of interest in and of itself.1


Theory. This paper proceeds in three steps. First, in a canonical job search model with consump-
tion and savings, we establish that lower assets lead individuals to accept higher wage, lower
amenity jobs. The partial equilibrium model combines a standard consumption and savings prob-
lem with three key ingredients: random search, random job offers that are heterogeneous in both


   1 As  an example of recent empirical work, Alvaro Mezza and Sommer (2019) find that student debt has a nega-
tive effect on homeownership, with a $1,000 increase in student loan debt leading to an estimated postponement of
homeownership by around 4 months.


                                                       1
                                        Figure 1: Increases in total debt per borrowing student (in 2013, thousands of dollars)

                                                A. Average loan per borrowing student                                                   B. Decomposition of total loans
    Level − Thousands of 2016 dollars


                                        30                                                                            1.00      Loans
                                                                                                                                Intensive (Loans/Borrowers)
                                                                                                                                Extensive (Borrowers/Students)




                                                                                               Log change from 2001
                                        28                                                                            0.80      Students




                                        26                                                                            0.60

                                        24                                                                            0.40

                                        22                                                                            0.20

                                        20                                                                            0.00
                                         2000      2004         2008        2012        2016                             2000           2004                     2008   2012   2016

Notes (i) Data are from Integrated Post Secondary Data System (IPEDS) maintained by the National Center for Education Statistics,
(ii) The sample is restricted to colleges that, according to the Carnegie classification, offer a highest qualification of at least a bachelor
degree. We remove law, medical and business schools. (iii) The decomposition is exact in logs, log Loans t = log ( Loans t /Borrowers t ) +
log ( Borrowers t /Students t ) + log (Students t ).



wage and non-wage features, and an assumption that amenities cannot be traded.
                                 The theoretical model provides a framework that speaks to a broad literature.
Kaplan and Schulhofer-Wohl (2017) find that survey measures of job satisfaction vary systemati-
cally across demographic groups in the cross-section and time-series. Mas and Pallais (2017) find
evidence for sizeable compensating differentials at least for a tail of workers. Sorkin (2018) in-
fers the existence of amenities through a structural model that accounts for the observed manner
which workers systematically move from high to low wage firms. Estimated compensating differ-
entials account for over half of the firm component in the variance of earnings. Hall and Mueller
(2018) infer a dispersion of the value of the offered non-wage component of a job to be substan-
tially larger than that of the offered wages. In their case, these non-wage components are inferred
by workers accepting jobs below reported reservation wages. Bonhomme and Jolivet (2009) iden-
tify strong support for amenities but that these are not reflected in wages offered in the manner of
compensating differentials. This will be consistent with our modelling of jobs as random draws of
wage-amenity pairs. Meanwhile, other amenities, such as health insurance (Dey and Flinn, 2008)
and job security (Jarosch, 2015), have also been studied in the context of search models. None of
these papers study the role of assets in these decisions.


Empirical.                                      Second, we contribute evidence for the theory by showing that assets induce just
such a trade-off in the context of student debt: higher debt causes students to take jobs with
higher wages but lower satisfaction.
                                 We extend the one-college event studies of Rothstein and Rouse (2011) and Field (2009) to a

                                                                                          2
representative sample of college students.2 Extending such analysis to a representative sample,
we lack the quasi-experimental variation in student debt available to these authors. Still, we fol-
low in the spirit of these papers, and exploit changes in the composition of grants and loans at
the institution level—which differentially impact debt across cohorts within a college—to identify
the causal effect of debt on job choice. A similar identification strategy has been used in con-
temporaneous work by Yannelis (2017) to understand the role of student debt in graduate school
enrollment.3
     Our main result is that higher student debt causes higher wages, lower job satisfaction,
shorter unemployment durations out of college and lower rate of employment in low paying pub-
lic interest jobs such as school teaching. Under our benchmark results, increasing student debt by
$10,000 would lead to an increase of $2,110 in annual salary one year after graduation. The causal
effect on wages is larger than the result in OLS, where we find higher debt is associated with no
change or a negative change in wages. This suggests the IV is addressing negative selection into
student debt, consistent with the findings of Yannelis (2015) over this period.4
     This empirical result confirms our theory. A model without amenities, however, would imply
the opposite: higher debt sharply reduces the value of unemployment relative to employment,
reducing reservation wages, so reducing observed wages. The empirical observation that satis-
faction falls therefore, through our model, rationalizes what would be an anomalous empirical
observation.
     The result contributes in three ways to the literature. First, we complement Herkenhoff et al.
(2016) who find that increases in borrowing capacity encourage workers to move into self-
employment. Second, comparison of our OLS and IV specifications clarifies why empirical stud-
ies of student debt and wages that do not control for the endogeneity of debt find that higher
   2 Both   find that policies that substitute loans for grants reduce wages and increase uptake of public interest jobs.
Rothstein and Rouse (2011) study a “highly selective” private college, while Field (2009) studies New York University
Law School.
     3 Herbst (2019) uses the randomization of call-center operators managing borrower’s phone calls as an instrument

for take up of Income Based Repayment plans and finds that these plans increase consumption. The policy experiment
in our quantitative model is consistent with these empirical results.
     4 We also make direct contributions to the study of the impact of student debt on graduating college students. We

list examples for papers that have used the BBS data set . Lochner and Monge-Naranjo (2015) study the repayment
and default patterns of the 1993 cohort ten years later in 2003, characterizing default along different demographics.
Altonji et al. (2016) use the BBS and other data sets to study the impacts of recessions on labor market outcomes at
labor market entry and long-run success. In an unpublished working paper, Chapman (2015) employs a different
identification strategy that uses state-level merit aid to measure the causal effect of debts on earnings. She finds that
exogenously increasing the loan burden of a college graduate by $1,000 increases her annual income by $400-$800 one
year after graduation. Gervais and Ziebrath (2019) instead use a kink in parental contribution requirements, but do
not find a statistically significant affect of debt on earnings, lacking power around the discontinuity in the BBS. They
conclude that via this approach “student debt has a nonnegative effect on earnings".


                                                           3
debt is associated with lower wages (Ji, 2017). Third, that higher debt leads to lower job sat-
isfaction provides explicit empirical support for the notion that amenities are important in job
decisions, corroborating results from a growing literature (Hall and Mueller, 2018; Sorkin, 2018;
Mas and Pallais, 2017; Delavande and Zafar, 2014).


Quantitative.      Third, we extend our theoretical model to separately include student debt in the
agent’s portfolio, modelling its unique institutional features. A novel calibration strategy uses self-
reported search behavior of the employed by income and job satisfaction to infer utility values of
amenities. We invert this empirical relationship through the model to quantify the value of job
satisfaction and its role in job choice. A free move to a high amenity job is—on average—valued
at 6 percent of lifetime consumption. The value is lower when on-the-job search is less costly.
     The model permits a policy experiment in which fixed repayment loans are replaced with
income based repayment loans. This replicates the largest change in student debt policy in the
US in recent years, as Income Based Repayment (IBR) plans, were introduced by legislation after our
sample. Under an IBR, students only repay debt in a fixed proportion to disposable income when
they are employed.5
     We show that understanding the wage-amenity trade-off is important for evaluating the wel-
fare consequences of this change. Keeping fixed the distributions of debt and available jobs, and
adjusting taxes to maintain a balanced budget, we examine the effect of implementing the policy
under a balanced budget with three main results. First, the policy has a positive effect on aver-
age graduate welfare, increasing average post-graduation expected utility by 1.3 percent. In the
cross-section, 89 percent of students prefer the IBR, with low debt students preferring the fixed
repayment system. Second, we use the model to decompose these gains. A large fraction of the
welfare increase stems from shifting repayments into periods when marginal utility of consump-
tion is lower. This is somewhat obvious, but we also find that 30 percent of welfare gains from
graduates taking higher amenity jobs, while 7 percent is due to lower search costs. Third, we
assess how policy analysis might be misguided if it does not account for amenities. A simple al-
ternative metric would be discounted expected lifetime income, however this decreases under the
IBR as students take jobs that pay less but they enjoy more. Understanding the role of amenities
is crucial not only for the magnitude of the response, but also assessing its sign.

   5 This  policy is the dominant repayment scheme in the United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand and Singapore.
The quantitative implications of the policy for college attendance are studied by Ionescu (2009), we study the implica-
tions for job choice.


                                                          4
Layout. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the theory. Section 3
presents our empirical results. Section 4 extends the theoretical model to a quantitative model of
student debt. Sections 5 and 6 discuss estimation and model fit. Sections 7 and 8 we examine
how student debt effects behavior in the model, compare our results to the data, and conduct our
repayment scheme policy experiment. Section 10 concludes.



2 Theory

We present a labor-search model that motivates the following empirical study of the effect of
student debt on job choice. Since it forms the core of the quantitative model that we will estimate
in Section 4, we present the model in some detail.


Time and agents.       Time is discrete. There is a continuum of infinitely lived workers. Each period
a worker may be either employed or unemployed. Workers begin life unemployed.


Preferences.     Workers maximize expected discounted lifetime utility which is time separable,
and discount the future at constant rate β ∈ (0, 1). Period utility derives from consumption c ∈
[0, ∞) and non-pecuniary amenity x ∈ [0, ∞) which we call job satisfaction when employed, and
has a fixed value x ∈ (0, ∞) when unemployed. Expected lifetime utility is therefore

                                                       ∞
                                             U = E0    ∑ β t u ( c t , xt ).
                                                       t =0


We assume that u has the following properties: twice continuously differentiable, with uc > 0,
ucc < 0, u x > 0, u xx < 0, and that the Inada conditions hold for both arguments.6 We assume that
u is homogeneous of degree one in (c, x), which implies that xucx + cucc = 0, a sufficient condition
for ucx > 0.


Job. A job is a bundle of a wage and non-wage utility, or amenity, provided to the worker each
period: (w, x) ∈ [0, ∞) × [0, ∞). Labor markets are frictional. At the beginning of each period
unemployed workers draw one job with probability λ, from the distribution of jobs F (w, x).7 Em-
ployed workers are separated into unemployment at the beginning of each period with probability

   6 Thatis limc →0 u c (c, x ) = ∞, limc → ∞ u c (c, x ) = 0, with the same being true for the limits in terms of x.
   7 Weassume that F (w, x ) has continuous density f (w, x ) over bounded, connected supports w ∈ W = [ w, w] and
x ∈ X = [ x, x ].


                                                           5
δ. Unemployed workers receive unemployment benefits w ∈ (0, ∞). A separated worker does not
receive a new job offer within the period in which they are separated.


Assets.    Workers have access to a single liquid asset a that pays a riskless net return r. Holdings
of the asset may be negative subject to the natural borrowing limit a.8


Worker problem. Let W ( a, w, x) be the present discounted value of expected utility of a worker
with assets a and employed in job (w, x), having survived the current period separation shock δ,
but before payment of wage w. Let U ( a) be the present discounted value of expected utility of
an unemployed worker with assets a after either (i) rejecting an offer, or (ii) being separated. We
represent these values recursively as follows:

                                                     h                                  i
                                                            ′                   ′
                   W ( a, w, x) = max
                                   ′
                                      u ( c, x ) + β   δU a     + ( 1 − δ ) W a   , w, x    ,                 (1)
                                         a
                                 c = (1 + r ) a + w − a ′      ,   a′ ≥ a.


                                         Z            w                                   
              U ( a) = max u (c, x ) + β λ               max W a′ , w′ , x′ , U a′ dF w′ , x′                 (2)
                        ′    a                         w
                                                                         
                                                                       
                                                       + (1 − λ ) U a ′ ,

                   c = (1 + r ) a + w − a ′        ,     a′ ≥ a.


Reservation policy. Given that W ( a, w, x) is monotonically increasing in each of w and x, the
acceptance decision of the unemployed worker will be characterized by a reservation job locus.
This locus w∗ ( a, x) is defined implicitly:


                                        W ( a, w∗ ( a, x) , x) = U ( a) .                                     (3)




    8 The natural borrowing limit is determined by the maximum amount that an individual may repay while receiving

only unemployment benefits. This is given by a = ∑∞  t =0 w (1 + r )
                                                                     − t = w/r.



                                                           6
A job with amenity value x is accepted if and only if its wage lies above the locus: w ≥ w∗ ( a, x).
Using (3) we can establish that w∗ ( a, x) is (i) downward sloping, and (ii) convex:9

                                            h                         i(−)            h                  i(+)
                                                  (−)      (+)                 (+)      (+)   (−)              (+)
         W
           (+)                                  Wxx + Wxw w∗x (−)            Ww      − Wxw + Www w∗x (−)      Wx
w∗x =   − x(+)    <0 ,         w∗xx = −                                                                                   > 0.
         Ww                                                                       Ww2

In the limit as x increases, the Inada conditions imply that lim x →∞ Wx = 0. Meanwhile, the de-
clining wage around w∗ ( a, x) leads the marginal utility of consumption to increase: lim x →∞ Ww =
limx →∞ uc + β(1 − δ)Ww′ = ∞. Therefore limx →∞ w∗x = 0: at very large x and low w, a small in-
crease in wages could keep utility constant despite a large decline in x. The converse is true as
x decreases, with limx →0 w∗x = ∞. Below we graph these and other properties of w∗ ( a, x) in a
numerical example (Figure 2A).


Assets and job choice.           Our main interest is in how the job acceptance policy varies over different
levels of assets a. Differentiating (3) with respect to a and using envelope conditions for Ua , Wa :

                Ua − Wa          1+r             h                                                            i
        w∗a =           =                         u c c U
                                                          ( a, x ) , x   − u c   c E
                                                                                     ( a, w ∗
                                                                                              ( a, x ) , x ) , x    .
                  Ww      Ww ( a, w∗ ( a, x), x)

Let cU and c E be shorthand for the above consumption functions in unemployment and employ-
ment, respectively. We take a first order approximation of the marginal utility of consumption
                                
when unemployed around c E , x . Under the additional assumption that u (c, x) is homogeneous
of degree one in (c, x), and letting R(c, x) denote the coefficient of relative risk-aversion:10

                                                                                (+) "                           #
                                          (1 + r)ucE c E ( a, w∗ ( a, x), x), x         x          cU ( a )
                                    (+)
           ŵ a ( a, x) ≈ R(c, x)                                                        −                          .
                                                   Ww ( a, ŵ ( a, x), x)(+)            x c E ( a, w∗ ( a, x), x)


                              b ∗a ( a, x) denote the approximation of w∗ ( a, x) attained under an
A special case is useful. Let w
assumption that consumption and hence the marginal utility of consumption is constant in
employment—as would be the case where the individual is saving at a constant rate—and let
    9 The recursive structure of the derivative properties of the value function with respect to x and w implies that they

inherit the derivative properties of the utility function. For example, Wxw = u cx + β(1 − δ)Wxw    ′ . Since it is always the
case that u cx ≥ 0, then Wxw ≥ 0.
   10 The approximation is as follows:

                                                                                                           
           u c cU , xb = u c c E , x + u cc c E , x cU − c E + u cx c E , x ( x − x ) + O2 || x − x ||, || c E − cU || .

Note that the residual terms in the approximation are second order with respect to the marginal utility of consumption,
and so third order with respect to u.


                                                                 7
relative risk aversion be given by a parameter R(c, x) = R. In this case
                                                                                                             
                                                   (+)                                x        cU ( a )
                          b ∗a ( a, x) ≈ R
                          w                              [1 − β(1 − δ)](+)              − E                     .
                                                                                      x c ( a, w∗ ( a, x), x)

Working first with the special case, it is straight-forward to sign the derivative in the limits of x.
Using the fact that w∗ ( a, x) is decreasing in x and c E ( a, w∗ ( a, x), x) is increasing in w:


                                               b ∗a ( a, x) > 0 ,
                                           lim w                                 b ∗a ( a, x) < 0.
                                                                             lim w
                                           x →0                              x →∞


Note that we do not require that c E ( a, w∗ ( a, x), x) is at any point less than cU ( a), only that it is
increasing in the wage. Since w∗a ( a, x) is continuous, and monotone in x,11 then there exists some
xb( a) such that:

   1. For all x < xb( a) an increase in assets leads to an increase in the reservation wage. With higher
      assets, workers reject more high wage, low amenity jobs, accept more low wage, high amenity jobs.

   2. For all x > xb( a) an increase in assets leads to a decrease in the reservation wage. With lower
      assets, workers reject more low wage, high amenity jobs, accept more high wage, low amenity jobs.

Since the marginal value of wages is positive (Ww ( a, x) > 0), then inspection of (2) make it clear
that this holds true for the general case as well. In fact, the result is more stark. Take a worker
considering a high-w, low-x job. If the job were accepted, then the worker would be saving, with
consumption increasing, and the marginal utility of consumption falling on-the-job.12 Therefore
                                                      b ∗a ( a, x). In the alternative case, at a low-w,
Ww < (1 + r)ucE /[1 − β(1 − δ)], and so w∗a ( a, x) > w
high-x job, the marginal utility of consumption will fall on-the-job, such that Ww > (1 + r)ucE /[1 −
β(1 − δ)], and w∗a ( a, x) < w
                             b∗a ( a, x). Comparing the general and special cases, the derivative w∗a is
                              b ∗a to the left (right) of xb( a).
more positive (negative) than w


Illustrative simulation.              To visualize the above results we simulate a version of the model with
simple functional forms and standard parameter values. We specify F (w, x) as the product of
independent log-normals with the same mean µ and standard deviation σ. For simplicity we set
                      h                                                            i
  11 Note that w                                           E · w ∗ ( a, x ) + c E ] < 0.
               b ∗ax ∝ − xx2 + cU ( a) · ( c E (1a))2 · [ cw     x              x
  12 The Euler equation for consumption on-the-job is standard:

                                                                        h                    i
                                                   u cE = β(1 + r ) (1 − δ)u cE′ + δuU   c
                                                                                           ′
                                                                                               .




                                                                        8
                Table 1: Parameters for the illustrative monthly model depicted in Figure 2

               β             R          λ        δ                   µ                       σ                ρ     x=w
                      1
                                                                                                      
                   − 12                                           $30,000                    $18,000
            1.05          βR = 0.99    0.40    0.05    log       12× $1,000       log       12× $1,000       0.50   $1, 000


the unemployed benefits and amenity equal: w = x. The utility function u(c, x) is CES with the
same weights on each input and elasticity of substitution ρ < 1.13
     In Figure 2A, a is held fixed and we plot the downward sloping, convex job acceptance policy
w∗ ( a, x). Note that the worker will accept high amenity jobs with wages below w and jobs with
x < x but high wages. The baseline low asset case gives w∗ ( a, x) under a = 0, the high asset case
under twice the average wage draw. Under higher assets the reservation locus rotates clockwise
around a stationary point. With higher assets the worker is liberated from the pains of high wage,
low amenity work, and accepts more high amenity jobs at lower wages.
     In solving the value function problem, third order polynomial splines are used to approxi-
mate value functions. In Panel B we use these differentiable splines used to determine the ‘exact’
              b a = (Ua − Wa )/Ww . The blue line gives the first order approximation used in the
derivative of w
                                                                                       ba.
above argument which is shown to do a good job of characterizing the change in sign of w
                                                                                     b a = (Ua −
                                                                   b a . Recall that w
     Panel C provides an alternative view of the change in sign of w
              b1a = Ua /Ww , and w
Wa )/Ww . Let w                  b2a = Wa /Ww , such that w    b1a − w
                                                          ba = w     b2a . Since the risk-free asset
allows the household to smooth consumption relatively well, the ratio of the marginal utility of
wealth in employment to the marginal utility of wages is roughly constant around the reservation
locus.14 Meanwhile, with U ( a) fixed in this figure, higher amenities x are associated with lower
                                                                                                 b2a .
wages w around the job reservation locus which delivers an increasing Ww and a steeply declining w


Restrictions on utility.         Homothetic utility implies that amenities and consumption are comple-
ments: ucx > 0. However strict complementarity is not necessary. If ucx = 0, then as x increases
    b( a, x) decreases, this causes c E ( a, w
and w                                        b( a, x), x) to decline such that the marginal utility of con-
sumption in employment still increases. This is sufficient to cause Ww to increase and ŵ2a to de-
crease, which delivers the result. However if ucx < 0, then the increase in x will have an off-setting
effect on the marginal utility of consumption, leaving the change in Ww ambiguous. In the quan-
titative model we will consider separable utility between c and x—which allows us to be agnostic
   13 Formally    u (c, x ) = [cρ + x ρ ]1/ρ .
   14 This   ratio decreases slightly since at higher x, w falls around the job reservation locus, which increases Ww more
than Wa .


                                                                 9
                     Figure 2: Simulated example of job acceptance policy behaviour

                                                                              0.4


                                                                              0.3


                                                                              0.2


                                                                              0.1


                                                                                0
                                                                                     2000      4000       6000


Notes: Panel A depicts the acceptance policies w∗ ( a, x ) for two asset levels (high and low). Jobs to the North-East of
the locus are accepted, while others are rejected. As per the text, the locus is decreasing and convex in x for a fixed
a, and as a increases rotates around a fixed point. Under lower assets, more high-x, low-w jobs are rejected (in the
                                                                                                          b a ( a, x ) with
South-East), and more low-x, high-w jobs are accepted (in the North-West). Panel B depicts its derivative w
                                                                                       b a = (Ua − Wa ) /Ww .
                                                b a ( a, x ) according to the equation w
respect to a. Panel C decomposes the derivative w



as to whether our data captures the flow or present discounted values of job satisfaction. Hence
the fact that the results of this section go through with ucx = 0 is not important for what follows.


Unemployment duration. Note that the model does not have a sharp prediction for the effect
of assets on unemployment duration, only on the average wage and average job satisfaction of
accepted jobs. As the reservation locus rotates, it may either lead to an increase or decrease in
unemployment duration. In a model without amenities, a decrease in assets would cause Ua
to decline by more than Wa , leading the reservation wage to fall and unemployment duration
to shorten. In a model with amenities, the decrease in acceptance of low wage, high amenity
jobs offsets some of this in unemployment duration. This is clear in Figure 2A, where it is not
immediately clear whether the job acceptance region has expanded or contracted. This ambiguity
will be borne out in our empirical results, where we do not find large effects of student debt on
unemployment durations, but economically significant effects on job selection in w and x.


Summary. Our contribution in this section is to include amenities in a model of search with asset
accumulation. The key insight is that when amenities are non-tradeable, and so do not enter the
budget constraint of the worker, there exists a substitutability between wages and assets that does
not carry over to job satisfaction and assets. Higher assets can be used to purchase consumption
goods, which reduces the marginal value of a high wage job, leading the household to substitute



                                                            10
toward low wage, high amenity jobs.


Further questions. This simple framework allows one to rethink existing studies with the added
perspective of the interaction of assets and amenities. Over the business cycle, do recessions
marked by sharp declines in asset values cause the cyclically unemployed to systematically choose
higher wage, lower amenity jobs in the recovery? And if so, how would this change our view as to
the true welfare losses of recessions? As an economy develops, does the increased provision of in-
surance through broader access to credit allow workers to take lower wage, higher amenity jobs?
May this permit an interpretation of the flattening college wage premium as due to better insured
college graduates taking jobs they like more? Does this help explain increasingly slow recover-
ies of wages in economic recoveries? Does the provision of insurance from parents to children,
allow offspring of wealthy parents to take higher amenity, lower wage jobs such as low paying
internships?
    We think that all such questions would be quantitatively interesting provided that the utility
values of job satisfaction are large. So in Section 4 we extend this model so that we can estimate the
value of job satisfaction and understand how this may interact with policy. But first, we establish
that this trade-off of amenities for wages when assets are lower is empirically observed, focusing
on the special case of student debt.



3 Empirics

We first describe the data, sample selection and measurement. This determines both the sample
for our empirics and for computing moments used in estimating the quantitative model in Section
5. We then detail our empirical strategy, results, how these results vary across the distribution
of observables, and robustness to sample selection and measurement choices. Throughout we
deflate all dollar amounts to 2009 according to the CPI.


3.1 Data

Individual. At the individual level our main data source is the restricted-use National Center for
Education Statistics’ Baccalaureate and Beyond Surveys (BBS) microdata.15 The data are available for
three samples of undergraduates: those graduating in 1993, 2000 and 2008. We restrict attention
  15 Other  papers to have used this data include Lochner and Monge-Naranjo (2015), Altonji et al. (2016),
Gervais and Ziebarth (2017), and Weidner (2016).


                                                   11
to the latter two cohorts (BBS00, BBS09) since student debt is negligible in the first. Each sample is
representative of that cohort, and consists of a mix of administrative data and self-reported data
acquired in an interview one year after graduation. Administrative data include all responses on
individuals’ applications for free Federal funding (including parental income, parental education),
college reported data (including GPA, major), and data from national administrative grant and
loan records.16 Self-reported data include various aspects of employment and job search between
college and interview.


Institutional.        Using harmonized college identifiers, we merge the BBS individual level data
with institution level data from two sources. The first is the Institutional Post-Secondary Database
(IPEDS), which includes annual data on grants and loans of all types (institutional, State, Federal,
other). The second is the recently released College Scorecard data, which includes measures of SAT
scores of entering college cohorts that we will use to control for time-varying college quality.


Sample selection.         We keep the following observations. All references are with respect to char-
acteristics of the individual one year after college when the BBS interview takes place. In terms of
demographics, those under the age of 30. In terms of employment, those employed full-time in
a single job, and that report earning above $12,500 annually.17 In terms of education, those that
completed a four year undergraduate degree. In terms of debt, those with positive student loans
from any source. We provide more explanation for these restrictions when considering robustness
below.
     Table 2 provides full-sample and restricted-sample summary statistics for both cohorts. We
find that our sample selection procedure does not drastically change the general observable prop-
erties of the cohorts. The final two columns provides statistics for individuals under 30 with a
college degree and employed full time in the CPS. A comparison of these statistics across samples
shows the BBS to be broadly representative.18

   16 Respectively, these data sources combined in the BBS are as follows. The Free Application for Federal Student
Aid (FAFSA) form is filled out by any student seeking Federal funding, which in practice is almost all students. The
National Post-secondary Student Aid Study (NPSAS) is an administrative data set to which all colleges that receive
any Federal funding report information on all students. The National Student Loan Data System (NSLDS) maintains
records of all student loans.
   17 In 2009 dollars, one would earn $12,445 ($11,809) if working at the 2009 (2001) Federal Minimum Wage for 38 hours

per week over a 50 week year. Full-time status is taken from an interview question regarding labor force participation.
Ten categories are available, and we keep those responding “One full-time job, not enrolled [in further education]”. The
majority of respondents (50.1 percent) give this response.
   18 Earnings are higher in the CPS because we cannot condition precisely on individuals having completed college

one year ago. Hence the CPS statistics incorporate some income growth after college.


                                                          12
                                                Table 2: Sample statistics

                                        Initial BBS sample        Final BBS sample                  CPS
                                        2001         2009          2001       2009          2001          2009
                                         ( 1)         ( 2)          ( 3)       ( 4)          ( 5)         ( 6)


               A. Demographics
               Male                      39.5        41.2          41.3       44.7          47.4          44.7
               Age                       25.2        24.4          22.8       22.8          26.8          26.5
               White                     77.9        72.4          79.6       75.2          80.2          80.4
               Black                     7.8          9.1          7.14       7.79           8.8           8.2

               B. Outcomes
               Earningsijc ($)          30,522      26,831        30,788     36,418        38,833     44,025
               Satisijc                  0.854      0.736         0.858      0.758            -          -
               Searchijc                 0.261      0.357         0.240      0.302            -          -
               Duration ijc                -         10.1            -        10.3            -          -
               Teachijc                  0.177      0.113         0.198      0.126            -          -

               C. Other
               Observations             6,664       13,902         4,274      7,630         2,710     2,639
               Colleges                  594         953            543        953            -         -
               Students/College           11          15             8          8             -         -



Notes: The table provides sample statistics for the main variables of interest in this paper. We provide the statistics for
the two cohorts for the raw sample (columns 1 and 2) and the final sample for IV regressions (columns 3 and 4). We also
report the statistics from the unrestricted Current Population Survey (CPS) for the two years, to show that our sample
of the undergraduate graduates is close to the representative working population.



3.2 Specification

Estimating equation. To estimate the effect of student debt on job choices, we consider estimat-
ing the following equation:
                                          yijc = αc + βdijc + γ0 Xijc + ε ijc ,                                        (4)

where yijc is an outcome measure for an individual i at college j in cohort c ∈ {2001, 2009}, dijc
is a measure of student debt, Xijc are a vector of individual level observables, and αc is a cohort
fixed effect. We seek an unbiased and consistent estimate of β. Two issues arise from such a
specification.
     First, there may be a correlation between the level of debt an individual takes on and the
quality of the college attended. If a higher quality college costs more and produces better outcomes
                                                                       
yijc conditional on observables Xijc , then a positive cov ε ijc , dijc would bias β upward. To address
this we consider only within-college across-cohort variation by adding a college fixed effect α j , as



                                                             13
well as a continuous control for time-varying college quality Q jc . Under ε ijc = α j + γ1 Q jc + ηijc ,
                                                 
our estimate would be unbiased if cov ηijc , dijc = 0.
      However, even within a college there may be a correlation between the level of debt an in-
dividual takes on and unobservable quality or skill ai which may be positively correlated with
yijc . Two particular cases concern us. On the one hand, debt may be negatively selected. Low
ability students may have low ability parents, who themselves have low wages, leading to addi-
tional borrowing. In this case a negative cov( ai , ηijc ) would bias β downward. On the other hand,
debt may be positively selected. High ability students forecast that they will receive high wages
and so borrow to smooth consumption and purchase better quality college. In this case a positive
cov( ai , ηijc ) would bias β upward.
      We address this in two ways. First, we add additional controls Sijc for parent ability and
student ability that are pre-determined at college entry, so that ηijc = δ2 Sijc + νijc . Second, we
construct instruments for student debt that vary within-colleges, across-cohorts, are correlated
with dijc , and uncorrelated with νijc . Motivated by Rothstein and Rouse (2011), we choose an
instrument that depends on college policy. We take as our instrument Zjc the ratio of the value
of total institutional grants issued by the college Grants jc to the sum of Grants jc and total Federal
loans Loans jc . We later vary this instrument and show our results to be robust.
      The final regression specification is therefore as follows:

                                                                                        
                      First stage:      dijc = α1c + α1j + ψZjc + Π′ Xijc , Q jc , Sijc + ξ ijc ,                 (5)
                                                                                        
                  Second stage:         yijc = α2c + α2j + βdbijc + Γ′ Xijc , Q jc , Sijc + νijc .


      We briefly describe the validity of our instrument:

   1. Relevance. In Table 3 we show that Federal loans and Institutional grants account for over
       70 percent of external funding.19 Institutional grants account for more than half of Grants jc +
                        
       Loans jc —i.e. E Zjc ≈ 0.5. Changes in institutional grants have a large impact on a large
       amount of funding for a lot of students.

   2. Relevance. In addition to being small in value, other forms of State and Federal funding, (i)
       show little across-cohort variation, (ii) are determined by formulae that are often functions

   19 Interms of percentage of total funding: Loans - Federal 26%, Other 6%; Grants - Federal 13%, State 10%, Institu-
tional 45%. In terms of percentage of students receiving funding: Loans - Federal 54%, Other 7%; Grants - Federal 33%,
State 34%, Institutional 55%. Federal loans and institutional grants therefore dominate funding (See Table 3).


                                                         14
       of our existing controls Sijc .20

   3. Variation. There is significant within-college across-cohort variation in Zjc . Figure B1 plots
       a histogram of Zjc − Z j using IPEDS data from 2001 to 2014, showing that there is significant
       variation in Zjc within colleges, across time.

   4. Exogeneity. One may be concerned that within-college across-time changes in Zjc alter the
       composition of students beyond that accounted for by our rich set of observables and mea-
       sures of college quality Q jc . For example, suppose a student receives many offers from col-
       leges J and then selects j ∈ J based on Grantsijc —which is positively correlated with Zjc ,
       and will receive the same federal funding regardless of college choice. Comparing one col-
       lege over time, if Zjc′ < Zjc , then the lower Zjc′ will lead fewer financially constrained (and
       thus potentially low ability) students in cohort c′ to accept offers. Debt in c′ will be higher
       and wages will also be higher due to selection on ability. Our estimate of β would be biased
       upward. However, we provide evidence that students do not in fact apply to many schools
       and then select on Grantsijc . Nearly 80 percent, of Freshmen FAFSA applicants list only one
       college, and less than 4 percent list more than five (Figure B2). This suggests that college
       choice is primarily determined by idiosyncratic preferences and not individual selection on
       institutional grants, which are offered to the student after admission, which itself occurs after
       their FAFSA submission.21

We therefore summarize that the instrument is relevant for debt, fluctuates substantially across
cohorts within institutions, and should be uncorrelated with unobserved student ability that is
not already captured by our controls, given the limited scope of college applications.




   20 In an unpublished working paper Chapman (2015) studies a similar question to us, focussing only on the ef-
fect of student debt on wages. Using BBS09 and a regression-discontinuity design around SAT eligibility cut-offs
for state-merit aid as an instrument for student debt, she finds a positive but statistically insignificant effect of debt
on wages. Similar issues regarding power have affected researchers using Treasury data on the universe of student
loans and parental income eligibility cut-offs for Federal need-based aid. This issue again occurs in the study of
Gervais and Ziebrath (2019), who have insufficient power in the BBS around a kink in Federal grant issuance as a
function of parental income. We suspect that much of the issue regarding statistical significance in both cases is that
State and Federal grants make up small components of total external funding (Table 3) and—when not granted—can
be made up with institutional grants if available. Hence, like Rothstein and Rouse (2011), we focus on within-college
variation in the largest component of non-loan funding: institutional (or ‘college’) grants.
   21 Students can list up to ten colleges in their FAFSA submission. There is no monetary cost of listing additional

schools. There is also no strategic cost: the number of colleges listed, and the order of colleges, is not disclosed to any
school. Federal and State aid is administered using FAFSA based information, while most colleges also use the FAFSA
to allocate institutional grants. For further information see FAFSA Help.


                                                            15
                         Table 3: External college funding at US colleges 2007-2014

                                               Fraction of total   Fraction of students     Average value for a
                                                   funding          receiving funding      receiving student ($)
                                                      (1)                   (2)                     (3)


           A. Total loans and grants
           Loans                                     30.5                  53.9                     7,200
           Grants                                    69.5                  72.7                    12,223

           B. Disaggregated loans and grants
           Loans - Federal                           24.7                  53.1                     5,932
           Loans - Other                              5.7                   6.3                    11,473
           Grants - Federal                          12.4                  32.2                     4,924
           Grants - State                            10.5                  34.0                     3,933
           Grants - College (Institutional)          46.7                  56.0                    10,639


Notes: This table reports the decomposition of college funding at U.S. colleges from 2007 to 2014.



Measurement.          The key independent variable dijc is total cumulative borrowing upon gradua-
tion.22 Control variables Xijc are age and dummies for sex (female omitted) and race (white omit-
ted). Measures of student ability Sijc are parental income as reported on the FAFSA form, which
proxies for parental ability, and GPA which proxies for individual ability.
     We consider separately the following dependent variables yijc . Earningsijc is annual earnings
in the current position, where we also use its logarithm for robustness. Searchijc and Teachijc are
binary variables capturing individual answers to the questions “Are you currently looking for a job?”,
and “Are you a teacher?”, respectively. Durationijc is the number of weeks between college and the
beginning of first full-time job (where in this regression only, we condition our sample on students
that did not have a job straight out of college).
     A contribution of our analysis is the use of explicit measures of job satisfaction, which we
briefly describe. Each individual is asked qualitative questions (depending on waves) regarding
their job, each requiring a yes or no answer. We construct our baseline index Satisijc as equaling
one if the individual answers yes to the question “Overall, would you say that you are satisfied with
                                                    ] ijc which controls for systematic correla-
your job?". We also consider an alternative measure Satis
tion of job satisfaction and earnings.23


   22 Since the codebook for the BBS data is not publicly available, we specify variable names from the BBS data and

full descriptions in Table C1 in Appendix C.
   23 To construct this measure we estimate the following by OLS: Satis         0     1
                                                                        ijc = θ c + θ c Earnings ijc + νijc . We allow coeffi-
                                       ] ijc ∈ {0, 1} according to whether the estimated residual is below or above
cients to vary by cohorts. We then set Satis
0.


                                                             16
Implementation.         As shown in Table 2, the average number of students per college j is 8 in our
final BBS data. With few students per college we are unable to precisely estimate college fixed
effects α j . We therefore group colleges into G groups gj ∈ {1, . . . , G }, and estimate fixed effects
at the group level α g . To isolate fixed effects for similar schools we group colleges by quantiles of
average SAT scores of entering cohorts.24 These are obtained from the publicly available College
Scorecard data. We lag this measure by four years such that it aligns with the BBS cohorts. This
serves the purpose of grouping together similar schools, and further controlling for college quality.
In our baseline estimates we set G = 10, and cluster standard errors at the gc-level.


3.3 Results

Table 4 provides our main empirical results, where the instrument is the ratio of total grants to
total financial aid (grants plus loans) for cohort c within college j.
     Our benchmark specification shown in Column (1), implies that increasing a student’s debt
by $1,000 would lead to an increase of $211 for the initial wage, but a 0.22 percent decrease in our
measure of the general satisfaction index. The empirical results establish the trade-off between a
higher wage and a lower satisfaction level due to more student debts. The satisfaction measure
                           ] ijc , responds more to debt, both economically and statistically.
conditioning out earnings, Satis
Furthermore, college graduates search more on-the-job, spend less time looking for their first job,
and are less likely to take on a teaching job. As discussed above, shorter durations of unemploy-
ment would—in a model without amenities—necessarily imply a lower accepted wage. Instead
we observe shorter durations and higher wages, rationalized by lower amenity. Table 5 reports
coefficients on the additional controls for debt and satisfaction regressions.


OLS vs IV.      Column (6) of Table 4 provides results from estimating equation (5) by OLS. Condi-
tioning on our broad range of controls, the correlation of residual debt and wages is statistically
insignificant, and the economic magnitude is much smaller than the IV coefficient. The point esti-
mate of the coefficient in the log earnings case is even negative. This is consistent with debt being
negatively selected, corroborating the interpretation of the data proposed by Yannelis (2015).




   24 Thecolleges are grouped (i.e. quantiles calculated) in the BBS data, which represents a subsample of all colleges,
rather than being grouped in the College Scorecard data, which represents the universe of colleges, and then these
groups being merged down onto our BBS data.


                                                          17
                                                                                       Grants jc
                            Table 4: Baseline empirical results: Zjc =             Grants jc + Loans jc

                       Baseline                  Debt                         Income                  OLS        Follow-up
                                        Low             High          Low          High              2001-09       2012
                          ( 1)           ( 2)           ( 3)           ( 4)            ( 5)               ( 6)      ( 7)


   A. Earnings
   Earningsijc         0.2114***       0.9110       0.2430*          0.0253       0.1578*            0.0079      0.4548***
                        (0.06804)      (0.61202)    (0.12884)        (0.03430)    (0.09256)         (0.01491)     (0.09058)
   log Earningijc      0.0046***       0.0104      0.0073***         0.0006       0.0025*            -0.0000     0.0064***
                        (0.00148)      (0.01314)    (0.00281)        (0.00138)    (0.00128)         (0.00032)     (0.00151)

   B. Satisfaction
   Satisijc             -0.0022        0.0056       -0.0047          0.0004      -0.0056***          -0.0004
                        (0.00161)      (0.01458)    (0.00303)        (0.00265)    (0.00193)         (0.00028)
   ] ijc
   Satis                -0.0029*       -0.0029      -0.0048          0.0004      -0.0069***          -0.0004      -0.0002
                        (0.00162)      (0.01456)    (0.00304)        (0.00265)    (0.00198)         (0.00029)     (0.00065)

   C. Other
   Searchijc            0.0032*        0.0194       0.0025           0.0040       0.0040*           0.0009***     0.0017
                        (0.00173)      (0.01579)    (0.00320)        (0.00280)    (0.00209)         (0.00032)     (0.00142)
   Duration ijc         -0.1351        0.2885       -0.2587          -0.2982      -0.0373
                        (0.09677)      (0.82459)    (0.16534)        (0.20041)    (0.10523)
   Teachijc            -0.0035***      -0.0162*    -0.0077***        -0.0032*    -0.0033***          0.0001       -0.0002
                        (0.00114)      (0.00945)    (0.00208)        (0.00173)    (0.00122)         (0.00018)     (0.00121)


Notes: Results from estimating (5) by 2SLS, using the fraction of total grants to the sum of grants and loans within
college j in cohort c as the instrument for individual loans of student i. Entries provide point estimates for β and
standard errors in parentheses. ∗ ∗ ∗ indicates statistical significance at 1% level, ∗∗ means significance at 5% level,
while ∗ for 10% level. Column (1) provides our baseline estimate. Columns (2) and (3) provide results splitting the
sample into those with lower and higher than the median student debts level for robustness checks. Columns (4) and
(5) provide results for the subsamples for those with lower and higher than the median earnings level. Column (6)
provides results for the pooled OLS regression. The last column provides results using the follow-up survey in 2012 in
place of the BBS09 in the baseline estimate, i.e. using the variation between BBS01 and BBS12.



Follow-up in 2012.           Column (7) in Table 4 reports the IV results using the BBS01 cohort and a
2012 follow up survey for the BBS09 cohort. This new data were published only in 2017 and are
helpful in understanding the long-term effects of student debt on labor market outcomes. The
results on both earnings and log earnings are much larger and more precise.25 A $1,000 increase
in debts implies a $455 increase in the wage. The long-term effects of student debts on earnings
are hence stronger than the short-run effects. While the 2012 follow-up does not contain questions
regarding job satisfaction, the signs of the results for search and teaching are consistent with the
baseline.



   25 We   understand the precision to increase as the noisy process of sorting through the labor market settles down.


                                                                18
Heterogeneity.    Next we provide results for estimation of (5) in subsamples under two different
splits of the data. Columns (2) and (3) in Table 4 split the sample below and above median
student debt level ($20,600). Columns (4) and (5) in Table 4 split the sample below and above
median income ($36,200). Focussing on the results for earnings and satisfaction, we find that
the magnitude and precision of the effects are largest for high debt and high income individuals.
When we calibrate our model we will show that in fact earnings and satisfaction are correlated
for individuals without college debt, implying a positive correlation in the underlying sampling
distribution of jobs. The negative coefficient on satisfaction for high income individuals implies
that job choice is undoing this positive correlation in the underlying sampling distribution of jobs,
something our model will not target but will reproduce in Figure 9.


Robustness. We also consider two alternative specifications for our instrument Zjc and find
that our results are robust. Table A1 replicates Table 4 for estimation of (4) where Zijc is de-
termined at the individual level, and given by total fees plus board as reported by the college
                                                                        
 StudentBudget jc minus institutional grants to the individual Grantsijc . Table A2 reports re-
sults for a 3SLS approach which aims to isolate the increase in within college student debt cor-
related with within college grant policies, and use this as an instrument. In a new first stage we
                                                                   
                                                            \ jc from IPEDS data and project
take college level average student debt from 2001-2014 AveDebt
this on year fixed effects, total number of students, our original instrument Zjc and college fixed
                                            \ jc as the instrument in our original two-stage
effects. We then use the predicted values, AveDebt
least squares estimation. Under both alternative instruments, the coefficients on earnings and log
earnings are positive and those on the two satisfaction measures are negative, consistent with the
signs in the baseline estimation.


Summary. Our empirical results expand the results of Rothstein and Rouse (2011) to a represen-
tative sample and support the conclusion that higher student debt leads individuals to quickly
take jobs that they like less but pay more and engage in more search once employed. Figure 3
summarizes the satisfaction component of this result, showing that, even outside of our regres-
sion framework, the fraction of individuals reporting high job satisfaction is decreasing in student
debt, even within income groups.
    If labor markets are frictional and search is costly then this trade-off may lead to persistently
low job satisfaction and high search costs. But how is this valued in lifetime utility? And how



                                                 19
                                  Figure 3: Student debt and job satisfaction

                                 0.70

                                 0.65

                                 0.60

                                 0.55

                                 0.50

                                 0.45
                                               High          Med           Low income
                                 0.40
                                    No debt        1            2          3          4
                                        Debt quartiles (within each income tercile)

Notes: Estimation sample reported in text (Table 2). Individuals are first split up into three income terciles. Debt
quantiles are then computed within income terciles. No debt on the x-axis corresponds to students with zero debt,
which account for 23 percent of the sample. The y-axis reports the fraction for which Satisijc = 1.



might this change our understanding of the welfare implications of debt repayment policy? These
are the questions we now pursue, laying out a quantitative counterpart to the model in Section 2
that explicit accounts for student debt, and estimating the model using the empirical relationship
between Earningsijc , Satisijc and Searchijc .



4 Quantitative model

Our theoretical model established an asset-induced trade-off between wages and job satisfaction,
and we have provided empirical support for this trade-off in the context of student debt. We now
extend the theory model, specializing it to the case of student debt so that we can put this trade-off
in utility terms, answering: what is the utility value of job satisfaction to individuals? Through
the model, the data informs us that these values are significant, which prompts us to consider
how accounting properly for this trade-off affects the direction and magnitude of the response of
welfare to a change in institutional repayment policies.
     We change the model in four ways. First, we include institutional features that distinguish
student debt from other forms of debt, specifically its repayment requirements. Second, to map
the model into the data in the previous section we specialize the utility function to two levels of
job satisfaction x L and x H , while considering only log utility in consumption: u(c, x) = log c + x.
We normalize the value of job satisfaction in unemployment to zero. Third, higher student debt

                                                           20
                  Table 5: Baseline empirical results - Coefficients for additional covariates

                                        Baseline                  High debt                  High income
                             Earningsijc       Satisijc    Earningsijc    Satisijc      Earningsijc     Satisijc
                                 ( 1)              ( 2)         ( 3)          ( 4)          ( 5)          ( 6)


          Debt                0.2114***        -0.0022       0.2430*      -0.0047         0.1649*     -0.0056***
                               (0.06804)      (0.00161)     (0.12884)    (0.00303)       (0.09294)     (0.00193)
          Male                6.8748***        0.0222*      6.3125***     0.0218         4.5275***      -0.0024
                               (0.50929)      (0.01203)     (0.74414)    (0.01739)       (0.74203)     (0.01539)
          Age                  -0.6859         -0.0353       -2.0485      -0.1130         -4.6126       -0.0166
                               (2.20872)      (0.05265)     (3.19641)    (0.07604)       (3.01433)     (0.06358)
          Black                2.0228**        0.0008        0.0577       0.0024          0.0989        0.0003
                               (0.96772)      (0.00107)     (0.06472)    (0.00154)       (0.06079)     (0.00128)
          Parental Income      0.4885**        0.0050        -0.1523      0.0121          -0.1971       0.0024
                               (0.24249)      (0.00575)     (0.41793)    (0.00977)       (0.33822)     (0.00708)
          GPA                 12.0327***      0.1427***    12.2017***    0.1384**        8.1490***      -0.0460
                               (1.82654)      (0.04331)     (2.53988)    (0.05964)       (2.60522)     (0.05438)

Notes: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1 This table provides results from estimating (5) by 2SLS. Entries provide point
estimates for β and standard errors. Columns (1) and (2) provide results for the baseline for outcomes of earnings and
general satisfaction. Columns (3) and (4) provide robust results for the subsample with debts higher than the median
level ($20,600). Columns (3) and (4) provide robust results for the subsample with income higher than the median
level ($32,600).



may not affect job decisions if individuals have access to other forms of borrowing and saving, we
therefore include liquid assets with realistic borrowing constraints. Fourth, in order to estimate
the utility value of job satisfaction, we add costly on-the-job search. This allows us to leverage
the empirical relationship between on-the-job search, wages and job satisfaction to estimate the
magnitudes of x L and x H . Much of the structure of the simple model remains.


States.    The state vector for an employed worker is sE = ( a, d, t, w, x) and contains liquid assets
a, outstanding student debt d, a date variable for the loan t, wage w and job-satisfaction x. For an
unemployed worker the state vector is sU = ( a, d, t). The initial state of the agent is unemployment
with a0 , d0 , and t0 = 1.


Repayment. We accurately model the repayment rules faced by student loan holders. To this
end we introduce the following general objects which in later sections we specialize to replicate
features of different repayment environments.

Definition. A repayment policy R is a tuple of functions R = (ρ, ∆, τ )(s)

   1. The repayment function ρ(s) specifies the full required repayment in the current period.

                                                           21
   2. The penalty function ∆(s) specifies the evolution of debt d′ = ∆(d, w, t) if the full repayment is not
       made. This includes penalties for late repayment.

   3. The deferral function τ specifies the evolution of the date of the loan t′ = τ (d, w, t) if the full
       repayment is not made. This captures renegotiation and other institutional features.

Finally, we assume that if an individual’s available resources, including credit up to their borrow-
ing limit, exceed ρ(s) plus a consumption floor c, then the full repayment ρ(s) must be made. If
these resources cover less than ρ(s), then a partial repayment is made and the penalty function is
invoked. Since student debt can not be defaulted upon, we do not model default on the principle.
The interest rate on student debt is given by rd .


Assets.    Since the standard repayment period for college debt is ten years, it would be counter-
factual to impose a′ ≥ 0 until debt is repaid. When the worker is employed we limit credit to
a multiple of income a′ ≥ −Γ E (sE ) = −γw. An unemployed worker’s credit cannot be further
extended and so faces the borrowing constraint a′ ≥ ΓU (sU ) = min { a, 0}.26 We assume that the
interest rate on student debt rd is constant and allow the rate of return on liquid assets ra ( a) to
vary with assets.


Search.     All unemployed workers search and face a probability λU of drawing from F (w, x). For
employed workers search is costly. At the convening of the labor market each period an employed
worker draws an iid utility cost of search κ ∼ H (κ ), κ ∈ [κ, κ ]. If the cost is paid, the worker is
deemed to be searching and an offer arrives with probability λ E . The model therefore produces
data on the fraction of workers searching across the observed states (w, x). The increase in in-
come that is required to generate the same frequency of on-the-job search across low and high
satisfaction jobs will therefore inform us about their utility values.27


Worker problem. Let W ( a, d, t, w, x) and U ( a, d, t) be the present discounted value of lifetime
utility of an employed and unemployed worker (i) after the resolution of labor market risk, and
   26 This implies that on graduation the student cannot borrow until they find a job.The particular structure of borrow-
ing limits is new and allows us to represent the problem recursively while also avoiding a common issue in Bewley style
consumption savings models, which is that individuals that experience negative shocks are required to immediately
delever.
   27 An additional benefit of the iid costs of search is to smooth expected value functions, allowing us to use sparse

polynomial approximations when solving the model. With four continuous state variables (w, a, d, t) such polynomial
approximations are crucial. The iid costs of search allow these to be implemented even in the presence of kinks induced
by job acceptance decisions.


                                                           22
(ii) before the consumption and saving decision. These two values may be written recursively as
follows:


1. Value of employment
                                                                 "
     W ( a, d, t, w, x) = max log(c) + x + β δU ( a′ , d′ , t′ ) . . .
                                   c≥c

                                                  Z                                                                                    #
                                  +(1 − δ)            max       − κ ′ + W S ( a′ , d′ , t′ , w, x), W ( a′ , d′ , t′ , w, x) dH (κ ′ )
                                      Z      n                                                      o
        ′    ′    ′
    S
 W ( a , d , t , w, x) = λ E              max W ( a′ , d′ , t′ , w, x), W ( a′ , d′ , t′ , w′ , x′ ) dF (w′ , x′ )

                                  +(1 − λ E )W ( a′ , d′ , t′ , w, x)


subject to
Case 1 - Repayment             (1 + ra ( a)) a + w + Γ E (w) − c ≥ ρ(d, t)


                 a′ = (1 + ra ( a)) a + w − c − ρ(d, t),                       d′ = (1 + r d ) d − ρ( s E ),      t′ = t + 1


Case 2 - Delinquency            (1 + ra ( a)) a + w + Γ E (w) − c < ρ(d, t)


                               a ′ = − Γ E ( w ),               d′ = ∆( a, d, t, w),              t′ = τ (d, t)


2. Value of unemployment
                                                                 "
                      U ( a, d, t) = max log(c) + β (1 − λU )U ( a′ , d′ , t′ ) + . . .
                                          c≥c

                                              Z
                                                                                                                          #
                                                       n                                                   o
                                                                  ′   ′    ′      ′   ′       ′    ′   ′          ′   ′
                                         λU       max W ( a , d , t , w , x ) , U ( a , d , t ) dF (w , x )


subject to
Case 1 - Repayment             (1 + ra ( a)) a + b + ΓU ( a) − c ≥ ρ(d, t)


                                           a′ = (1 + ra ( a)) a + b − c − ρ(d, t)

                                           d′ = (1 + rd ) d − ρ(d, t)

                                           t′ = t + 1


                                                                      23
Case 2 - Delinquency         (1 + ra ( a)) a + b + ΓU ( a) − c < ρ(d, t)


                            a ′ = − ΓU ( a ),            d′ = ∆( a, d, t, b),           t′ = τ (d, t)


Baseline policy. In the baseline model we consider the repayment policy for Federal Stafford
loans under the Standard Repayment Plan, which we denote RS :28,29

                                  
                                  
                                  0                                        ,   if t ≤ TG
                      ρS (d, t) =   h                               i
                                  
                                                 rd
                                           1−(1+r d ) −( T −t +1)
                                                                 if t ≥ TG + 1
                                                                        d   ,
                                                                h                        i
                ∆S ( a, d, t, y) = (1 + rd )d − ρ p ( a, y) + φS ρS (d, t) − ρ p ( a, y)
                                                                  n                        o
                                     where ρ p ( a, y) = max (1 + ra ) a + y + Γ − c , 0
                                   
                                   
                                    TG + 1 , if d > 0 and t = T − 6
                      τS (d, t) =
                                   
                                   t + 1      , otherwise


The repayment ρS is calculated to amortize the balance d over T − t periods. If available resources
do not cover the full required repayment (i.e. (1 + ra ( a)) a + w − Γ(s) ∈ (0, ρS (s))) then available
resources are submitted in partial repayment ρ p ( a, y). We call this delinquency. Under delinquency
∆S states that the loan accrues interest and a penalty is added to the balance. This penalty is a
fraction φS of the missed full repayment (ρS ) net of the partial repayment (ρ p ).
     The rules are then parameterized as follows. The penalty φS is set to 18.5 percent to ap-
proximate the effect of payment default.30 Since any payment up to the borrowing constraint is


    28 Conditional on positive debt, 67 percent of the BBS sample receive only Federal funding and 30 percent receive

a combination of Federal and private loans (BBS09 variable: loansrc). One hundred percent of Federal borrowers hold
Stafford loans and 78 percent hold Stafford loans as their only form of Federal support (BBS09 variable: fedlnpak).
The remainder receive a combination of Stafford and other Federal support (e.g. PLUS loans, Pell grants). 99 percent
of Stafford borrowers held both subsidized and unsubsidized loans and of these 48 percent borrowed less than the total
maximum for the program (BBS09 variable: stafct1). The only difference between subsidized and unsubsidized Stafford
loans is the deferment of interest while studying at college under the latter, effectively changing the principle of the
loan upon graduation for a given amount borrowed. Since t = 0 coincides with graduation we do not need to model
the difference between these loans.
    29 For information regarding the Standard Repayment Plan the explaination at studentaid.ed.gov linked see here. Up

until 2010 this was the only payment plan available to borrowers.
    30 Stafford loans are considered to be in default if they have remained delinquent for 270 days. A loan is delinquent if

it is not completely up to date in its repayments. A defaulting borrower does not default in the traditional sense since
student debt is essentially non-defaultable. Instead the loan is handed to a collection agency with a fee of 18.5 percent
accrued to the principle. Since modeling this entirely would require additional state-variables we view the above as a
reasonable approximation. As an additional reference, a major loan provider Sallie Mae issues a late fee of 6 percent of
the repayment after a payment for each 15 days past its due date. Compounded over two periods to get to a month,
this is 12.4 percent (see: http://lifehacker.com/how-one-late-student-loan-payment-affects-you-1326216867).


                                                                24
enforced, all delinquent borrowers end the period with assets a′ = Γ(s) and consume c = c.31
Graduates are initialized with t = 1. Payments are deferred for a six month grace period ( TG = 6)
and the loan is amortized over 10 years ( T = 120) . We do not model renegotiation of the loan
explicitly. As a stand-in τS implies that we reset the date of the loan to t = TG in the case that the
individual gets close to T without it being fully amortized.32



5 Estimation

Given the baseline repayment policy the unknown parameters and functional forms are

                   n                                 o               n                                             o
            θ1 =       β, δ, rd , ra ( a), γ, b, c       ,    θ2 =       x L , x H , H (κ ), λU , λ E , F (w, x)


Our strategy is as follows. We externally calibrate θ1 and then make the following observation:
all of the parameters in θ2 enter the problem of a student graduating with d = 0. Given the
complexity of the problem, our strategy is therefore to estimate θ2 on the sub-sample of the BBS09
data without student debt, dropping two state variables. This also ties our hands. We are not using
our main empirical results in the estimation of the model, which allows us to validate the model
against them ex-post. The model is solved at a monthly frequency and estimated on BBS09 data.


5.1 Calibration - θ1

We assume a monthly frequency, and choose β consistent with an 5 percent real interest rate in a
representative agent model: β = 0.951/12 . When discussing interest rates we compound monthly
rates and express them at a yearly frequency. Following Kaplan and Violante (2014) (henceforth
KV) we specify an annual real return on positive assets r+
                                                         a = −2 percent given the nominal return

of zero after 2008 and two percent inflation. The interest rate on student debt is modeled on
Stafford loans which are nominal, fixed rate loans. In academic years 2006-07 and 2007-08 the rate
was 6.80 percent, so we set rd = 4.8 percent.33

   31 In some cases the worker will not be able to finance c even when making no repayments, for example in the

case that a worker has negative assets, is unemployed and ra + b < c. Since unemployed the worker cannot extend
borrowing. We simply assume that the individual remains at the borrowing constraint and that c is a subsidy from
government to the household.
   32 Absent such a function, an individual may end up with a large balance d close to the amortization date. This will

lead to required payments ρS that exceed available funds, and so the loan may never be repaid.
   33 Prior to 2006-07 rates were variable and fluctuated around this figure. From 2013 onwards - due to The Bipartisan

Student Loan Certainty Act 2013 - the rate will be equal to the minimum of the 10-year T-Bill rate and 8.25%. See:
https://www.edvisors.com/college-loans/federal/stafford/interest-rates/


                                                             25
    Figure 4: Median credit card limits and interest rates by age and education. Source: SCF01


                                                                       A. Credit limit                                                                    B. Interest rate
                                              0.25                                                                                      16.00
     Median ratio of limit to annual income




                                                                                                        Median interest rate (% p.a.)
                                                                                                                                        15.50
                                              0.20

                                                                                                                                        15.00


                                              0.15
                                                                                                                                        14.50


                                                          No college
                                                          College                                                                       14.00
                                              0.10
                                                     20     25         30          35    40   45                                                20   25    30         35     40   45
                                                                            Age                                                                                 Age




Notes: (i) Credit ratio is total available credit card limits divided by income, (ii) Income includes wage income, unem-
ployment benefits child benefits, TANF, other, (iii) Values represent medians within age groups; approximately 1,000
observations per cell.


              As borrowing of the liquid asset is uncollateralized, we model it around credit cards. Our
convenient approach to the borrowing constraint is consistent with banks which do not force bor-
rowers to pay down their debt in unemployment, but will no longer extend credit limits. The
average nominal rate on consumer credit cards given by the Federal Reserve’s Consumer Credit
report was 14 percent in 2009 which is the same as we compute for the average rate paid by college
graduates in the Survey of Consumer Finance 2001 (SCF01), so we set r−
                                                                     a = 12 percent.
                                                                                     34 Given the


lack of information regarding credit limits in the BBS09 we use SCF01 to calibrate γ. The survey
asks households to report their total credit limit. Using the same sample as KV, but now restricted
to only college graduates aged 25 to 30, we find a median ratio of credit limits to annual labor in-
come of 21 percent. This is higher than found in KV (18.5 percent) due to excluding those without
a college degree, which have a median limit of only 15 percent of labor income (see Figure 4).35
              The rate of separation from employment δ is taken from Lise (2013) which calculates a
monthly rate for college graduates in the NLSY 1979 of 0.019. The Federal poverty threshold


   34 See:                                      http://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/g19/: G19
   35 An interesting fact emerges when decomposing the data this way.       When comparing college to non-college workers
the within group increase in the credit limit with age is far less significant than the between group difference in average
credit limits: the median credit limits for non-college students is 15.5 percent and 20.0 percent for college graduates. In
fact the increase by age is statistically insignificant for college graduates while increasing from a median of 13.1 percent
among 20 to 25 year old non-college graduates to 16.1 percent for ages 40 to 45.


                                                                                                   26
                   Figure 5: On-the-job search, job satisfaction, income and student debt

                      A. Fraction OTJ search by income                               B. Fraction OTJ search by student debt
     0.60                                                              0.60
                 Low job satiscation
                 High job satisfaction
     0.50                                                              0.50


     0.40                                                              0.40


     0.30                                                              0.30


     0.20                                                              0.20


     0.10                                                              0.10



             1           2               3          4         5         Zero debt        1        2         3          4      5
                                 Income quintile                                                 Debt quintile


Notes: (i) The question asked is “Are you currently looking for a job?” (ii) Zero on the x-axis corresponds to students
with zero debt (23% of the sample) (iii) Part-time workers are those workers that are employed and report average
hours of less than 35 per week (iv) Income is measured as annual income and debt is cumulative student borrowing
upon graduation (v) Since all unemployed workers search by definition we limit the figure to employed workers only.


for an individual living alone in 2008 was $991 per month. We therefore set c to $991.36 In our
estimation sample of 1,439 workers only 20 have a monthly income less than this amount. We as-
sume that unemployment benefits b are sufficient to cover half of c. Computing average benefits
for unemployed workers in the SCF01 gives approximately this result.


5.2 Indirect inference - θ2

The parameters of θ2 = { x L , x H , H (κ ), λU , λ E , F (w, x)} are jointly estimated by indirect inference
given functional forms that we now specify. Search costs are assumed to be distributed uniformly
with mean κ and upper bound κ.
     Given our assumption on two values of amenity we can fully characterize joint distribution
F (w, x) using two conditional densities FL (w) and FH (w) and a probability p H of drawing x H .
These conditional densities are assumed to be log-normal:

                                                            
                                                            
                                                            xL         w.p. (1 − p H )
                                                    x =
                                                            
                                                            x    w.p.
                                                                  H                 pH
                                                                      
                                             log w| xk   ∼ N µk , σk2


   36 See:   https://www.census.gov/hhes/www/poverty/data/threshld/thresh08.html


                                                                  27
The population distribution F (w, x) from which agents draw offers is distinct from what we call the
sample distribution F̃ (w, x) which is the distribution of workers over (w, x) one year after graduat-
ing college which we observe in the data.
     We impose the same parametric form on the sample distribution to give estimates of observed
p̃ H and {µ̃k , σ̃k }k∈{ L,H } which we treat as moments in the estimation. To form these moments we
assign workers in our sample to low and high satisfaction groups in the same way as we did for
our earlier empirics.37 Having split individuals into high and low satisfaction groups we fit a log-
normal distribution log wk ∼ N (µ̃k , σ̃k ) to each of the conditional wage densities. The sampling
proportion of high satisfaction jobs is p̃ H = 0.374. Figure 6A shows the log-normal to be a good
approximation of these conditional densities.
     Under these assumptions we have eleven parameters to estimate:

                                      n                                                         o
                               θ2 =       x L , x H , κ, κ, λU , λ E , p H , µ L , µ H , σL , σH .


Identification.      A key hurdle in the quantitative study of amenities such as ours is identifying the
utility values x L and x H . We have structured the model to leverage observables in the BBS in this
regard. Our approach is to use observed search behavior over job satisfaction and income groups
to infer these values. Figure 5A shows that, conditional on job satisfaction, the fraction of individ-
uals searching on the job is decreasing in income. It is also sharply decreasing in job satisfaction.
With a random cost of search, the model generates exactly this data, with some fraction of indi-
viduals at each income and job satisfaction level choosing to search. This relationship effectively
allows us—through the model—to put a utility value on job satisfaction. The two parameters
associated with the cost of search (κ, κ ), and x L and x H are chosen to jointly target the average
rate of search, the difference across satisfaction groups, the slope with respect to income and the
amount of search not explained by income and debt. Panel B is the non-regression counterpart of
our empirical results, showing that search is also increasing in student debt.


Data.   The estimation sample consists of n = 940 students from the BBS09 that satisfy the fol-
lowing conditions: (i) unemployed upon graduation, (ii) without student debt. The data is
XnData = { Ei , ji , wi , di , xi , Si }ni=1 which consists of observations on employment status Ei ∈ {0, 1},
number of jobs since graduation ji , monthly income wi , duration of search after graduation di , our
constructed measure of job satisfaction xi , and an indicator of active job search Si ∈ {0, 1}.
  37 Again   we refer the reader to Appendix C for the exact questions asked.


                                                               28
                                                     Figure 6: Wage and asset distributions


                         A. Empirical wage distribution by satisfaction type                                B. Empirical distribution of intitial assets
                .4                                                                                 .5
                                                             Low satisfaction                                                      Kernel smoothed estimate
                                                             High satisfaction                                                     Log−normal fit
                                                             Log−normal fit                                                        Exponential fit
                                                                                                   .4
                .3                                           Log−normal fit


                                                                                                   .3
      Density




                                                                                         Density
                .2
                                                                                                   .2

                .1
                                                                                                   .1


                0                                                                                  0
                     0           2          4          6         8             10                       0       2          4           6          8           10
                                       Wage ($000, monthly)                                                         Summer job savings ($000)




Notes: (i) Panel (A) plots kernel smoothed densities of monthly wages (in thousands of dollars) in solid and the log-
normal fit of these distributions in dashed lines. (ii) Panel (B) plots a kernel smoothed density of summer savings from
the year before college (BBS09) jobsave (in thousands of dollars) together with an exponential and log-normal fit. (iii)
For both panels the data are from BBS09 corresponding to our estimation sample for workers without student debt.


Simulation. Given a vector of parameters θ we compute moments from the model as follows.
Policies are solved under θ and then used to simulate s = 1, . . . , S samples of size n for 12
months to derive a dataset XnModel . Moments are computed for each of the s samples and aver-
aged across samples to compute an expectation of the moments. We initialize simulations at t = 0
by specifying that each worker is unemployed and endowed with asset ai,0 which are drawn from
log ai,0 ∼ N (µ a , σa ) with probability pa and set to zero with probability (1 − pa ). BBS09 does not
provide data on savings, though it does contain data on savings due to work over the previous
summer. We use this to estimate pa = 0.35, µ a = 0.376 and σa2 = 0.817 (see Figure 6B).38


Moments.                    The 12 moments used in our estimation of the 11 parameters are as follows. Let
n E = ∑ni=1 1[ Ei =1] .

   1. Maximum likelihood estimates of the parameter ν of a simple hazard model of unemploy-
         ment p(u) = νe−νt so that νb = D n =                            1
                                                                         nE      ∑ni=1 1[ Ei =1] di
   38 Two  other ways to proceed may be as follows. First, we could assume that log ai,0 ∼ N (µ a , σa ) and estimate
these parameters along with p a , adding three parameters to the joint estimation. Alternatively we could assume that
ai,0 = ω × ãi,0 where ãi,0 is summer savings as distributed in the data and estimate only ω, i.e. assume that initial wealth
is perfectly correlated with summer savings. To estimate these new parameters would require us to add moments
regarding assets to the model, which we do not have in the BBS data. We view our approach as a trading off the
assurance that we are using data from a single unified source, against using better asset data from an alternative source
such as the NLSY which has a different sampling scheme.


                                                                                    29
 2-4. Average number of jobs since graduation J n , fraction of employed workers searching Sn , and
     fraction of workers unemployed U n

                                n                                          n                                     n
                          1                                          1                                      1
                   Jn =
                          nE    ∑ 1[E =1] ji ,
                                       i
                                                         Sn =
                                                                     nE   ∑ 1 [ E = 1] s i ,
                                                                                   i
                                                                                                   Un =
                                                                                                            n   ∑ 1 [ E = 0]
                                                                                                                       i
                                i=1                                       i=1                                   i=1



 5-7. The coefficients of a linear probability model estimated on employed workers ( β̂ w , β̂ x ), and
     the implied standard deviation of residuals σ̂e :

                                                                                                                 n
                                                 wi                                                         1
                      Si = β̂ 0 + β̂ w
                                               1, 000
                                                      + β̂ x 1[ xi = x H ] + êi               ,    σ̂e =
                                                                                                            n   ∑ ê2i .
                                                                                                                i=1


8-12. Maximum likelihood estimates of the parameters of the sample distribution of (wi , xi ) under
     the same parametric specification as the population distribution

                                                n
                                        1
                          bk =
                          µ
                                       n E,k   ∑ 1[ E =1, x =x ] log wi ,
                                                         i       i    k
                                                                                       k ∈ { L, H }
                                               i=1
                                        1       n                                2
                          σk2 =
                          b                    ∑ [ Ei =1, xi =xk ]
                                                1                    log w i − b
                                                                               µ k ,               k ∈ { L, H }
                                       n E,k   i=1
                                               n
                                       1
                          pbH    =
                                       nE   ∑ 1[ E =1, x =x
                                                     i       i       H]
                                            i=1


Estimation.   Estimation of the parameters is achieved using a minimum distance estimator
                                     b n described above. We define the following criterion
(MDE) based on the set of 12 moments m
function
                                            n
                                               b n − m (θ ))′ Wn (m
                                Qn ( θ ) = − ( m                  b n − m (θ ))
                                            2

and the associated MDE θbnMDE = arg minθ ∈Θ Qn (θ ). The weighting matrix Wn is constructed
from a consistent estimate of the asymptotic variance covariance matrix of the moments Σ which
         √                  d
satisfies n (mb n − m(θ0 )) → N (0, Σ). This is found by boot-strapping from the data to obtain
                                  h i−1
b n and then taking Wn = diag Σ
Σ                                   bn    .39 Recall that m
                                                          b n is the average across boot-strapped
samples of the data to remove small sample bias.




                                                                     30
                                       Table 6: Parameter estimates - θ2

                          Parameter                                                 Value
                          A. Search costs
                          Mean                                                κ     0.828
                          Upper bound                                         κ     1.617
                          B. Disutility of labor, relative to xUnemployment = 0
                          Low satisfaction                                    xL    -2.344
                          High satisfaction                                   xH    -1.027
                          C. Job offer arrival rates
                          Unemployed                                         λU     0.649
                          Employed conditional on paying κ                   λE     0.081
                          D. Population distribution parameters
                          Probability of high job satisfaction draw x H      pH     0.611
                          Mean of log w for x L                              µL     0.837
                          Mean of log w for x H                              µH     0.993
                          Variance of log w for x L                          σL2    0.140
                          Variance of log w for x H                           2
                                                                             σH     0.124

Notes: Table provides estimates of parameters of quantitative model from Section 4. The model is estimated on the
2009 cohort of the BBS data, and estimated only on students reporting zero student debt.


6 Model fit

Parameter estimates are given in Table 6 and the values of target moments in Table 7. The overall
fit of the model is good, with the moments closely matching those found in the data. Recall that
the amenity value of unemployment was set to zero, so we read the estimates of x L and x H as
suggesting that work still has a lower amenity value than unemployment, but a low satisfaction
job has more than twice the level of disamenity.
     Table 7 column (3) provides the standard deviation of the moments from the data, constructed
by taking the standard deviation of each moment across boot-strapped samples from the data.
Column (4) provides similar statistics from the model, constructed by taking the standard devi-
ation of the moment across repeated simulations of the model. These columns do not provide a
formal assessment of fit, and are not statistics we have seen in similar tables in other papers where
models are estimated by SMM. However we find these statistics useful. They reassure us that even
given the very limited degree of ex-ante heterogeneity, the model generates similar sized variation
in these moments in small samples, suggesting that the statistical properties of the data generated
  39 In taking the diagonal we ignore the correlations between moments which may be imprecisely measured in small

samples given that some are fourth order.


                                                         31
                                            Table 7: Target moments

                                                                          Mean          Std. deviation
            Moments                                               Data       Model      Data     Model
                                                                    (1)          (2)      (3)      (4)

            A. Means
            Duration                             E[hi ]           2.500      2.943      0.108     0.052
            Number of jobs                        E[ ji ]         1.524      1.298      0.031     0.018
            Search                                E [si ]         0.187      0.180      0.014     0.013
            Probability of x H               E[1[ xi = xh ]]      0.716      0.732      0.017     0.014
            B. Wage distribution
            Mean log w for xl                 E[log wi | x l ]    1.097      1.003      0.029     0.039
            Mean log w for xh                 E[log wi | xh ]     1.148      1.098      0.016     0.012
            Variance log w for xl             V[log wi | xl ]     0.175      0.138      0.023     0.019
            Variance log w for xh             V[log wi | xh ]     0.143      0.103      0.010     0.006
            C. Regression coefficients
            Wage ($000) coefficient                 β̂ w         -0.031      -0.033     0.012     0.010
            High satisfaction coefficient           β̂ x         -0.283      -0.308     0.036     0.042
            Std. dev. residuals                      σ̂e          0.364       0.313     0.011     0.011

Notes: (i) Column (1) gives the mean of moments from a bootstrap of the data with 10,000 re-samples (these are
associated with the diagonal of the weighting matrix Wn used in estimation) (ii) Column (2) gives the mean of the
moments from the S = 1, 000 simulations of the model used to compute Q n (θ ) (iii) Column (3) gives the standard
deviation of the moments from the same bootstrap exercise used for column (1) (iv) Column (4) gives the standard
deviations of the moments from 10,000 samples from the model.


                                         Table 8: Additional moments

                                                                          Mean         Std. Deviation
            Moments                                              Data       Model      Data     Model
                                                                   (1)        (2)        (3)      (4)

            A. Unemployment, consumption and assets
            Unemployment                   E[ui ]                0.079      0.095      0.010     0.010
            Mean log consumption         E[log ci ]              0.685      0.516        -       0.014
            Consumption - Income ratio E[ci ]/E[wi ]             0.750      0.602        -       0.006
            Mean log assets             E[log ai ]               2.321      2.316        -       0.021

            B. Other regression moments
            Regression R-squared                    R2           0.124      0.346      0.027     0.043

Notes: (i) Column (1) gives the mean of moments from a bootstrap of the data with 10,000 re-samples, (ii) Column
(2) gives the mean of the moments from the S = 1, 000 simulations of the model used to compute Q n (θ ), (iii) Column
(3) gives the standard deviation of the moments from the same bootstrap exercise used for column (1) (iv) Column (4)
gives the boot-strap standard deviations of the moments from 10,000 samples from the model.




                                                           32
by the model are close to the data not only in terms of means of moments.40
     In Table 8 we produce additional over-identifying moments. The model overstates unem-
ployment only a little at 12 months over graduation in the BBS sample. We also take data from
the SCF01. We find that the consumption to income ratio is roughly consistent, as is the mean of
log consumption and log assets. The R2 of the linear probability model for on-the-job search is too
high in the model relative to the data, indicating that there is additional heterogeneity in the data
not captured in the model. That being said, the fact that fit is not perfect (R2 = 0.346) implies that
the iid search costs and asset dispersion are capturing a lot of this heterogeneity.


Sampling and population distributions. In Figure 7 we plot the population wage distribution
(from which agents draw offers) and the resulting sample distribution which is the model coun-
terpart to the distribution measured in the data one year after graduation. Recall from Table 7 that
we match the sample distribution well. The model has a wage and amenity ladder, as workers
first accepting low wage or low amenity jobs may pay to search for better wages or amenities. The
fact that the mean wage of high satisfaction jobs is higher than the mean wage of low satisfaction
jobs in the sample distribution therefore may be driven by dynamics up the job ladder rather than
a higher mean in the population distribution. We find that to match the data we still need an
underlying positive correlation between wages and job satisfaction in the population distribution:
µ L < µ H . From the point of view of the model, this correlation is an innate technological feature
of the jobs that workers can draw.
     The amenity ladder causes workers with initially low amenities to have higher incentives to
search—a relationship targeted in our calibration. Their wages grow if in their search for a high
amenity job when they draw another low amenity job with a higher wage. Workers with low
amenities therefore drift up the wage ladder more quickly. This leads to a wider gap between
population and sample distributions for low amenity jobs.


Low vs. high asset graduates.         In Figure 8 we show the evolution of cohort means of variables
in the model for the one year period following entry into the labor market. We compare the paths
for a cohort in which all workers have zero assets and one in which all workers have high assets
which are drawn the upper quartile of the initial distribution of initial assets log ai,0 ∼ N (µ a , σa2 ).
  40 To see this point consider a case in which the model was generating the moment relating to unemployment du-
ration by a deterministic mechanism that delivers an acceptable match at exactly this frequency. The model would
match this moment, but across many simulations of the panel of data from the model there would be no variance in
this moment.


                                                      33
                                                                                                                    
                Figure 7: Sampling and population distributions: log w| xk ∼ N µk , σk2


                 A. Low satisfaction jobs                                                B. High satisfaction jobs
 0.6                                                                     0.6
            Population distribution wi |ψL ∼ log N (µL , σL )                      Population distribution wi |ψH ∼ log N (µH , σH )
            Observed distribution wi |ψL ∼ log N (µ̂L , σ̂L )                      Observed distribution wi |ψH ∼ log N (µ̂H , σ̂H )
 0.5                                                                     0.5

 0.4                                                                     0.4

 0.3                                                                     0.3

 0.2                                                                     0.2

 0.1                                                                     0.1

   0                                                                      0
       1    2      3        4       5        6       7          8              1   2       3        4       5       6       7          8
                       Wages ($000s)                                                           Wages ($000s)


Notes: (i) The figure compares the sampling and population distributions implied by the model, (ii) The population
                                            
distributions are log-normal with parameters µ k , σk2 k∈{ L,H } given in Table 6, (iii) The sampling distributions are the
log-normal fits to data generated by the model on low and high satisfaction workers 12 months after graduation with
                      
parameters given by µ        σk2 k∈{ L,H } in column 2 of Table 7.
                        bk , b



       We discuss the wage-amenity trade-off below in the context of student debt, but here note
that the model describes sensible dynamics. Workers in a higher initial asset position when un-
employed are more selective in the labor market, rejecting more offers leading to higher initial
wages and job satisfaction when employed. Since low asset workers quickly accept less satisfac-
tory offers when unemployed they also incur search costs and search more when employed. They
then continue to accept more offers when employed than high asset workers.



7 Results I - Role of student debt

In this section we compare the predictions of the model with student debt against the behavior
detailed in Section 3, specifically the influence of student debt on the wage-amenity trade-off and
search. Since we did not target moments related to student debt in our estimation of the model
we view this as a clear out of sample test of the model.


High vs. low student debt. We next consider the evolution of average labor market outcomes
for cohorts by the level of student debt. We simulate three cohorts, one with no debt, one with
medium debt (di,0 = $40, 000) and one with high debt (di,0 = $85, 000). For simplicity we set


                                                                    34
                                             Figure 8: Comparison of low and high debt cohorts

                   1. Unemployment rate                                  2. Mean monthly wage                         3. Fraction high satisfaction
   1                                                      3200                                                1
                                Solid - Positive assets
                                Dashed - Zero assets
  0.8                                                     3100                                              0.9

  0.6                                                     3000                                              0.8

  0.4                                                     2900                                              0.7

  0.2                                                     2800                                              0.6
                                                                                                                              Sampling probability pH
   0                                                      2700                                              0.5
        1    2     3   4   5    6 7 8      9 10 11 12            1   2   3   4   5    6 7 8   9 10 11 12          1   2   3   4    5    6 7 8      9 10 11 12
                               Months                                                Months                                            Months

                 4. Job offer acceptance rate                        5. Employed fraction searching                               6. Mean assets
   1                                                       0.3                                             1500
                                         Employed                                                                         Employed
                                         Unemployed                                                                       Unemployed
  0.8
                                                           0.2                                             1000
  0.6

  0.4
                                                           0.1                                              500
  0.2

   0                                                        0                                                 0
        1    2     3   4   5    6 7 8      9 10 11 12            1   2   3   4   5    6 7 8   9 10 11 12          1   2   3   4    5    6 7 8      9 10 11 12
                               Months                                                Months                                            Months



Notes: (i) Simulated cohorts have 100,000 workers, (ii) All workers in low asset cohort are initialized with ai,0 = 0,
(iii) All workers in the high asset cohort draw ai,0 from the upper quartile of the initial distribution of assets log ai,0 ∼
            
N µ a , σa2


initial assets to zero for all individuals.
            The behaviour shown in Figure 9 is consistent with our theory and empirics. In the first
period all workers are unemployed. Those with higher debts desire higher wage jobs to meet
the repayments that will become due after the 6 month grace period ends. Given that on-the-
job search is costly, high debt graduates use the grace period to accept fewer initial wage offers
than medium debt graduates who in turn accept slightly fewer than those with no debts. This job
selection leads to high debt graduates having initial jobs with higher wages.
            Since wages are correlated with job satisfaction in the population distribution they also have
higher job satisfaction. When employed, high debt graduates both search more and are more
selective, seeking higher wage jobs. In particular, those in high satisfaction jobs are prepared to
trade off their amenities for higher wages. This is found in their lower acceptance rate and the
fact that although their wages remain higher, their job satisfaction falls relative to lower or no
debt graduates. All of these patterns are maintained when comparing the medium and no debt



                                                                                     35
                           Figure 9: Comparison of zero, low and high debt cohorts

                    2. Wage                               3. Satisfaction                     3. Offer Acceptance Rate
                                             0.7                                      1
                                                                                                                 Unemployed
 3400                                                                                                            Employed
                                            0.65
                                                                                     0.8

 3200                                        0.6
                                                                                     0.6
                                            0.55
 3000                         Zero debt                                              0.4
                              Medium debt    0.5
                              High debt
 2800                                       0.45                                     0.2
         1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12              1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
                  Months                                    Months                                  Months

             4. Emp: Frac searching                     5. Debt Repayments                            6. Value
   0.4                                      1000                                   1650

                                            800
   0.3                                                                             1600
                                            600

                                            400
   0.2                                                                             1550
                                            200

   0.1                                        0                                    1500
         1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12              1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
                  Months                                    Months                                  Months


Notes: (i) Simulated cohorts have 100,000 workers each, (ii) All workers are initialized in unemployment with ai,0 = 0,
(iii) High debt workers are initialized with di,0 = 85, 000, medium debt workers are initialized with di,0 = 40, 000.


graduates. At 12 months, despite a positive correlation in the population distribution, higher debt
students have higher wages and lower amenities. We view this as validation of our empirical
exercise.


First repayment.          Finally, we note the effect that the timing of the first repayment has on job
acceptance for high debt students. Seven months after graduating first repayments on student
loans become due and the acceptance rate for unemployed high debt graduates jumps up, diverg-
ing from medium and no debt and causing satisfaction to further diverge from other students.
We also see a kink in the profile of high debt wages as the unemployed accept anything to meet
repayments.


Summary. Overall we find strong qualitative support of the effect of student debt on search,
wages and job satisfaction and this appears to be of potential quantitative importance. In the fol-
lowing two sections we put numbers around this by first studying the importance of the amenity
channel for assessing the welfare consequences of a change in repayment policy and second quan-


                                                             36
tifying amenity values in lifetime utility terms.



8 Results II - Evaluating repayment policies

External validity.     First we wish to be perfectly clear regarding the external validity of the fol-
lowing results given our sample and estimation. Consider computing the model under policies
R and R′ and computing moments m and m′ from a simulated cohort of graduates under each
policy. Then m′ − m is the model’s prediction of the counterfactual change in that moment un-
der the assumption that R′ is an unanticipated policy change enacted upon the student’s date of
graduation.


Welfare.    We use the following measure of welfare throughout. Given a joint initial distribution
of assets and student debt F ( a, d) upon graduation, and a repayment policy R, total welfare of
student debt holders W is
                                                   Z
                                       W (R) =         UR ( a, d, 0)dF ( a, d)

Consumption welfare Wc (R) and non-pecuniary welfare W x (R) are computed similarly but
only count the utility flows from consumption and job satisfaction, respectively.


Income based repayment.           Our main policy experiment considers the effect of a change from
the standard repayment plan RS under which we have so far proceeded to an Income Based Re-
payment Plan (IBR) R I . In the United States, IBR plans were introduced in 2009, after our sam-
ple.41 Therefore a sudden change to R I seems like a valid experiment. The repayment pol-
icy R I = (ρ I , ∆ I , τI ) is as follows, noting that the condition for delinquency remains the same:
(1 + r( a)) a + w − Γ(s) < ρ I (s) + c:

                                                
                                   ρ I (s) = max 0.15 × (w − 1.5 c ) , 0

                                  ∆ I ( s) = ∆S ( s)

                                   τ I (s) = τS (s)



  41 In 2008 IBR plans were approved by congress. In 2009 these were implemented on a small scale. In 2010 executive
action by President Obama lowered the rate of repayment for loans issued after Academic Year 2013. Since then the
administration has passed actions requiring matriculating college students to be informed of IBR plans. This is very
much an active policy area.


                                                         37
Following institutional data, under R I repayments are 15 percent of disposable income, where
disposable income is defined as wages minus 150 percent of the Federal poverty level c which
in 2008 was $933/month.42 If wages are less than 150 percent of the Federal poverty level then
repayments are zero.43
     Under the US policy three further features were added that we do not consider in our anal-
ysis: (i) debt would be forgiven after 25 years, (ii) in the case that repayments ρ I (s) are less than
interest accrued rd d, the government would pay the remaining interest to avoid negative amortiza-
tion, (iii) the actual required repayment would be the minimum of ρ I (s) as defined here and the
payment required under a Standard Repayment policy ρS (s). For now we ignore these changes
and assess welfare under only the changes to ρ. This is a cleaner experiment and is comparable to
the implementation of income based repayment schemes in other countries such as Australia and
the United Kingdom.


Government budget. So that the policy is not providing a free-lunch to graduates, we modify
the fiscal environment of the model such that a government taxes labor income at a constant
rate τ to finance the cash-flows associated with loan repayment. We view the government as
being able to borrow freely at an exogenous interest rate rg and constrained by a lifetime budget
constraint for each cohort. We require this budget constraint to hold in both repayment schemes
upon graduation (t = 0).
     The government’s lifetime budget constraint for a cohort is as follows:

                               ∞                         ∞
                                                                            
                                   I   τ1 E wit + ρit        I     1 − 1 itE b + rg dit
                              ∑ ∑ (it1 + rg )t =        ∑∑            (1 + r g ) t
                                                                                        .                       (6)
                              t =0 i=1                  t =0 i=1


On the revenue side, the government receives taxes at a constant rate τ on all wages of employed
                 
workers 1 itE = 1 , and all loan repayments. On the expenditure side, the government finances
unemployment benefits and must meet interest payments on the stock of debt.
     When comparing welfare under RS and R I we solve for the tax rate τ that balances the bud-
get. We set rg = 3 percent. Since the IBR will reduce the repayments close to graduation, revenue
will be lower and interest payments on debt higher, requiring higher taxes.44 Quantitatively, these

  42 See: https://www.census.gov/hhes/www/poverty/data/threshld/thresh08.html
  43 All plans are computed annually and then effective for the following year however if large income fluctuations
occur within a year then individuals can have their repayment re-assessed. Therefore the monthly determination model
seems fine (see: StudentAid.gov).
   44 The government can also levy a lump-sum tax on all the wage earners. We also calculate the welfare comparison



                                                        38
                                 Figure 10: Comparing welfare: RS vs. R IBR




Notes: The figure plots the values taken on by the value function for unemployment U ( a, d, t) under the range of values
for d given on the x-axis, and values of a = 0 and t = 1. These are plotted for the model solved under the baseline set
of parameters under R I and RS .


differences turn out to be minor: τS under the Stafford system is 1.13 percent, and τI under the
IBR is 1.14 percent.


Welfare and debt.        Figure 10 plots welfare under each of the repayment plans. At very low debt
levels individuals prefer the standard repayment policy, while at moderately higher debt levels the
income based repayment program is preferred. At low debt levels individuals prefer to ‘get on
with it’ and pay down their loans quickly rather than bearing the additional interest burden that
comes with the IBR. At high debt levels the standard repayment policy requires large repayments
that cripple the borrower. A borrower with $40,000 worth of debt has an initial repayment of $500
per month at the end of the grace period, while under IBR the average repayment is only $200.
This has the consequence of delivering higher consumption to the worker early on in their career
when wages are lower, and the marginal utility of consumption is high. For these reasons welfare
under the IBR is flat in debt since the repayments are determined only by the wage, the slight
downward slope is due to a smaller present discounted utility of consumption due to a higher
future repayments due to higher accrued interest.

under this specification and results are qualitatively the same. This is most likely driven by our abstraction from an
intensive margin of labor supply.


                                                           39
Average welfare.      We can compute the average welfare under both plans by integrating initial
values across the observed distribution of initial assets ai,0 and debt di,0 . We treat the two as
independent and model their marginal densities using log-normal approximations to the data
(Figure 10B). We find that the W (RS ) = 1, 499 and W (R I ) = 1, 520, such that the policy delivers
a 1.3 percent welfare gain. We find that 89 percent of individuals prefer R I .


Decomposing welfare.        We can use the model to decompose the gains in total welfare into that
due to (i) utility of consumption, (ii) disutility of labor, (iii) search costs.
     We derive three main findings, reported in Table 9. First, 63 percent of the increase in welfare
under the income-based repayment plan is due to the expected utility value of consumption flows.
This stems from two sources: consumption is delivered when marginal utility of consumption is
higher, and the present discounted value of consumption itself is higher by 2.45 percent (final
row). Second, the welfare value of lower disutility of labor (higher job satisfaction) under R I
is significant, accounting for 30 percent of the total difference. Third, a computation of life-time
utility based on the present discounted value of wages would suggest that the Stafford scheme
is preferred to the income based scheme. This is an important result and stems from the fact that
wages are endogenously higher under the Stafford plan as graduates sacrifice amenities. Note that
this is the type of calculation that one would employ in the standard on-the-job search model with
linear utility, no savings and student debt. A general message of this exercise is that understanding
the role of amenities in the utility of workers can deliver a different prediction for not only the
magnitude but also the sign of the welfare affects of policy.



9 Results III - Evaluating job satisfaction

An interesting quantitative exercise is to use the model to measure the value of job satisfaction.
Given the solution of the model under the baseline set of parameters we can ask how the worker
values a transition from a low to a high satisfaction job in terms of (i) life-time consumption,
(ii) willingness to pay in terms of wages, and (iii) how search behavior changes over satisfaction
levels. We abstract from student debt, setting di = 0 for all workers.


(i) Consumption compensation          First we determine the certain reduction in consumption in all
future states that an individual in state s = ( a, w, x L ) would be willing to incur in order to transi-
tion to a high satisfaction job today, keeping the same wage w. That is, we compute the function

                                                     40
                             Table 9: Decomposing welfare across repayment plans


                                                                                      RS           RI      R I − RS        Fraction of diff.
                                                                                      (1)          (2)         (3)                (4)
                                                   h                             i
 Total welfare                   E 0 ∑∞     t
                                      t =0 β u( c i,t ) − x i,t − 1 Si,t κ i,t       1499.4   1519.6        + 1.35%

 Consumption                     E 0 ∑∞     t
                                      t =0 β u( c i,t )                              1714.8   1727.6        + 0.75%              0.63
                                      ∞     t
 Work disutility                 E 0 ∑t=0 β xi,t                                      210.4    204.3         - 2.90%             0.30
 Search costs                    E 0 ∑∞     t
                                      t =0 β 1 Si,t κ i,t                               4.9      3.6       - 26.53%              0.07
 Wages ($000’s)                  E 0 ∑∞     t
                                      t =0 β w i,t                                    552.9        549.9    - 0.56%
                                      ∞     t
 Consumption ($000’s)            E 0 ∑t=0 β ci,t                                      477.7        489.3    + 2.45%

Notes: The table provides a decomposition for the total welfare under two different repayment regimes: RS and
R I , and compares the difference between the two. The three components in the welfare are: consumption, work
disutility, and disutility from search costs. Column (4) gives the percentage of the difference between welfare under the
repayment policies that is accounted for by each margin.


Ω( a, w) that satisfies
                                    "                                                                      #
                                        ∞                                  
            Ω                                  t
         W ( a, w, x H ) := E0          ∑βu            (1 − Ω( a, w))ct − xt x0 = x H , w0 = w = W ( a, w, x L ).
                                        t =0


We repeat the exercise for three cases: (i) under the baseline parameters, (ii) setting the conditional
wage distribution for low satisfaction draws equal to high satisfaction draws. (iii) under free on-
the-job search (κ = κ = 0). We plot results in Figure 11.45
      We first consider the baseline case. A worker in a low satisfaction job at date t would be
willing forego 2 to 6 percent of life-time consumption from date t onwards to transition to a high
satisfaction job at the same wage today, even when the average duration of the job is 1/δ = 5.5
years. This varies by wage. Higher wages in the low satisfaction job imply higher consumption
and a lower marginal utility of consumption so the worker is prepared to give up more of this
consumption to access a better amenity job. Eliminating the positive correlation between wages
and job satisfaction in the offer distribution F (w, x) has little impact, demonstrating that it is not
the underlying correlation of wages and amenities that is driving the baseline results.
      In the case with zero search costs, the value of a free transition from x L to x H — which this
experiment measures—is less valuable since if not taken, the worker can still search for free in
subsequent periods which increases the value of W ( a, w, x L ). This leads to Ω[κ =0] ( a, w) < Ω( a, w)
for all ( a, w). Search frictions are important for understanding the role of amenities in worker
   45 Under log utility we have we                       have   the   following       analytical     expression      Ω( a, w)   =       1 −
exp {(1 − β) [W ( a, w, x L ) − W ( a, w, x H )]}.


                                                                      41
               Figure 11: Life-time consumption equivalent value of high job-satisfaction




Notes: The figure depicts the life-time consumption equivalent value of high job-satisfaction relative to low job-
satisfaction for six cases: low and high assets, respectively, for (i) under the baseline parameters, (ii) free search (κ = 0),
and (iii) setting the conditional wage distribution equal for low and high satisfaction draws. For this figure a is set to
average assets in the steady state of the model.


decisions.


(ii) Wages vs. job satisfaction.          Next we consider the wage that would make an employed worker
in state s = ( a, w, x L ) indifferent between that job and a job with higher job-satisfaction: s′ =
( a, w′ , x H ). That is, we compute the function w
                                                  e ( a, w) that satisfies


                                                e ( a, w) , x H ) = W ( a, w, x L )
                                         W ( a, w


           e( a, w) as function of w for a = $0 and a = $50, 000 and plot these as solid lines in
We compute w
Figure 12. Comparing these wages can be thought of as analogous to the indifference relationships
derived in the theoretical model in Section 2 where we had a continuous support for x.
                                                             e( a, w) lies below the 45◦ -line: a worker
     The first take-away from Figure 12 is that the function w
with a low satisfaction job, zero assets and an annual wage of $20,000 will accept a high satisfaction
job with an annual wage of around $12,500. In this sense the high satisfaction job is valued at
$7,500 in current annual wages to the worker.
     Second, as the wage of the low satisfaction worker increases, so does the pay-cut that the
worker is prepared to take in moving to a high satisfaction job. At higher wages the worker
is already able to build up savings to insure against job-loss, and is consuming more so has a


                                                              42
                         Figure 12: Wage offer indifference across assets and wages




Notes: The figure shows the wage offer indifference across assets and wages for the six cases: low and high assets,
respectively, for (i) under the baseline parameters, (ii) free search (κ = 0), and (iii) setting the conditional wage distri-
bution equal for low and high satisfaction draws.


lower marginal utility of consumption. In this position the worker cares less about monetary
compensation and is prepared to take a larger pay-cut to move into a more satisfying job.
     Third, for a given wage a high asset worker is prepared to take a larger pay-cut than a low
asset worker. This replicates the theoretical result from Section 2: higher assets tilt the worker’s
job acceptance policy away from wages and towards job satisfaction.
     Finally, the gap between the pay-cuts acceptable to low and high asset workers narrow as
wages increase. The probability of job separation is low and so a high wage worker with low assets
will quickly increase their assets. Their job acceptance behavior therefore comes to approximate
that of a high asset worker. In this sense wages, through the budget constraint, substitute for
assets. Again, the underlying correlation in the population distribution is not important for these
results.
     Overall these conclusions are consistent with those in Section 2 and provide evidence for the
quantitative value of job-satisfaction; in many cases the worker is prepared to take a pay-cut of
around 50 percent.


(iii) Search decisions        We quantify how the satisfaction level of a job directly effects the search
behavior of a worker. Recall that the conditional mean effects of wages and satisfaction on search
are fitted in our indirect inference estimation - matching the parameters of the linear probability


                                                             43
    Figure 13: Reservation wage w( a, x) for on-the-job search at κ by assets and job satisfaction




Notes: The figure depicts the on-the-job search decisions w( a, x L ) and w( a, x H ) under the mean search cost κ.


model Si = α + β w wi + β x xi . We now use the model to extend the analysis to include the effect of
assets, which were not observed in our data. For a given value of κ and states ( a, x) we can deter-
mine the threshold reservation wage for search w( a, x) such that for all w < w( a, x) the individual
searches. That is, w( a, x) equates the marginal benefit of search to the marginal cost, satisfying

                                       Z                                                                 κ
              W ( a, w ( a, x), x) −       max W ( a, w ( a, x), x), W ( a, w′ , x′ ) dF (w′ , x′ ) =
                                                                                                          λE

     Figure 13 shows w( a, x L ) and w( a, x H ) for the mean value κ. For both levels of job satisfac-
tion the reservation wage for search is declining in assets. For asset values over $60,000, no high
satisfaction worker searches at the mean κ since they can no longer find higher satisfaction jobs
and the value of search in terms of wage outcomes does not out-weigh the cost. As the wage and
asset levels of the worker decrease, workers search more. The main difference in search behavior,
however is due to the satisfaction of the worker in their current job. Consider workers with assets
of $20,000: only high satisfaction workers in jobs paying less than around $14,000 search, while
the cut-off wage for low satisfaction workers is around $27,000.



10 Conclusion

In this paper we established that the level of student debt held by a graduating college student has
a statistically significant effect on early labor market behavior and outcomes. Specifically, higher


                                                             44
levels of debt cause workers to end up in jobs with higher wages and lower job satisfaction, and
to search more on-the-job. We showed that these outcomes can be neatly rationalized by a simple
extension of the Lise (2013) model of search with asset accumulation to accommodate amenities.
Since wages and asset levels are linked through the budget constraint whereas job satisfaction is
not, higher levels of debt cause workers to substitute higher wages for lower job satisfaction in
their reservation policies.
     We extended this simple model to a quantitative framework which we estimate using the
novel observables provided by the NCES BBS09 data. We found a quantitatively important role
for job satisfaction in shaping the labor market behavior and strong evidence for its interaction
with assets. Modelling the institutional framework of US Federal student loans in 2008 we showed
that the model’s out-of-sample predictions for students with student debt fits well with the data,
recommending the model for policy analysis.
     We considered a simple policy experiment of a transition to a income based repayment scheme
(IBR). The IBR is strictly preferred by students with higher debt burdens as it allows student to
intertemporally shift large repayments to periods when the marginal utility of consumption is
lower. This consumption effect accounts for 63 percent of the welfare gains. The remainder is
dominated by the higher job satisfaction achieved by graduates under the less pressing repay-
ment requirements. Importantly, the large trade-off of job satisfaction and wages found under the
standard repayment system would lead one that considers only wages to mistakenly infer that the
standard repayment system is preferred.
     This paper can be extended along a number of dimensions. In particular, the quantitative
model could be extended to accommodate college choice. Such a model would treat the contin-
uation values in the existing model as data, and utilize the new College Scorecard data to estimate
production functions for colleges. This setting would allow policy experiments of the type: “Sup-
pose the repayment policy changed from R to R′ , what is the total effect on welfare, including debt take up
and college choice?” rather than being qualified by our statements at the beginning of Section 8. We
establish that the role of amenities, and their ability to rationalize the otherwise puzzling evidence
we provide that debt can cause wages to increase, will be key to any such exercise.




                                                    45
References
A LTONJI , J. G., K AHN , L. B. and S PEER , J. D. (2016). Cahiser or Consultant? Entry Labor Market Condi-
   tions, Field of Study, and Career Success. Journal of Labor Economics, 34 (S1), S361–S401.

A LVARO M EZZA , S. S., D ANIEL R INGO and S OMMER , K. (2019). Student loans and homeownership. Journal
   of Labor Economics (forthcoming).

B ONHOMME , S. and J OLIVET, G. (2009). The pervasive absence of compensating differentials. Journal of
   Applied Econometrics, 24 (5), 12–25.

C HAPMAN , S. (2015). Student loans and the labor market: Evidence from merit aid programs.

D ELAVANDE , A. and Z AFAR , B. (2014). University choice: The role of expected earnings, non-pecuniary
  outcomes and financial constraints.

D EY, M. and F LINN , C. (2008). Household search and health insurance coverage. Journal of Econometrics,
  145 (1-2), 43–63.

F IELD , E. (2009). Educational debt burden and career choice: Evidence from a financial aid experiment at
   nyu law school. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics.

G ERVAIS , M. and Z IEBARTH , N. (2017). Life after debt: Post-graduation consequences of federal student
  loans.

— and Z IEBRATH , N. (2019). Life after debt: Postgraduation consequences of federal student loans. Eco-
 nomic Inquiry (forthcoming), 57.

H ALL , R. E. and M UELLER , A. I. (2018). Wage dispersion and search behavior: The importance of nonwage
  job values. Journal of Political Economy, 126 (4), 1594–1637.

H ERBST, D. (2019). Liquidity and insurance in student loan contracts: The effects of income-driven repay-
  ment on borrower outcomes (working paper).

H ERKENHOFF , K., P HILLIPS , G. and C OHEN -C OLE , E. (2016). The Impact of Consumer Credit Access
  onEmployment, Earnings and Entrepreneurship.

I ONESCU , F. (2009). The federal student loan program: Quantitative implications for college enrollment and
   default rates. Review of Economic Dynamics, 12 (1), 205–231.

J AROSCH , G. (2015). Searching for job security and the consequences of job loss.

J I , Y. (2017). Job search under debt: Aggregate implications of student loans.

K APLAN , G. and S CHULHOFER -W OHL , S. (2017). Understanding the Long-run Decline in Interstate Migra-
  tion. International Economic Review, 58 (1), 57–94.

— and V IOLANTE , G. L. (2014). A model of the consumption response to fiscal stimulus payments. Econo-
 metrica, 82 (4), 1199–1239.

L ISE , J. (2013). On-the-Job Search and Precautionary Savings. Review of Economic Studies, 80 (3), 1086–1113.

L OCHNER , L. and M ONGE -N ARANJO , A. (2015). Default and repayment among baccalaureate degree earn-
   ers. In B. Hershbein and K. Hollenbeck (eds.), Student Loans and the Dynamics of Debt, W.E. Upjohn Insti-
   tute for Employment Research, vol. 8.


                                                      46
M AS , A. and PALLAIS , A. (2017). Valuing Alternative Work Arrangements. American Economic Review,
  107 (12), 3722–3759.

R OTHSTEIN , J. and R OUSE , C. E. (2011). Constrained after college: Student loans and early-career occupa-
   tional choices. Journal of Public Economics, 95 (1), 149–163.

S ORKIN , I. (2018). Ranking firms using revealed preference. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133 (3), 1331–
   1393.

W EIDNER , J. (2016). Does student debt reduce earnings?

YANNELIS , C. (2015). Asymmetric Information in Student Loans.

— (2017). Debt and human capital: Evidence from student loans (working paper).




                                                    47
                           A PPENDIX F OR O NLINE P UBLICATION

This Appendix is organized as follows. Section A includes additional tables referenced in the text.
Section B includes additional figures referenced in the text. Section C includes additional details
regarding the data.


A     Additional tables

                       Table A1: Alternative instrument 1: Zijc = Budgetijc − Grantsijc

                               Baseline                   Debt                   Income                    OLS
                                                  Low            High         Low      High               2001-09
                                   ( 1)            ( 2)          ( 3)          ( 4)         ( 5)            ( 6)

            A. Earnings
            Earningsijc          0.0506          0.0470      0.1044          -0.0014      0.0402          0.0036
                                (0.04916)       (0.53181)    (0.09569)       (0.02301)   (0.07251)        (0.01263)
            log Earningijc       0.0010         -0.0012      0.0026          -0.0003      0.0005          -0.0002
                                (0.00107)       (0.01172)    (0.00206)       (0.00093)   (0.00100)        (0.00030)

            B. Satisfaction
            Satisijc             -0.0003         0.0070      -0.0010         -0.0003      -0.0006         -0.0005*
                                (0.00118)       (0.01299)    (0.00226)       (0.00179)   (0.00149)        (0.00030)
            ] ijc
            Satis                -0.0005         0.0046      -0.0012         -0.0003      -0.0010         -0.0005
                                (0.00119)       (0.01299)    (0.00227)       (0.00179)   (0.00151)        (0.00031)

            C. Other
            Searchijc            0.0010         -0.0295      -0.0049          0.0027      -0.0010         0.0009**
                                (0.00128)       (0.06082)    (0.01399)       (0.00188)   (0.00151)        (0.00033)
            Duration ijc        -0.1978**       -0.7700      -1.0546        -0.3485**     -0.0557
                                (0.08750)       (2.17102)    (0.89504)       (0.14602)   (0.10361)
            Teachijc            -0.0012*        -0.0021     -0.0044***       -0.0005     -0.0018**        0.0004**
                                (0.00074)       (0.00792)    (0.00147)       (0.00114)   (0.00092)        (0.00014)

Notes: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1 This table replicates Table 4, but for an alternative specification of the instru-
ment. Here the instrument considered is the individual student budget (reported by the university) minus institutional
grants for individual i in college j for cohort c. For further details of these variables see Table C1.




                                                             48
                                                                          \ jc
                              Table A2: Alternative instrument 2: Zijc = AveDebt

                               Baseline                  Debt                         Income              OLS
                                                 Low            High          Low           High         2001-09
                                   ( 1)           ( 2)           ( 3)          ( 4)          ( 5)           ( 6)

            A. Earnings
            Earningsijc         0.1955***       0.4090      0.2569**         0.0132        0.1591*        0.0081
                                (0.06709)      (0.47158)    (0.12772)       (0.03336)     (0.09236)      (0.01497)
            log Earningijc      0.0042***       0.0008     0.0077***         0.0002        0.0025*       -0.0000
                                (0.00145)      (0.01037)    (0.00279)       (0.00134)     (0.00127)      (0.00033)

            B. Satisfaction
            Satisijc            -0.0019         0.0052      -0.0046          0.0005      -0.0053***      -0.0004
                                (0.00159)      (0.01152)    (0.00300)       (0.00259)     (0.00191)      (0.00028)
            ] ijc
            Satis               -0.0026         0.0001      -0.0048          0.0005      -0.0065***      -0.0004
                                (0.00159)      (0.01151)    (0.00301)       (0.00259)     (0.00196)      (0.00029)

            C. Other
            Searchijc           0.0029*         0.0032       0.0023          0.0038        0.0037*       0.0009**
                                (0.00171)      (0.01230)    (0.00317)       (0.00273)     (0.00208)      (0.00032)
            Duration ijc        -0.2120**       0.0984      -0.2493         -0.4317**      -0.0682
                                (0.10563)      (0.65243)    (0.16428)       (0.21970)     (0.11295)
            Teachijc           -0.0034***      -0.0131*    -0.0075***       -0.0028*     -0.0035***      0.0003*
                                (0.00102)      (0.00750)    (0.00204)       (0.00169)     (0.00122)      (0.00016)

Notes: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1 This table replicates Table 4, but for an alternative specification of the
instrument. Here the instrument considered is the predicted value from a college level regression of AveDebt jt on year
and college fixed effects as well as controls for the number of students, and Grants jt /( Grants jt + Loans jt ). For further
details of these variables see Table C1.




                                                                49
B Additional figures

                                                                     Figure B1: Variation of the instrument across cohorts


                                                 A. Distribution of Z_jc                        B. Deviations from within college mean   C. Within college, 2009−2001 changes
          .12                                                                                 .12                                      .12



          .08                                                                                 .08                                                                                  .08



          .04                                                                                 .04                                                                                  .04



                                      0                                                        0                                                                                    0
                                          0      .2     .4          .6          .8      1           −.4       −.2      0         .2                                         .4       −.4         −.2      0       .2                .4
                                                             Z_jc                                               Z_jc − E[Z_jc| j ]                                                                Z_j2009 − Z_j2001


Notes: These figures plot distributions of statistics constructed from our instrument Zjc = Grants jc /( Grants jc +
Loans jc ). Data are from IPEDS 2001-2015, with the sample of colleges restricted to those in Carnegie categories dis-
cussed in the main text, and for which we have information from the College Score Card data regarding entering
cohort median SAT scores. The median number of colleges each year is 1, 202. Panel A plots the distribution of Zjc in
the pooled sample of colleges and cohorts. Panel B plots the distribution of deviations of Zjc from within college means
Zjc − Z j . Panel C plots the distribution of changes in Zjc between the two cohorts in our analysis: 2001 and 2009.



                                                                                Figure B2: Student debt and job satisfaction

                                                              A. Freshmen applications                                                                                           B. Non−freshmen applications
                                      1.00                                                                  5+ schools
                                                                                                                                                                 1.00                                                  5+ schools
                                                                                                            4 schools                                                                                                  4 schools
  Cumulation fraction of applicants




                                                                                                                             Cumulation fraction of applicants




                                                                                                            3 schools                                                                                                  3 schools
                                                                                                            2 schools                                                                                                  2 schools
                                      0.90                                                                  1 school                                             0.90                                                  1 school




                                      0.80                                                                                                                       0.80



                                      0.70                                                                                                                       0.70



                                      0.60                                                                                                                       0.60
                                          2006        2008               2010          2012          2014          2016                                              2006   2008         2010          2012   2014            2016
                                                                                Year                                                                                                            Year


Notes: Data from StudentAid.gov (link below). Graphs plot the cumulative fraction of FAFSA applications for Federal
Student Aid that list the specified number of colleges. Data are for individuals filing original applications for student
aid. The average annual number of Freshman applications for student aid over 2006-2015 was 6,640,518. The average
annual number of Non-freshman applications for student aid over 2006-2015 was 12,453,944. The latter is larger since
individuals also file for college aid once in college. https://studentaid.ed.gov/FAFSA-data




                                                                                                                        50
C     Data

Table C1 provides the precise mapping between the variables we consider and the questions asked
in the BB03 and BBS09 surveys. In all cases these questions are consistent over time.

                                        Table C1: BB data variable definitions

 Variable in paper                          Code       Description


 A. Outcome variables
 Income                     Earnings ijc    b1ansal    Annual income from all sources
 Teaching                   Teachijc        b1occ33    Are you currently employed as a K − 12 teacher?
 On the job search          Searchijc       b1search   Are you currently looking for a different job? (Only asked if employed)
 Duration of unemployment   Duration ijc    b1timoff   As of the 2009 interview, the number of weeks after the respondent began applying
                                                       for job that the respondent received the offer for the job currently held.
 Job satisfaction           Satis ijc       b1jbover   Overall, would you say that you are satisfied with your job?


 B. Control variables
 Parental income                            cincome    Indicates the total 2006 income of parents of dependent respondents
                                                         (Used in Federal need analysis to determine AY 07-08 eligibility)
 GPA measure                                gpa2       Cumulative undergraduate grade point average (between 1.00 and 4.00)
 SAT measure                                tesatcre   The sum of reported SAT verbal and math scores



Notes: The codebook for the NCES BBS surveys is itself restricted use since it discloses statistics along with each
question, and so is available only with a data license. Here we have reproduce the text from the codebook for the
variables we have considered in this paper. More information regarding these variables is available upon request.




                                                            51
