                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  MULTINATIONAL EXPANSION IN TIME AND SPACE

                                       Stefania Garetto
                                       Lindsay Oldenski
                                       Natalia Ramondo

                                      Working Paper 25804
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25804


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            May 2019, Revised October 2019




We thank our discussants Javier Cravino, Ana Maria Santacreu, Michael Sposi, and Stephen
Yeaple for very helpful comments. We have also benefited from comments from George
Alessandria, Costas Arkolakis, Ariel Burstein, Jonathan Eaton, Oleg Itskhoki, Sam Kortum,
Andrei Levchenko, Eduardo Morales, Ezra Oberfield, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, as well as
seminar participants at various conferences and institutions. Xiao Ma provided outstanding
research assistance. The statistical analysis of firm-level data on US multinational companies was
conducted at the Bureau of Economic Analysis, US Department of Commerce, under
arrangements that maintain legal confidentiality requirements. The views expressed are those of
the authors and do not reflect official positions of the US Department of Commerce or the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Stefania Garetto, Lindsay Oldenski, and Natalia Ramondo. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Multinational Expansion in Time and Space
Stefania Garetto, Lindsay Oldenski, and Natalia Ramondo
NBER Working Paper No. 25804
May 2019, Revised October 2019
JEL No. F1,F23

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper studies the expansion patterns of the multinational enterprise (MNE) in time and
space. Using a long panel of US MNEs, we document that MNE affiliates usually start with sales
exclusively to the host market and eventually enter export markets, and that this extensive margin
of expansion accounts for most of their sales growth. Informed by these facts, we develop a
multi-country quantitative dynamic model of the MNE that features heterogeneity in firm-level
productivity, persistent aggregate shocks, and a rich structure of costs that affect MNE expansion.
Importantly, MNE affiliates can decouple their locations of production and sales, and
endogenously choose to enter or exit the host and the export markets. We introduce a novel
compound option formulation that allows us to capture in a tractable way the rich heterogeneity
observed in the data, which is necessary for quantitative analysis. Using the calibrated model, our
quantitative application to Brexit reveals that the nature of the frictions to MNE activities matters
for understanding the reallocation of MNE activity in time and space and for predicting the
effects of globalization shocks.

Stefania Garetto                                  Natalia Ramondo
Department of Economics                           School of Int'l Relations and Pacific Studies
Boston University                                 University of California at San Diego
270 Bay State Road                                9500 Gilman Drive, MC 0519
Boston, MA 02215                                  La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER                                          and NBER
garettos@bu.edu                                   nramondo@ucsd.edu

Lindsay Oldenski
Georgetown University
37th and O Streets, NW
Washington DC, 20057
Lindsay.Oldenski@georgetown.edu
1       Introduction

Many important questions in international economics involve the complex activities of multinational
enterprises (MNEs) in time and space. Consider the recent rise in protectionism worldwide: the
debate on the United Kingdom abandoning the European Union (EU), “Brexit”, is one example.
Under Brexit, would MNEs pull out from the United Kingdom? Would MNEs located in the EU be
affected? How would different implementations of Brexit affect MNEs’ expansion patterns? And
how would long-run consequences differ from short-run adjustments? Providing sound answers
to these and other similar questions requires an understanding of the dynamic patterns of MNE
expansion and of the nature of the costs these firms face.

Despite their importance, the behavior of MNEs and their affiliates in time and space has received
little attention in the literature.1 On the empirical side, this is primarily due to data limitations.
On the theoretical side, the nature of the costs of MNE activities—whether variable, fixed, or sunk,
and whether host- or destination-country specific—poses challenges to tractability, particularly in
a multi-country dynamic setting where MNEs can separate the locations of production and sales.
This paper contributes to filling the gap in the literature by introducing a new quantitative dynamic
multi-country model of the MNE, which is informed by a new set of facts on the behavior of foreign
affiliates of US MNEs. The model is aimed at answering counterfactual questions about the effects
of policy shocks on MNE expansion, which require both a rich spatial and dynamic structure.

Our analysis uses a long panel of US MNEs and their foreign affiliates from the Bureau of Economic
Analysis (BEA). We start by documenting two facts about the dynamic behavior of MNEs and
their affiliates.2 First, MNE expansion happens mainly at the extensive, rather than intensive,
margin. We observe that MNEs expand by entering new markets, either with a new affiliate or
exporting from an existing one. We do not find evidence of growth at the intensive margin within a
country: the ratio of affiliate-to-parent sales is flat over the affiliate’s life. Second, the vast majority
of affiliates are born with sales to the host market, which remains the main destination market of
the affiliate; sales to other markets may start later in the affiliate’s life.

Guided by these facts, we build a multi-country dynamic model of MNE expansion. Home-based
firms decide whether, when, and where to open foreign affiliates. Affiliates, in turn, can sell both to
their host market and to any other market. Affiliate operations, both in the host and in the export
    1
    See Antrás and Yeaple (2014) for a detailed survey on the main facts and theories about MNEs.
    2
    Studying the behavior of US MNEs and their foreign affiliates is a relevant setup not only because the United
States is the main source of MNEs in the world, but also because MNE affiliates are the main channel through which
US firms reach foreign consumers. In 2009, for instance, majority-owned affiliates of US MNEs abroad accounted for
75 percent of US sales to foreign customers; forty percent of those affiliates’ sales were exports, i.e., sales to customers
outside the affiliate’s host market (Yeaple, 2013).


                                                             1
markets, are subject to sunk, fixed, and variable costs. The MNE decisions of whether to set up an
affiliate in a market, and whether to export from it, are shaped by the interaction of firm-specific
characteristics, persistent aggregate productivity and demand shocks, and the array of MNE costs.

While the static components of our model are standard and follow Melitz (2003), the way we
formulate the dynamic problem of the MNE is new to the international trade literature. We
build on insights from the literature on real options to solve general models of investment under
uncertainty (see Dixit and Pindyck, 1994). More precisely, our model is based on a compound
option structure: opening an affiliate in a country is an option, which, if exercised, gives access to
a set of additional options, such as exporting from the affiliate to any other location. Guided by
the observation that almost all affiliates in the data have some horizontal sales at birth, we assume
that firms that decide to do Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) must first set up an affiliate and sell
to the local market; only then can they consider exporting from that affiliate.

The compound option structure, coupled with the assumption of sequential MNE activities and
a standard Armington assumption, are key for achieving tractability of the model while, at the
same time, preserving the rich heterogeneity necessary for quantitative analysis. In particular, it is
through this compound option structure that we are able to tractably introduce interdependence in
the location choices of the MNE: the decision to open an affiliate in a country depends on the set of
countries where the affiliate can export to. Moreover, because of the continuous time specification,
the value functions can be solved in closed form as simple additive functions of the firm’s realized
profit flow, the option value of expansion, and the option value of exit. We further leverage the
tractability of the firm’s problem by aggregating firms’ outcomes to solve for the evolution of the
price index in each country. Based on these price indexes, we can construct measures of welfare
changes induced by changes in MNEs’ activities.

We calibrate the model to static and dynamic moments related to the behavior of US MNE affiliates
located in the top ten host countries for US FDI, over thirty years. Our calibration implies that
opening and operating affiliates is more costly than exporting from them, for most host countries.
Exports to the United States (the Home country) are generally associated with lower barriers than
exports to other destinations. Heterogeneity, however, is large across host countries, sales type,
and type of frictions.

The calibrated model is also able to reproduce non-targeted observations related to the selection
patterns of MNE affiliates within and across host markets, as well as sorting patterns of MNE
entry across host markets, in the spirit of the facts documented in Eaton et al. (2011) for French
exporters. Concretely, the model matches fairly well the size advantage, in terms of horizontal sales,
observed for: affiliates that export over affiliates that do not export; affiliates that export earlier


                                                  2
in life over affiliates that export later; and affiliates that are opened first within the MNE over
subsequent affiliates. Additionally, the model captures the positive correlation observed between
the size of the MNE in its Home market (the United States) and the number of markets penetrated,
as well as the negative correlation between the extensive margin of market penetration and market
popularity.

Armed with the calibrated model, we perform various counterfactual exercises with the goal of
evaluating the effect of changes in different frictions on the dynamics of MNE expansion, and the
endogenous responses of price indexes. We also illustrate how the possibility of affiliate exports—the
compound option structure—interacts with changes in frictions to deliver very different long-run
responses of MNE activity compared to what a dynamic standard model of only horizontal FDI
predicts. Since our sample includes affiliates located in the United Kingdom, Ireland, Germany, and
France, we use the potential withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union (EU),
Brexit, as our main counterfactual exercise. Our counterfactual exercises point to the importance of
considering both the time and space dimensions when evaluating the changes in the MNE expansion
decisions after a shock.

Potential implementations of Brexit are related to the increase of different types of export costs
between the United Kingdom and other EU countries. Our model predicts that an increase in export
costs between the United Kingdom and other EU countries would have a static effect, a dynamic
effect, and an equilibrium price effect. First, export activities between the United Kingdom and
the EU would become more costly, so that sales from UK-based affiliates to the EU, as well as
sales from EU-based affiliates to the United Kingdom, would decline. This decline would drive a
decrease in the incentive to open affiliates in the United Kingdom and in other EU countries, due to
the smaller, and costlier, export market. Second, increases in trade costs would affect the affiliate
export band of inaction, and hence, affiliate export entry and exit rates would change. This second
effect is driven by including one-time sunk costs that are distinct from fixed per-period costs–a
feature only possible to include in dynamic models. Finally, increases in trade frictions would
have the effect of raising prices not only in the United Kingdom, but also in the EU, encouraging
more export entry from the United Kingdom into those markets. The strength of each effect on
aggregate firm dynamics varies depending on the nature of the shock to export costs. For instance,
while increasing sunk export costs would increase both the sales and number of affiliates selling
to the EU from the United Kingdom, increases in per-period fixed costs would decrease both the
number and sales of UK-based US affiliates to the EU. Again, these different patterns could not be
captured with a static model of the MNE since one-time sunk and fixed per-period costs would be
indistinguishable.



                                                  3
This paper is related to the existing literature in several ways. First, most contributions in the
literature have analyzed MNE behavior in space, but not in time. Papers such as Ramondo and
Rodrı́guez-Clare (2013), Tintelnot (2017), Fan (2017), Arkolakis et al. (2018), Alviarez (2019), and
Head and Mayer (2019) have made substantial progress in building static quantitative models that
allow MNEs to set up affiliates in countries that differ from the destinations of their sales.3 Making
progress in dynamic setups, while keeping the spatial complexity of the static models, requires
restricting the problem of the MNE to retain tractability. The sharp patterns that we document
from observing MNE affiliates over time guide us on how to simplify this problem: thanks to
our novel compound option structure, coupled with the assumption on the sequentiality of MNE
decisions, we are able to reduce the choice set of firms in a way that is consistent with the data, while
keeping the model amenable to quantitative analysis. In this way, we are able to make substantial
progress towards modeling the dynamics of MNE expansion, without sacrificing the spatial richness
of static models.

Second, there is a small, but growing, literature that analyzes different aspects of the dynamic
behavior of the MNE. Papers in this literature, however, limit the spatial dimension of the problem.
Gumpert et al. (2018) focus on the life-cycle dynamics of exporters and MNEs as alternative ways of
serving a foreign market, and assess the role of MNEs on new exporters’ dynamics. Given the nature
of their question, the analysis does not consider export platforms, and focuses on life-cycle, rather
than aggregate, firm dynamics. Fillat and Garetto (2015) build a dynamic two-country model of
exporters and MNEs, where they introduce the idea that MNE activities can be treated as a real
option that gets exercised once an affiliate is opened abroad.4 Fillat et al. (2015) extend this idea
to a multi-country setup. Both papers focus on the link between the MNE expansion decisions
and asset prices, and both assume that the activities of affiliates are restricted to their market of
operation. Our model treats MNE activities as a compound, rather than a simple, option. In this
way, we are able to preserve the tractability of the problem in a dynamic multi-country setup, and
expand on the spatial dimension by separating the locations of production and sales.5

Third, our paper is naturally related to the large literature on export dynamics, which has been
primarily concerned with quantifying the various costs of export activities and their welfare implications.6
   3
     In static setups, the seminal model in Helpman et al. (2004) and the quantitative version of it in Irarrazabal et al.
(2013) assume that the locations of production and sales of the MNE coincide—that is, MNE activities are restricted
to horizontal sales, which are the alternative to exports for serving foreign consumers.
   4
     Impullitti et al. (2013) also use the real option analogy to model the entry and exit patterns of exporters.
   5
     Other papers in the MNE literature limit both the spatial and dynamic dimension of the analysis by considering
only horizontal FDI sales and only two periods (see, for instance, Ramondo et al., 2013; Egger et al., 2014; Conconi
et al., 2016).
   6
     Earlier contributions by Baldwin and Krugman (1989), Roberts and Tybout (1997), Das et al. (2007), and
Alessandria and Choi (2007) find evidence of large sunk costs of exporting by focusing on observed patterns of export
entry and exit. Subsequent analyses, such as Eaton et al. (2008) and Ruhl and Willis (2017), incorporate facts


                                                            4
An important difference of our approach from the literature on export dynamics is that the nature
of the MNE problem is more complex than the exporter problem: MNEs choose not only which
markets to serve, as an exporter does, but also the location from which to serve each of those
markets. Our compound option structure allows us to solve the complex spatial problem of the
MNE in a multi-country dynamic setup. In this way, we complement the literature on export
dynamics by quantifying the frictions to MNE expansion, and by analyzing their implications in
terms of aggregate firm dynamics and welfare.

Finally, our paper relates to the large literature that analyzes the dynamics of domestic firms, which
goes back to Davis et al. (1996), and more recently Decker et al. (2014, 2016). Our facts suggest
that the dynamics of MNE affiliates are starkly different from the dynamics of domestic firms. We
interpret these differences as indicative of the fact that new US firms face a very different set of
frictions in the domestic and foreign markets.



2     Evidence on US MNE Expansion

We document two novel facts on the dynamic behavior of foreign affiliates of US multinational
enterprises (MNEs): MNE expansion happens at the extensive, rather than the intensive, margin;
and the vast majority of affiliates are born specialized in sales to the host market, which remains
the main activity of the affiliate, while export activities may start later in life.


2.1    Data

Our empirical analysis uses firm-level data on the operations of US MNEs from the Bureau of
Economic Analysis (BEA). The data include detailed information on the operations of MNEs in
the United States and their affiliates abroad, for the period 1987-2011. We restrict the sample
to majority-owned affiliates that do not operate in tax haven countries, have manufacturing as
their primary activity, and belong to a US parent operating in any sector.7 We further consolidate
affiliates belonging to the same parent and operating in the same country and 3-digit industry.
related to the life-cycle dynamics of new exporters and find that those costs are much lower. Alessandria et al.
(2018) take a further step and also calculate the welfare gains from trade in a dynamic setting that matches well
the life-cycle export facts. Arkolakis (2016) presents rich micro evidence on firm selection and export growth that
supports dynamic theories of endogenous entry costs vis-á-vis standard export sunk costs. Finally, Fitzgerald et al.
(2017), using detailed data on export prices and quantities, show that the life-cycle growth patterns of those two
variables are quite different.
   7
     Our sample is primarily composed of affiliates that are majority owned during their whole life. Only about one
percent of affiliates go from majority to minority owned and less than two percent go from minority to majority
owned.



                                                         5
                                Table 1: Number of observations, by sale type.

                                                               Horizontal sales       Export sales

                      No. of observations                            38,080               38,080
                         with positive sales                         36,135               25,958
                                                                     (95%)                (68%)
                         of pure type                                14,035                2,418
                                                                     (37%)                (6.3%)
                      Sales accounted by pure type                   15.6%                 7.7%

Note: Observations are at the affiliate-year level, for new majority-owned affiliates that survive for at least ten
consecutive years, in manufacturing. A pure-type affiliate is an affiliate for which at least 99 percent of sales are
either only horizontal or only export sales.



Finally, for the facts presented in this section, we focus on affiliates that open during our sample
period and that survive for at least ten consecutive years in the market. This restriction implies that
we exclude affiliates that open in 2003 or later, as well as observations belonging to the affiliate’s
eleventh year of life, or greater. We also remove affiliates and parents with zero total sales.8

Crucially, the BEA data break down affiliate sales by destination: the host market of operation
(horizontal sales), and other markets (exports). The data further distinguish between affiliate
exports to the United States and to third markets. Every five years the BEA conducts a more
detailed benchmark survey, which further distinguishes affiliate exports to Canada, the United
Kingdom, and Japan.9 However, the BEA data do not record total exports from the US parent by
destination.

Table 1 shows the number of observations with positive horizontal and export sales in our sample.
Almost 95 percent of our affiliate-year observations have some horizontal sales, while more than
two-thirds of them have some exports. More than one-third of the observations correspond to
affiliates with horizontal sales only, while the share of affiliates with only exports is around six
percent. Since affiliates that only export are few and account for a small share of total affiliate
sales, the model we present in Section 3 does not feature pure exporters.

Appendix A provides more details on the data coverage and sample construction.
   8
      This restricted sample covers 23 percent of all affiliates in manufacturing as well as 38 percent of their total sales.
Facts computed using a larger sample with a five-year survival threshold display the same patterns (not shown).
    9
      The distinction between the United States and other export markets of the affiliate does not make any substantial
difference for the facts documented below. We do use, however, the available break-down of affiliate exports by
destination in our calibration.




                                                             6
2.2                                     The expansion of MNE affiliates

We start by documenting that MNE affiliates grow by entering new export markets.

Figure 1 shows the ratio of affiliate-to-parent sales, by affiliate age, for all, horizontal, and export
sales. We plot the coefficients on age dummies from estimating, by Ordinary Least Squares (OLS),

                                                                                  10
                                                                                  X
                                                                     log Yiap =                                      Diap + β log global empiap + uiap .                                                                  (1)
                                                                                  a=2

The dependent variable Yiap denotes the ratio of affiliate-to-parent sales for affiliate i belonging to
parent p at age a, while Diap is a set of age dummies. We include country-year and affiliate fixed
effects in all the specifications as well as a control for the global size of the corporation in terms of
employment, log global empiap .

                                                               Figure 1: Affiliate-to-parent sales ratio, intensive margin.
                                                (a) All sales                                                              (b) Horizontal sales                                                     (c) Export sales
                                                                                                   .015




                                                                                                                                                                              .015
                  .015




                                                                                                                                                                                          .01
  Affiliate−to−parent sales ratio




                                                                                   Affiliate−to−parent sales ratio




                                                                                                                                                              Affiliate−to−parent sales ratio
                                                                                                              .01
                             .01




                                                                                                                                                                             .005
                                                                                                .005
               .005




                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                    0
   0




                                                                                                                                                                              −.005
                  −.005




                                                                                                   −.005




                                    2       4               6        8      10                                       2       4              6        8   10                                     2   4            6          8   10
                                                     Affiliate age                                                                   Affiliate age                                                        Affiliate age




Notes: OLS coefficients on age dummies (relative to the entry year) from estimating (1), with affiliate fixed effects and country-
year fixed effects. The dependent variable affiliate-to-parent sales ratio refers to affiliate sales relative to the domestic sales of
the US parent. Five-percent confidence intervals shown in dashed lines. Sample of new majority-owned affiliates that survive for
at least ten consecutive years, in manufacturing. Each panel includes affiliates with positive sales in the given category.


The affiliate-to-parent sales ratio is flat: at all ages, this ratio is not significantly different from the
ratio in the entry year. A similar lack of growth is observed not only for all affiliate sales, but also
for horizontal and export sales, separately.10

MNE affiliates do not grow at the intensive margin, but they do expand at the extensive margin,
i.e., adding destinations other than the host market. Table 2 shows the results from estimating, by
   10
    Notice that this finding is in stark contrast with the export dynamics literature, which documents small export
shares at entry and intensive margin growth in exports over the life of surviving exporters. See, among others,
Arkolakis (2016), Fitzgerald et al. (2017), and Ruhl and Willis (2017).




                                                                                                                                 7
OLS,
                                           X
                       log Yiap =                          Diδp + β log global empiap + uiap ,                    (2)
                                    δ∈{−5,...1}∪{1,...5}

where Diδp equals one when affiliate i is δ years away from starting exporting. We also control for
the global employment of the MNE, and include country-year and affiliate fixed effects.

Results in Table 2 are relative to sales in the year of entry into exports, the excluded category.
In each of the five years preceding export entry (-5- to -1), the ratio of affiliate-to-parent sales
is significantly lower than the ratio at entry. After export entry (1 to 5), this ratio is flat. The
similarity of the coefficients for δ = {−5, . . . , −1} indicates that the affiliate-to-parent sales ratio
increases only at the time of export entry. Expansion happens only at the extensive margin of sales
destinations.11 Notice that the flat affiliate sales profile observed in Figure 1a is not inconsistent
with the jump observed in affiliate sales at export entry documented in Table 2 because affiliates
start exporting at different ages.

Robustness. One could argue that the lack of growth in MNE affiliates’ sales may be due to the
fact that the affiliate “inherits” the age of the parent so that, de facto, it is a much older firm,
and hence, has lower growth rates. This may well be happening, as documented for multi- versus
single-plant firms in the United States by Kueng et al. (2017).12 Unfortunately, the BEA data do
not record the age of the parent firm. However, we can look at the affiliate position in the opening
sequence of the MNE—i.e., first affiliates versus subsequent affiliates. In this way, we can compare
affiliates belonging to younger MNEs with affiliates belonging to older MNEs (or the same MNE
at older ages). Columns 1 and 2 in Appendix Table B.1 show that first affiliates do not appear
to grow faster than subsequent affiliates—even though the age-dummy coefficients for subsequent
affiliates are more precisely estimated.

A second argument can be that, since global value chains (GVCs) have been growing very fast
in the last decades, affiliates linked to them might be growing faster than non-GVC affiliates. In
columns 3 and 4 in Appendix Table B.1, we show the results of estimating (1) separately for GVC
affiliates (defined as affiliates with positive intra-firm exports), and for non-GVC affiliates (defined
as affiliates with zero intra-firm exports). Both groups of affiliates have flat affiliate-to-parent sales
ratios—even though estimates are more precise among GVC affiliates.
  11
     It is worth noting that MNE expansion does not happen by opening more than one affiliate in a given host
market. Only 6.98 percent of US MNEs have more than one affiliate in the same host country; at the country-MNE
level the share is 4.6 percent; and at the country-firm-year level the share is only 3.38 percent.
  12
     Kueng et al. (2017) document a stark difference in the life-cycle employment profiles of establishments belonging
to single- versus multi-unit firms in manufacturing: while establishments in single-unit firms grow steeply, the ones
in multi-unit firms do not grow.



                                                             8
                      Table 2: Affiliate-to-parent sales ratio, extensive margin.


                                D(years to export entry = -5)              0.001
                                                                          (0.010)
                                D(years to export entry = -4)            -0.023**
                                                                          (0.010)
                                D(years to export entry = -3)             -0.024*
                                                                          (0.013)
                                D(years to export entry = -2)            -0.018**
                                                                          (0.009)
                                D(years to export entry = -1)           -0.019***
                                                                          (0.007)
                                D(years to export entry = 1)              -0.018*
                                                                          (0.009)
                                D(years to export entry = 2)               -0.014
                                                                          (0.009)
                                D(years to export entry = 3)               -0.005
                                                                          (0.010)
                                D(years to export entry = 4)               -0.003
                                                                          (0.009)
                                D(years to export entry = 5)               -0.005
                                                                          (0.008)
                                log global employment                      -0.012
                                                                          (0.009)

                                Obs                                       38,080
                                R2                                         0.011

Note: Results from estimating (2) by OLS. Observations at the affiliate-year level, for new majority-owned
affiliates that survive for at least ten consecutive years, in manufacturing. The dependent variable affiliate-
to-parent sales ratio refers to affiliate sales relative to the domestic sales of the US parent. All specifications
include affiliate and country-year fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered at the parent level, are in parenthesis.
Levels of significance are denoted ∗∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, and ∗ p < 0.1.




                                                         9
A third argument for the observed lack of growth in MNE affiliates’ sales is related to the mode
of FDI entry. If MNEs establish foreign affiliates mostly through a merger with—or an acquisition
of—an existing firm (M&A), one could argue that “new” foreign affiliates are in reality preexisting
firms that likely grew before their acquisition. The BEA asks a subset of affiliates whether they
were created through an M&A or a greenfield project.13 Columns 5 and 6 in Appendix Table B.1
show that, relative to age two (the first year for which sales are recorded for the whole year), the
sales ratio grows very little, regardless of the mode of FDI entry.

A final concern is that the flat sales ratio observed for affiliates may be due to the fact that firms
grow in a foreign market first through exports, and only subsequently through opening an affiliate.
Since the BEA data do not include information about parent exports by destination market, we
are not able to address this question directly. Gumpert et al. (2018), however, report that, for
Norway and France, the difference in growth profiles for MNEs with previous export experience
into a market and those without it is not significant, except for the first year of the affiliate’s life.

The fact presented in this section motivates an important feature of our model: MNE affiliates
grow by entering new destination countries.


2.3    The activities of MNE affiliates over time

We now present evidence on the specialization patterns of affiliates in terms of horizontal and
export activities over time. We show that affiliates are born specialized in horizontal sales, and
they may incorporate exports as a secondary activity later in life.

Figure 2 shows the evolution of the intensive and extensive margins of horizontal and export sales
as shares of total sales of the affiliate. Figure 2a shows the evolution of the horizontal and export
sales share, computed as an average over affiliates reporting, respectively, positive horizontal and
positive export sales. On average, horizontal sales account for about 80 percent of affiliate sales at
birth and decrease by ten percentage points over the first ten years of life of the affiliate, while the
export share is flat at 40 percent. To capture the extensive margin of horizontal and export sales,
Figure 2b plots the percentage of affiliates with non-zero horizontal sales and non-zero export sales.
While the share of affiliates with horizontal sales is stable at more than 95 percent, the share of
exporting affiliates increases from 50 to 70 percent during the first ten years of life of the affiliate.
In other words, for horizontal activities, changes in sales shares are due to the intensive margin,
while export shares increase only because of affiliates that start exporting. Hence, the data suggest
  13
     This question applies only to firms that opened mid-year, and thus, the reported information about sales covers
only part of the entry year. For this reason, we compute the ratio of affiliate-to-parent sales starting at age two.



                                                        10
                        Figure 2: Intensive and extensive margins of affiliate sales, by type.
                        (a) Affiliate sales shares                                                                      (b) Share of affiliates
       1




                                                                                              1
       .8




                                                                                                       .8
                                                                                   share of affiliates
  sales share
       .6




                                                                                          .6
       .4




                                                                                              .4
       .2




                                                                                              .2
                1   2   3      4       5         6    7         8        9   10                             1   2   3        4       5         6    7         8        9   10
                                      Affiliate age                                                                                 Affiliate age

                            horizontal sales              export sales                                                    horizontal sales              export sales



Notes: Sample of new majority-owned affiliates that survive for at least ten consecutive years, in manufacturing. Horizontal
and export sales refer, respectively, to sales to the market where the affiliate is located, and to sales to markets outside the
local market. (2a): average sales, as a share of total affiliate sales, include affiliates with positive horizontal and export
sales, respectively. (2b): number of affiliates, as a share of the total number of affiliates, include affiliates with positive
horizontal and export sales, respectively.



that, over time, affiliates incorporate export sales into their activities, but they never stop selling
to their host market.

The patterns in Figure 2 are confirmed by OLS regressions that include a battery of fixed effects,
as shown in Appendix Table B.2. Estimates that include affiliate fixed effects suggest that, on
average, horizontal (export) sales shares decrease (increase) during the life of an affiliate, and the
share of affiliates with exports is higher among older affiliates.

Robustness. Appendix Figure B.1 and Table B.3 report analogous results for the subset of
affiliates that are pure type at birth—i.e., firms that in their first year of life either sell exclusively
to the host market or only export. The results on pure-type affiliates reinforce the patterns shown in
Figure 2: pure-type affiliates diversify activities over their life, moving from exclusively horizontal
sales to also exporting. Relatedly, Appendix Figure B.2 shows the relationship between the intensity
at which an activity is performed and the time at which the affiliate first starts that activity: the
older the affiliate is when it starts exporting, the lower its export intensity.

The fact documented in Figure 2 motivates a key assumption of our model: all affiliates start
operations with some horizontal sales and may endogenously expand into export markets.




                                                                              11
3     A Dynamic Model of MNE Expansion

We build a quantitative dynamic model in which MNEs open affiliates across countries over time.
Affiliates sell in their host markets, and they choose whether to export to other markets from there.
We impose assumptions that are guided by the facts documented in Section 2 and are key for the
tractability of the model.

The main innovation of the model is the introduction of a compound option formulation that allows
us to characterize the richness of the decisions of the MNE in time and space. This formulation is
novel to the international trade literature, and it is the key element that makes the model amenable
to quantitative analysis.


3.1   Preferences and technology

The economy consists of N + 1 countries: the Home country (the United States in our data) and
N foreign countries. Time is continuous. In each country k, consumers have preferences over a
composite good,                                Z    ∞
                                       Uk =             e−ρt Qk (t)dt,                                 (3)
                                                0

with ρ denoting the subjective time discount rate. The quantity Qk (t) aggregates a continuum of
varieties, indexed by v, with a constant elasticity of substitution (CES) η > 1,
                                                                                            η
                                                                                             η−1
                                  XXZ                           1               η−1
                                                                η
                        Qk (t) =                             λij qijk (v, t)    η    dv          .   (4)
                                       i   j       Ωijk (t)


The term qijk (v, t) denotes consumption of variety v ∈ Ωijk (t), and Ωijk (t) denotes the set of
varieties sold to country k and produced by affiliates located in j belonging to firms from i, at time
t. The term λij denotes a preference shifter.

Assumption 1 (Armington). Varieties consumed and produced are firm-location specific.


As in Armington (1969), Assumption 1 states that consumers perceive differently varieties produced
in different locations by the same firm, a standard assumption in the literature. For example,
consumers in a given destination perceive Möet Chandon champagne produced in France as different
from Chandon sparkling wine produced by the same firm in the United States.

Each country is populated by a continuum of firms. The Home country is the only source of MNEs:
Home firms decide whether to operate only in their home market or to also establish affiliates

                                                        12
abroad. For this reason, to simplify notation, we remove the index i that denotes a variety’s origin
country and use the subscript d to refer to the parent’s operations at Home.

Labor is the only factor of production. Each firm produces with a linear technology and operates
under monopolistic competition. As in Melitz (2003), each firm is characterized by a productivity
parameter ϕ that determines the unit labor cost of the good produced. Each firm sets prices
to maximize profits from sales to each destination, pjk (ϕ) = ηecjk (ϕ), with ηe ≡ η/(η − 1) and
cjk (ϕ) ≡ wj τjk /ϕ. The term wj denotes the wage in country j where production takes place, and
τjk denotes the iceberg cost of shipping goods from production location j to destination k, with
τjk ≥ 1, ∀j 6= k, and τjj = 1, ∀j.

A Home firm’s domestic profits are given by πd (ϕ) = H(wd /ϕ)1−η Pdη λd Qd , while variable profits
from sales to k of an affiliate in j are given by πjk (ϕ) = H(τjk wj /ϕ)1−η λj Pkη Qk , where H ≡
η −η (η − 1)η−1 and Pk is the corresponding CES price index. Note that, for j = k, the variable πjk
denotes profits from horizontal sales, while for j 6= k, it denotes profits from affiliate export sales.

When a firm establishes an affiliate in a foreign country j, it has to pay a sunk entry cost Fjh > 0.
The affiliate starts by selling locally and incurs a per-period fixed cost fjh > 0. Once the affiliate
is in place, it can expand its operations to export to other markets. An affiliate located in country
                          e > 0 to start exporting to country k, and a per-period fixed export
j has to pay a sunk cost Fjk
      e > 0. For simplicity, we assume that there are no per-period fixed costs associated with
cost fjk
domestic production, so that all firms produce at Home.14

Our setup has two important implications. First, Assumption 1, coupled with CES preferences and
monopolistic competition, implies that there is no cannibalization of sales when a MNE serves a
market by opening an affiliate there and by exporting to it from an affiliate in a different location;
those affiliate exports and horizontal sales refer to different goods. Second, Assumption 1 also
implies that the affiliate entry decision of the MNE is separable across locations: affiliate profits in
one location do not depend on the number of affiliates of the same MNE in other locations.15

Our data on US MNEs offer evidence in support of the implications of our setup regarding the lack
of cannibalization and separability in the affiliate-entry decisions. First, a large share of firms has
  14
     The model can easily accommodate exports from the Home country: this is the case of j = i. However, in our
calibration, we do not include exports from the US parent because the BEA data do not break down the parent
exports by destination (and more generally, we observe very limited information on the activity of the parent in the
United States). The model with exports will deliver aggregate predictions that are in line with the predictions of the
proximity-concentration tradeoff in Brainard (1997): the higher trade costs and the lower plant-level scale economies,
the larger is the share of foreign sales accounted for by affiliate sales relative to export sales.
  15
     Assumption 1 makes the product space in our model different from Tintelnot (2017). In his setup, varieties are
not unique to a firm-location pair. As a result, because of the presence of fixed production costs, firms solve a complex
static combinatorial problem to choose the minimum cost location where to produce a variety for a given destination
market. The solution of such a problem would be unfeasible in a dynamic multi-country setting.


                                                           13
affiliate exports to a country in which they also operate affiliates. For the benchmark year 2004,
we are able to examine this pattern for three countries (Canada, the United Kingdom, and Japan).
Of the 20,359 (5,017; 5,224) affiliates that export to Canada (United Kingdom; Japan), 64 (70; 47)
percent belong to a US parent that also has affiliates located in Canada (United Kingdom; Japan).16
Second, Appendix Figure B.3 shows that the horizontal sales of an affiliate in a country do not
decrease when another affiliate of the same parent starts exporting to that country from another
location.17 While the results in figure B.3 do not establish a causal relationship, they do reveal a
pattern in the data that is consistent with the assumptions of our model. Finally, the comparison
between conditional and unconditional probabilities of affiliate entry into a country informs us
about the separability of the MNE entry decisions. Appendix Table B.4 shows that, for a given
US parent, there is an extremely small –and in several cases statistically insignificant– difference
between the unconditional probability of opening an affiliate in a country and the probability of
opening an affiliate conditional on already having an affiliate in a country with similar characteristics
(i.e., located in the same continent, with common border, with common language, or with similar
income per capita).18


3.2     The MNE dynamic problem: the compound option

We now present the MNE dynamic problem. At each point in time, a firm endogenously decides
whether to open an affiliate in a foreign country, and whether—and where—to export from its
existing affiliates, including exporting to the Home market. A firm may also decide to shut down
affiliates, or to exit any of its affiliate export markets.

We use the notion of a compound option to model the dynamic problem of the MNE. Opening an
affiliate in a country is an option that, when exercised, gives access to another set of options, namely
the possibility of expanding to each export destination. Hence, the decision to open an affiliate in
country j depends on the set of countries where the affiliate can export to. The compound option
   16
      This evidence is consistent with the detailed evidence in Head and Mayer (2019) about automakers: MNEs in
that industry source each vehicle model (a “variety”) from a single source.
   17
      We restrict the sample to three destinations for which we can observe arm’s length affiliate exports: Canada,
the United Kingdom, and Japan. The results are robust to including controls for the global operations of the parent
and the operations in the United States, a battery of fixed effects, different clustering of standard errors, and to
considering different samples of affiliates as well as of exports (arm’s length and intra-firm).
   18
      This finding is in stark contrast with the findings for exporter entry in Morales et al. (2018): they find, for instance,
that the unconditional probability of exporting to a given country is 0.7 percent and increases to 6.7 percent if the
firm is already exporting to an adjacent country. In contrast, we find that the unconditional probability of opening
an affiliate in the United Kingdom is 2.5 percent and increases to only three percent if the MNE already has an
affiliate in an adjacent country. In general, while differences between conditional and unconditional probabilities for
exporter entry range between 2 and 4 times, differences for MNE entry range between 2 and 20 percent. This finding
is robust to considering different samples of MNEs and affiliates (not shown).



                                                              14
structure allows us to easily solve the firm’s problem backwards, as suggested by Dixit and Pindyck
(1994, chap. 10). Conditional on the MNE having an affiliate in country j, one can solve for the
value of exports to each destination and for the policy functions that induce the affiliate to start,
or stop, exporting to each country k 6= j. Together with the value of horizontal sales, the value of
exports determines the value of an affiliate in country j. One can then solve for the policy functions
that induce the firm to open, or shut down, the affiliate.

The assumption we present next is guided by the empirical observations in Section 2.

Assumption 2 (Sequential MNE activities). A new affiliate has to sell to its host market
before eventually starting to export from there.


Assuming sequential decisions for the affiliate is a mere artifact to gain tractability: because the
model is specified in continuous time, opening an affiliate and exporting from it can happen almost
simultaneously. In this way, the model can generate affiliates that export from birth, as observed
in the data.

Following Ghironi and Melitz (2005), we define the firm-level productivity ϕ as the product of a
time-invariant firm-specific component, z, and a time-varying Home-country specific component,
Z, so that ϕ ≡ z · Z. The term z is firm-specific, drawn from a time-invariant distribution, G(z),
as in Melitz (2003). We assume that Z = eX , where X is a Brownian motion with drift,

                                               dX = µdt + σdW,                                                  (5)

for µ ∈ <, σ > 0, and dW denoting a standard Wiener process. Additionally, we introduce host-
country aggregate demand shocks by assuming that aggregate demand in destination country k
evolves according to a geometric Brownian motion,

                                         dQk = µk Qk dt + σk Qk dWk ,                                           (6)

where µk ∈ <, σk > 0, and dWk denotes a standard Wiener process, possibly correlated with the
Home aggregate productivity shock.19 We assume that when a firm operates an affiliate in a foreign
country, it transfers both the aggregate and the idiosyncratic components of the productivity shock
to the host market. In this way, MNE operations contribute to the transmission of productivity
shocks across countries, in the spirit of Cravino and Levchenko (2017).

Our shock structure is based on analytical and computational convenience, as well as on empirical
  19
    The shock process (6) is analogous to assuming that foreign productivity Xk evolves according to a process that,
in equilibrium, implies that foreign demand evolves according to (6).


                                                        15
observations. Analytically, the specification in (5)-(6) is equivalent to assuming that aggregate
Home productivity and foreign demand growth behave like a random walk and that productivity
and demand growth are independently and identically distributed. This is a convenient functional
form assumption that guarantees the tractability of the model’s solution. More precisely, affiliate
profits from sales to country k are linear in the term e(η−1)X Qk . Thus, it is convenient to define
the “composite” shock Yk ≡ e(η−1)X Qk , which captures the effect of both source- and destination-
country aggregate shocks on affiliates’ profits. The composite shock Yk is also a geometric Brownian
motion with drift µ̃k and variance σ̃k2 given by

                                                         σ2
                             µ̃k = µk + µ(η − 1) +          (η − 1)2 + γk σk σ,                  (7)
                                                          2
                             σ̃k2   = σk2 + σ 2 (η − 1)2 + 2(η − 1)γk σk σ,                      (8)

where γk denotes the correlation between eX and Qk . We show below that the model can be solved
in terms of realizations of the composite shock. Computationally, relying only on aggregate shocks
makes feasible the aggregation of individual firms’ decisions and the computation of equilibrium
price indexes for many countries. By relying on aggregate shocks only, we do not need to keep
track of changes in the firms’ productivity distribution over time, which significantly reduces the
dimensionality of the state space. Furthermore, the introduction of country-specific demand shocks
gives the model the flexibility to match the evolution of affiliate sales shares in different host
countries.

Empirically, this specification is broadly consistent with the main sources of variation observed
in the data. Most of the variation in US MNE affiliates’ sales is explained by country-specific
time-varying shocks and parent fixed effects, rather than parent- and affiliate-level time-varying
shocks (see Appendix Table B.5). Finally, our shock structure is consistent with the facts shown
in Section 2. Country-level shocks, together with the assumption that the MNE transfers its
productivity to its affiliates abroad, imply that, conditional on entry, a firm’s Home and foreign
sales perfectly co-move, as observed in the data (see Figure 1). The persistence of the aggregate
shock, together with aggregate productivity growing over time (µ ≥ 0), gives rise to the dynamic
patterns documented in Figure 2: affiliates start serving their host market, and later on, they start
expanding internationally.

Bellman equations. The state of the economy is described by the (N + 1)-tuple (X, Q), where
Q = [Q1 , . . . , QN ]. Let V(z, X, Q) denote the expected net present value of a Home-country firm




                                                      16
with productivity z that follows an optimal policy when the state of the economy is (X, Q),

                                                 N
                                                 X
                                                       max Vjo (z, X, Q), Vja (z, X, Q) .
                                                          
                   V(z, X, Q) = Vd (z, X) +                                                          (9)
                                                 j=1


The function Vd (z, X) is the value of domestic operations, Vjo (z, X, Q) is the option value of opening
an affiliate in country j, and Vja (z, X, Q) is the value of an affiliate in country j, regardless of the
destination of its sales. In turn, the value of an affiliate in country j is given by
                                                   X
                Vja (z, X, Q) = Vjh (z, X, Q) +
                                                              o               e
                                                          max Vjk (z, X, Q), Vjk (z, X, Q) ,        (10)
                                                   k6=j


The function Vjh (z, X, Q) is the value of horizontal sales in country j, Vjk
                                                                            o (z, X, Q) is the option

                                                                     e (z, X, Q) is the value of exports
value of exporting to country k for an affiliate located in j, and Vjk
to country k for an affiliate located in j. Equations (9)-(10) reflect Assumption 2. The problem
is formulated as a compound option because opening an affiliate in a country is equivalent to
exercising an option that gives access to another set of options: the options to export to any other
country.

Since all firms operate in the domestic market, the value of domestic operations is simply given by
the evolution of domestic profits over time, and depends only on the domestic shock X. Over a
generic time interval ∆t,

                                            1
                                                  πd (z, X)∆t + E[Vd (z, X 0 )|X] ,
                                                                                
                        Vd (z, X) =                                                                 (11)
                                         1 + ρ∆t

where X 0 denotes the realization of Home aggregate productivity next period.

If a domestic firm has not yet opened an affiliate in country j, all the value from its operations in
j is option value—i.e., the value of the possibility of entering j in the future,
                                                                                           
                                           1              0   0
            Vjo (z, X, Q)   = max                   o                       a             h
                                                E[Vj (z, X , Q )|(X, Q)]; Vj (z, X, Q) − Fj ,       (12)
                                        1 + ρ∆t

where Q0 denotes the vector of realizations of demand shocks next period. This equation captures
the fact that a firm may keep the option of entering market j, or may enter country j by opening
an affiliate there, in which case it pays the entry cost Fjh and gets the value of having an affiliate in
country j, Vja (z, X, Q). Because goods are firm- and location-specific, each firm evaluates entering
each location separately.

Since we assume that all affiliates sell in the market where they are located, the value of horizontal


                                                        17
sales for an affiliate in country j is given by
                                                                                                      
                                 1    h
                                                                            0   0
                                                                                        i
  Vjh (z, X, Q)   = max                                   h           h                      o
                                        (πjj (z, X, Q) − fj )∆t + E[Vj (z, X , Q )|X, Q] ; Vj (z, X, Q) .
                              1 + ρ∆t
                                                                                                       (13)
This equation captures the fact that the affiliate may survive and make profits from horizontal sales
in j, or may shut down, in which case it gets the value of the option of opening an affiliate in j,
Vjo (z, X, Q).

As indicated by (10), the value of an affiliate is given by the value of its horizontal plus its export
sales. The Bellman equation describing the value of the option to export to country k for a firm
with an affiliate in country j is given by
                                                                                                
              o                               1        o      0   0             e              e
            Vjk (z, X, Q)     = max                E[Vjk (z, X , Q )|(X, Q)]; Vjk (z, X, Q) − Fjk .     (14)
                                           1 + ρ∆t

This equation captures the fact that the affiliate may keep the option of exporting to country k—
and get the continuation value of that option—or may start exporting to country k, in which case
                        e and gets the value of exporting to k from j, V e (z, X, Q). In turn, this
it pays the entry cost Fjk                                              jk
value is given by
                                                                                                         
  e                             1                      e            e      0   0
                                                                                           o
Vjk (z, X, Q)    = max                (πjk (z, X, Q) − fjk )∆t + E[Vjk (z, X , Q )|(X, Q)] ; Vjk (z, X, Q) .
                             1 + ρ∆t
                                                                                                         (15)
This equation captures the fact that the affiliate may keep exporting to country k—and get the
continuation value of that option—or may stop exporting to country k, in which case it gets the
                                                o (z, X, Q).
value of the option of exporting to k from j, Vjk
                                                                            o (z, X, Q) and
Value functions. The problem can be solved backwards by first solving for Vjk
  e (z, X, Q), conditional on the firm having an affiliate in country j. Given the affiliate’s location,
Vjk
the value functions only depend on the Home productivity shock and on the demand shock in
destination country k. Since these shocks enter the profit functions linearly, we can replace them
with the composite shock Yk ≡ e(η−1)X Qk .

Solving for the value of exports conditional on the affiliate’s location is a simple case of interlinked
options (see Dixit and Pindyck 1994, ch. 7), with solution given by

                                   o
                                 Vjk             o
                                     (z, Yk ) = Bjk (z)Ykβk ,                                           (16)

                                                                  e
                                                    πjk (z, Yk ) fjk
                                   e
                                 Vjk (z, Yk )   =               −    + Aejk (z)Ykαk .                   (17)
                                                     ρ − µ̃k      ρ


                                                          18
                o (z) > 0 and Ae (z) > 0 are firm-specific parameters, while α < 0 and β > 1
The variables Bjk                jk                                           k         k
                   2  2             2
                                                               o      βk
are the roots of σ̃k ξ /2 + µ̃k − σ̃k /2 ξ − ρ = 0. The term Bjk (z)Yk in (16) represents the
option value of exporting to country k and is increasing in the realization of the composite shock.
Similarly, Aejk (z)Ykαk in (17) is the option value of quitting export market k and is decreasing in
the realization of the composite shock—i.e., the option of exiting an export market has a larger
value in “bad times”. For each country pair (j, k) and for each firm with productivity z, the
            o (z) > 0, Ae (z) > 0, and the thresholds for the realizations of the composite shock
parameters Bjk          jk
that induce the affiliate to start and stop exporting—i.e., the policy functions—can be recovered
from the appropriate system of value-matching and smooth-pasting conditions.

Following a similar procedure, one can show that the value of horizontal sales, conditional on having
an affiliate in country j, is given by the present discounted value of profits from horizontal sales
plus the option value of shutting down the affiliate,

                                                πjj (z, Yj ) fjh            α
                               Vjh (z, Yj )   =             −    + Ahj (z)Yj j ,                  (18)
                                                 ρ − µ̃j      ρ

where Ahj (z) > 0 is a firm-specific parameter. As a result, the value of an affiliate in country j can
be written as

                                                   αj       πjj (z, Yj ) fjh
                     Vja (z, Y) = Ahj (z)Yj             +               −    + ...
                                                             ρ − µ̃j      ρ
                                                          e
                                        X  πjk (z, Yk ) fjk               
                                                                e       αk
                                                        −    + Ajk (z)Yk     + ...
                                             ρ − µ̃k      ρ
                                      k∈Aj (z)

                                        X h           i
                                            o
                                           Bjk (z)Ykβk ,                                          (19)
                                      k6∈Aj (z)


where Aj (z) is the subset of countries where an affiliate of firm z located in j exports to, and
Y = [Y1 , . . . , YN ]. Inspecting (19) it is clear that the compound option structure introduces
interdependence in the MNE location choices: the value of an affiliate depends on the set of export
destinations available from the affiliate’s host country.

It remains to solve for the decision of a firm to set up an affiliate in country j. The option value of
opening an affiliate in j is
                                                                       β
                                              Vjo (z, Yj ) = Bjo (z)Yj j .                        (20)

Hence, for each host country j and for each firm with productivity z, the parameters Bjo (z) > 0,
Ahj (z) > 0, and the thresholds for the realizations of the composite shock that induce the firm to


                                                            19
open and shut down an affiliate can be recovered from the appropriate system of value-matching
and smooth-pasting conditions.

Lastly, the value of domestic sales is simply given by the present discounted value of profits from
domestic sales,
                                                       πd (z, X)
                                        Vd (z, X) =              .                                (21)
                                                        ρ − µ̂

Details on the solution of the dynamic problem of the firm are shown in Appendix C.


3.3   Prices indexes

Thanks to the tractability of our multi-country model, we are able to solve for the dynamics of the
price index in each country. This calculation entails keeping track of the evolution of the mass of
affiliates located in each host country j and serving each destination country k. Appendix C reports
the expressions for the price indexes for each country j, the law of motion of the mass of MNEs in
each country j, and the law of motion of the mass of firms in j that export to a destination k.

The ability to solve for equilibrium price indexes derives from the choices we made about the setup of
the model and shock structure. Traditionally, general equilibrium models of trade dynamics feature
firm-level shocks but do not feature sunk costs (see, for example, Luttmer, 2007 and Arkolakis,
2016). Existing dynamic models with sunk costs characterize the equilibrium dynamics for a single
firm, as in Das et al. (2007) and Morales et al. (2018), or focus on stationary equilibria where
aggregate variables do not change over time, as in Alessandria and Choi (2007). These models are
usually formulated in discrete time settings where the firm’s value function itself needs to be solved
numerically. Our continuous time formulation, coupled with unit root shocks, allows us to solve
for the value functions in closed form (up to some constants). By including only aggregate shocks,
we can easily solve for the price indexes since we do not need to keep track of the evolution of the
firm’s productivity distribution.

Finally, we assume that the wage in each destination is exogenous.


3.4   Model predictions

In this section, we derive some analytical properties of the model regarding the link between firm-
level productivity, host market characteristics, and affiliate entry and export thresholds. In order
to show these results analytically, we assume that the fixed costs of affiliate operations are “small,”
so that there is no endogenous exit of affiliates, either from export markets or from their production


                                                  20
locations.20 Under this assumption, the option-value terms Aeh (z) and Aejk (z), in (17), (18), and
(19), are zero. Hence, we can obtain closed-form solutions for the affiliate entry and export entry
thresholds,
                                                                    ! 
                                         fjh + ρFjh
                                                                              
                                          βj                            ρ − µ̃j
                   YjOH (z)=           ·                 E
                                                     − Vj (z, Y−j ) ·             ,                                  (22)
                                        βj − 1ρ                         κjj (z)
                                        e        e  
                                         fjk + ρFjk
                                                                  
                     OE          βk                        ρ − µ̃k
                   Yjk (z) =           ·               ·             .                                               (23)
                               βk − 1         ρ            κjk (z)

The term κjk (z) ≡ H(τjk wj /z)1−η Pjk λjk is a firm-specific revenue term, and VjE (z, Y−j ) denotes
the total value of exporting from an affiliate in j for a firm with productivity z.21 Details on the
derivation of (22) and (23) are in Appendix C.

Proposition 1. For a given host-destination pair, more productive firms have lower affiliate entry
thresholds and lower affiliate export entry thresholds: ∂YjOH (z)/∂z ≤ 0 and ∂Yjk
                                                                                OE (z)/∂z ≤ 0.



Proof. See Appendix C.

Under the assumption that, ∀k 6= j, YjOH (z) < Yjk
                                                 OE (z) (the threshold for the shock realization

that induces a firm to open an affiliate is lower than the one that induces the affiliate to export),
Proposition 1 implies that: 1) affiliates that are exporters from birth have larger horizontal sales
than affiliates born with exclusively horizontal sales; and 2) conditional on Home aggregate productivity—
or host-country aggregate demand—increasing over time (µ̃ ≥ 0), affiliates that start exporting later
in life have lower horizontal sales than affiliates that start exporting earlier in life.

The upper panels of Figure 3 illustrate these predictions. The red and blue lines denote, respectively,
the threshold for opening an affiliate in j, YjOH (z), and the threshold for starting exports from j
        OE (z). They are decreasing functions of the firm’s productivity z, and hence, they are
to k, Yjk
invertible functions. In Figure 3a, we assume that the realization of the aggregate shock is Y 0 and
that we observe two firms with affiliates in the same host country j. Firm 1 with productivity z1
has an affiliate in j with only horizontal sales, while firm 2 with productivity z2 has an affiliate
in j that also exports, so that z2 ≥ zje (Y 0 ) ≥ z1 , where zje (Y 0 ) denotes the productivity necessary
to export when the realization of the composite shock is Y 0 (i.e., the inverse of Yjk
                                                                                     OE (z)). Since

z2 ≥ z1 , the horizontal sales of the affiliate belonging to firm 2 must be larger than the horizontal
sales of the affiliate belonging to firm 1. Now, suppose that the realization of the composite shock
   20
      Numerical simulations reveal that the implications described in this section also hold in the general case where
fixed costs are large, and hence, exit thresholds are active.
   21
      Notice that if (fjh + ρFjh )/ρ − VjE (z, Y−j ) < 0, then YjOH (z) < 0. In this case, a firm with productivity z opens
an affiliate in j for any realization of Yj because the value of its potential export network is larger than the cost of
opening the affiliate.


                                                            21
increases to Y 00 > Y 0 . As illustrated in Figure 3b, z1 ≥ zje (Y 00 ) and firm 1 will start exporting from
its foreign affiliate in j. Hence, within a host country, affiliates that export earlier in life are more
productive and exhibit larger horizontal sales than affiliates that start exporting later.
                                                         Figure 3: Model predictions.

                                        Affiliate size, export status, and the timing of entry.
                       (a) Exporters vs non-exporters                                                     (b) Early vs late exporters

          4                                                                                  4

                                                                   <j2+(z)                                                                     YjOH(z)

          3                                                        <j2((z)                   3                                                 YjOE(z)




          2                                                                                  2

                                                                                           Y''

          1                                                                                  1

      <'                                                                                   Y'

          0                                                                                  0



       -1                                                                                   -1


                                                                                  z
       -2                                                                                   -2
               0   1   z 1 =2   3   4 z2 = 5   6     7    8        9         10                  0   1 z =2     3   4 z2 = 5   6   7    8      9          10
                                                                                                        1




                                        Host market characteristics and the timing of entry.
                                (c) Affiliate size                                                              (d) Entry costs

           4                                                                                 4
                                                              <j2+(z, ȜMM)                                                                  <j2+(z,Fjh)
                                                              < 2+(z, ȜkN)                                                                   2+     h
                                                                                                                                            <k (z, Fk )
           3                                                   k                             3



           2                                                                                 2

     Y''                                                                                   Y''

           1                                                                                 1
     Y'                                                                                    Y'

           0                                                                                 0



       -1                                                                                   -1



       -2                                                                                   -2
               0        z= 2        4          6          8                  10                  0   1   z= 2   3   4     5    6   7    8      9          10




Proposition 1 also implies that the model exhibits sorting of MNEs across different host markets.
First, MNEs with larger parent sales enter more foreign markets by opening foreign affiliates.
Second, the mass of firms with affiliates in n host markets is decreasing in n, so that there is a
negative relationship between the number of firms with affiliates in n markets and their parent sales
(see Corollaries 1 and 2 in Appendix C).

                                                                                      22
Proposition 2. For a given firm with productivity z, the affiliate entry threshold is decreasing in the
host-market preference shifter, ∂YjOH (z)/∂λj ≤ 0, and increasing in the entry cost, ∂YjOH (z)/∂Fjh ≥
0.


Proof. See Appendix C.

Proposition 2 relates to the expansion strategies of a MNE across countries. Since entry thresholds
are decreasing in the preference shifter, the model predicts that—keeping host market size constant
and conditional on aggregate productivity or demand increasing over time (µ̃ ≥ 0)—a MNE first
opens its largest affiliates and subsequently opens its smaller affiliates. Similarly, since entry
thresholds are increasing in entry costs, the model predicts that a MNE first opens affiliates in
markets that are less costly to enter.

The lower panels of Figure 3 illustrate the predictions of Proposition 2. Figure 3c plots entry
thresholds in two host countries of the same size, (Qk = Qj ) but with different taste shifters
(λkk < λjj ), so that YkOH (z, λkk ) ≥ YjOH (z, λjj ). Firm z only opens an affiliate in country j when
the realization of the aggregate shock is Y 0 . When the realization of the shock grows to Y 00 > Y 0 ,
the firm can also afford to open an affiliate in country k, illustrating that, controlling for factor
costs and host country size, a MNE opens its largest affiliates first. Figure 3d plots entry thresholds
in two host countries with different entry costs, Fkh > Fjh , so that YkOH (z, Fkh ) ≥ YjOH (z, Fjh ). Firm
z opens an affiliate in country j when the realization of the composite shock is Y 0 . When the
realization of the composite shock increases to Y 00 > Y 0 , the firm can also afford to open an affiliate
in country k.



4    Calibration

We calibrate the model to match the expansion of US MNEs during the period 1987-2011, in the top-
ten host countries for US FDI (Brazil, Canada, China, France, United Kingdom, Germany, Ireland,
Japan, Mexico, and Singapore). We set the values of preference and technology parameters using
estimates from the literature and direct observations from the data. Then, we jointly calibrate the
rich set of barriers to MNE expansion included in the model to match static and dynamic moments
from the BEA data.




                                                    23
4.1    Procedure

We set the elasticity of substitution η = 5, in line with estimates in the literature (Broda and
Weinstein, 2006). We need to set the time preference rate to ρ = 0.1 so that it does not violate
the technical condition that ensures that the present discounted value of profits does not diverge
(ρ > µ̃j , ∀j).22 We assume that the distribution of firm productivities is Pareto, with location
parameter normalized to b = 1 and shape parameter ϑ = 4.5, consistent with estimates in the
literature (Simonovska and Waugh, 2014).

We use data on expenditure-based real GDP growth across countries, from the Penn World Tables
9.0, to calibrate the composite shock process, for each country in our sample. The composite shock
Yj captures the effect on profits of both US aggregate productivity and aggregate demand in country
j. We set the drift of the process, µ̃j , to match real GDP growth in country j. Matching σ̃j to
the standard deviation of real GDP growth, however, would generate too little volatility to induce
reasonable firm dynamics. For this reason, we first set the standard deviation of US aggregate
productivity, σ, to match the standard deviation of labor productivity among US firms, and the
standard deviation of the aggregate demand shock in country j, σj , and its correlation with the US
aggregate shock, γj , to match, respectively, country j’s standard deviation of real GDP growth and
its correlation with US GDP growth. We then use (8), together with η = 5, to recover the values
of σ̃j . To initialize the shock processes, we normalize the initial value of the US productivity shock
to Z(0) = 1, and the US demand shock to QU S (0) = 1. We then set Qj (0) to be equal to country
j’s GDP relative to US GDP, ∀j.

It remains to calibrate the preference shifters, λij , and the parameters related to the costs of MNE
expansion. These costs are: the fixed and sunk costs of affiliate opening, fjh and Fjh , for j = 1, ...10;
                                                e and F e , for j = 1, ...10, k = 1, ...10, U S, and k 6= j;
the fixed and sunk costs of affiliate exports, fjk     jk
and the iceberg trade costs of affiliate exports, τjk , for j = 1, ...10, k = 1, ...10, U S, and k 6= j.

Due to data limitations, we make some symmetry assumptions.23 First, we assume that λii = 1
and λij = λj 6= 1, for i = U S and for all j 6= i. These taste shifters allow us to generate different
market shares for domestic firms and US MNEs in a host country. Second, we assume that the
fixed and sunk costs of affiliate exports are symmetric across all destination countries, except for
  22
     The value of ρ = 0.1 might appear high, but its interpretation includes economic magnitudes other than just the
time preference rate. For example, if the model included an exogenous death rate, this variable would be added to
the time preference rate and the technical condition would allow for a lower time preference rate. Since the solution
of the model would be unchanged, we prefer not to add unnecessary parameters and rather to assume a high value
for the time preference rate.
  23
     As mentioned in Section 2.1, the BEA data do not record affiliate exports by destination country, except for the
United States and for a handful of countries (Canada, Japan, and the United Kingdom) in benchmark-survey years.




                                                         24
                    e = f e and F e = F e , for j, k = 1, ...10, k 6= j, and k 6= U S. Third, we assume
the United States: fjk   j       jk    j
that iceberg trade costs for destinations for which we do not have any bilateral affiliate export
data are proportional to bilateral distance and to an exporter-specific dummy which is chosen to
exactly match the aggregate export share from country j to all destinations.24 Additionally, since
aggregate demand grows over time at the rate µj , we assume that the fixed and sunk costs of
MNE activities in each host country j also grow at the deterministic rate µj . Hence, we need to
calibrate the initial values of the fixed and sunk costs for each host country. Finally, we take wages
as exogenous and we set them to match real GDP per unit of equipped labor, from Klenow and
Rodriguez-Clare (2005), an average over the period 1995-2000.25 Appendix Table D.1 shows the
calibrated parameters for each of the top ten host countries for US FDI.

We are left with 117 parameters to calibrate, for which we target 117 moments from the data.
Even though the model does not have a one-to-one mapping from each parameter to each moment,
and parameters are jointly calibrated, because of the model’s closed-form solutions, it is relatively
easy to isolate the moment that drives the identification of a given parameter. More precisely, the
intensive margin of exports, given by export sale shares, drives the identification of the iceberg trade
cost τjk , while affiliate entry rates and the share of MNE affiliates in each country help identify the
sunk and fixed MNE entry costs, Fjh and fjh , respectively.26 Similarly, export entry rates and the
share of exporting affiliates help identify the sunk and fixed export costs, Fje and fje , respectively.
Finally, the ratio of affiliate horizontal sales in country j to parent US sales helps identify the taste
shifter λj .

We choose the values of the parameters that best fit the data moments, for each country. To
this end, we simulate the model 100 times, each time for a different realization of the vector of
aggregate shocks. Each simulation amounts to solving the model for 1,000 firms and 30 years.
Computationally, this entails solving N + N 2 systems of four equations in four unknowns, for each
firm and time period, as well as solving for the equilibrium price index every period.
   24
      The distance elasticity is calculated by running a standard gravity equation with two sets of fixed effects and
assuming that the trade elasticity is 4, consistent with the calibrated value of η.
   25
      With constant fixed costs, sunk costs, and wages, frictions to MNE activities are irrelevant in the long run and
all firms become MNEs with affiliates in every country. The growth adjustment to fixed and sunk costs avoids this
counterfactual situation.
   26
      Since the share of affiliates, affiliate entry rates, and affiliate exit rates are linearly dependent, it is enough to
target two out of the three moments. In the calibration, we target the share of affiliates and affiliate entry rates, and
leave affiliate exit rates as non-targeted moments.




                                                            25
4.2    Model fit

Table 3 reports simulated and data moments taking averages across the top-ten host countries
for US FDI and across years. Appendix Tables D.4-D.9 report the full set of simulated and data
moments, while Appendix Tables D.2 and D.3 show the calibrated parameters by country. We
construct moments from the data using the sample of all affiliates operating in the top-ten host
countries for US FDI. This sample includes 83,214 affiliate-year observations, which account for
68.8 percent of all sales by foreign affiliates of US MNEs.

Table 3 shows that the model matches quite well both the static and dynamic targeted moments.
We also include in the table three sets of non-targeted moments: moments related to affiliate size
advantage, MNE sorting patterns, and exit moments.

The moments capturing the affiliate size advantage are related to the analytical predictions of the
model described in Section 3.4. First, Proposition 1 implies that, controlling for the affiliates’ host
market, affiliates that export have larger horizontal sales than affiliates that do not export. In
the data, the average horizontal sales of an affiliate that exports from birth are 6.3 times larger
than the average horizontal sales of an affiliate that never exports, averaging across affiliates’ host
markets. Our calibrated model generates an exporter premium among MNE affiliates of around
seven. Similarly, the model predicts that affiliates that start exporting earlier in their life have
larger horizontal sales than affiliates that start exporting later. In the data, the average horizontal
sales of an affiliate that starts exporting in its first year of life are 3.7 times larger than the
average horizontal sales of an affiliate that starts exporting after its first year of life, averaging
across affiliates’ host markets (see also Appendix Figure D.1). Our calibrated model generates an
early-exporter premium of 5.5. Appendix Table D.9 shows results by country.

Second, the model has predictions about the expansion patterns of a MNE. Proposition 2 implies
that MNEs open their largest affiliates first. In the data, on average, the horizontal sales of a first
affiliate of a MNE are 2.6 times larger than the horizontal sales of the MNE’s subsequent affiliates.
The model generates a first-affiliate size premium of 2.1.27 Proposition 1 also has implications
about the sorting patterns of MNE entry. Similarly to Eaton et al. (2011) for exporters, the model
predicts that the largest MNEs (in terms of US sales) should enter more markets and less popular
markets. Indeed, as moments 5.1 and 5.2 show, the data corroborate the model’s predictions: the
larger the average sales of the MNE in the United States, the more markets the MNE enters; the
  27
     Proposition 2 also states that MNEs first open affiliates located in countries where entry is less costly. Even
though measuring entry costs directly in the data is difficult, we proxy them with the commonly used World Bank
Doing Business indicators and provide suggestive evidence that supports the model’s prediction, in Appendix Table
D.10.


                                                        26
                               Table 3: Moments: model versus data, averages.

                                                                                                          data      model
 Targeted Moments
 1. Static moments: intensive margin
 1.1 Affiliate sales share to host country                                                                0.026      0.026
 1.2 Affiliate sales share to the US                                                                      0.139      0.139
 1.3 Affiliate sales share to third countries                                                             0.288      0.296
 1.4 Affiliate sales share to Canada                                                                      0.015      0.014
 1.5 Affiliate sales share to the UK                                                                      0.069      0.087
 1.6 Affiliate sales share to Japan                                                                       0.033      0.026
 2. Static moments: extensive margin
 2.1 Share of MNEs with affiliates in j                                                                   0.287      0.283
 2.2 Share of affiliates in j exporting to US                                                             0.566      0.566
 2.3 Share of affiliates in j exporting to third countries                                                0.650      0.646
 3. Dynamic moments: entry
 3.1 Share of MNEs opening affiliates in j                                                                0.035      0.021
 3.2 Share of affiliates in j that start exporting to the US                                              0.030      0.024
 3.3 Share of affiliates in j that start exporting to third countries                                     0.031      0.027
 Non-Targeted Moments
 4. Static moments: size advantage
 4.1 Exporter size advantage                                                                               6.27      6.97
 4.2 Early-exporter size advantage                                                                         3.68      5.54
 4.3 First-affiliate size advantage                                                                        2.57      2.13
 5. Static moments: MNE sorting
 5.1 Elasticity of average sales in US w.r.t. # of markets entered                                        0.736      0.816
 5.2 Elasticity of average sales in US w.r.t # of firms entering multiple markets                        -0.424     -0.722
 6. Dynamic moments: exit
 6.1 Share of MNEs shutting down affiliates in j                                                          0.113      0.083
 6.2 Share of affiliates in j that stop exporting to the US                                               0.025      0.042
 6.3 Share of affiliates in j that stop exporting to third countries                                      0.027      0.037

Note: Averages across host countries and years. Data moments for Japan, Canada, and the United Kingdom are
averages over benchmark-year surveys only. Denominators are: in 1.1, US parent’s sales; in 1.2-1.6, total horizontal
sales of affiliates in j; in 2.1, the total number of MNEs; in 2.2 and 2.3, the total number of affiliates in j; in 3.1, total
number of MNEs in period before entry; in 3.2 (3.3), total number of affiliates in j in period before export entry into
US (third countries); in 6.1, total number of affiliates in j in period before exit; and in 6.2 (6.3), the total number
affiliate in j that export to the US (third countries) in the period before stopping the activity. In 4.1, exporter size
advantage refers to the average size of exporting MNE affiliates relative to the average size of non-exporting MNE
affiliates, an average across countries and years. In 4.2, affiliate early-exporter size advantage refers to the average
size of exporting MNE affiliates that start exports in their first year of life relative to the average size of exporting
MNE affiliates that start exports after their first year. In 4.3, first-affiliate size advantage refers to the ratio of the
size of the first foreign affiliate of a MNE (relative to GDP in the affiliate host market) to the size of subsequent
foreign affiliates of the same MNE (relative to GDP in the affiliate host market), an average across MNEs and years.
For moments in 4., size refers to horizontal affiliate sales. The elasticities in 5. are computed by OLS aggregating
the firm-level observations of MNEs that enter the same number of countries. Calculations in the calibrated model
trim the upper and lower 10th decile of the simulated firm-level data.



                                                             27
Table 4: Calibrated MNE costs: shares of sales and monetary values, average across host countries.

                                                                            As % of sales           In thousands $
                                                                          5th 50th 95th
      Sunk affiliate entry cost Fjh , as % of US parent sales             0.05    0.02     0.00           161.0
      Fixed affiliate entry cost fjh , as % of horizontal sales           18.7    12.2     2.30           1,525
                         e , as % of horizontal sales
      Sunk export cost Fjk
      To United States                                                    0.33    0.16     0.03           15.60
      To other destinations                                               3.00    0.99     0.18           97.30
                         e , as % of exports sales
      Fixed export cost fjk
      To United States                                                    12.7    10.1     1.70           98.50
      To other destinations                                               12.8    11.6     3.30           814.6

Note: US parent sales in the year of affiliate entry. Horizontal sales are evaluated in the year the affiliate first exports
                         e
to the destination, for Fjk , and averaged across years, for fjh . Export sales to a destination are averaged across years.
Percentiles are with respect to affiliate sales in the calibrated model. Cost shares in the model are converted into
thousands of US dollars using sales values for the median affiliate in each of the top-ten host countries included in
the calibration, from the BEA, and averaged across host countries. For confidentiality purposes, median sales are an
average of the 9 observations around the median.



smallest MNEs in terms of US sales enter only the most popular market (i.e. the one that all other
MNEs also enter), while the largest MNEs in terms of US sales also enter the least popular markets.
Table 3 shows that the calibrated model captures the magnitude of the elasticity of moment 5.1
very accurately, but overestimates the elasticity of moment 5.2. Appendix Figure D.2 illustrates
these sorting patterns by number of host markets.

Finally, as shown in the last panel of Table 3, the exit rates in the model are close to the ones we
observe in the data. The model slightly under-predicts affiliate exit, and over-predicts exit from
export markets.


4.3     The costs of MNE expansion

We now evaluate the magnitude of the costs of MNE expansion in time and space. Since model-
based magnitudes are hard to interpret, in Table 4 we express the calibrated MNE costs as shares
of firm revenues and in monetary values. Appendix Tables D.11 and D.12 report costs as shares
of revenues by host country, while Appendix Table D.13 shows sales, in US dollars, as observed in
the BEA data, by host country.

On average, opening an affiliate involves spending a very low share of a firm’s US parent revenues.
An affiliate’s fixed operating costs range from about two percent of the affiliate’s horizontal sales,


                                                            28
for the largest affiliates, to about 19 percent, for the smallest affiliates. In monetary terms, affiliate
export operations appear less costly than affiliate horizontal operations. As expected, affiliate
exports to the United States have lower costs than exports to other destination markets, especially
in terms of sunk costs. This result is intuitive as the United States is the origin country of the
affiliates.

The relative magnitudes of different fixed and sunk costs of affiliate operations and affiliate exports
are informative about the heterogeneity of the frictions to MNE activities, both by country and
by type of affiliate sales. Table 5 shows that, for most FDI destinations, opening affiliates is much
more costly than starting to export from them. Favorable trade regimes, such as NAFTA, or tax
policies favoring exports but restricting horizontal FDI, as in China, can rationalize this pattern.
Ratios lower than one for countries like Ireland and Singapore may be explained by favorable “tax-
haven”-like policies that attract FDI. There is a large amount of heterogeneity in the fixed costs
of setting up an affiliate relative to the fixed cost of exporting from it. Nonetheless, except for
Ireland and Singapore, all the calibrated ratios are above one, indicating that the operating cost of
horizontal activities is higher than the operating cost of exporting in all host countries.

The third and fourth columns in Table 5 show the peculiarity of the United States as an export
destination for affiliates of US MNEs. If the United States were an “average” export market for
affiliates, the reported ratios would be close to one. The fact that the ratios of fixed costs are all
above one indicates that affiliate exports to the United States are typically less costly than to other
destinations. The cost of establishing that affiliate export channel though, can be higher (as the
model shows for most of the host countries).



5     Quantitative Analysis

Armed with the calibrated model, we explore the implications of counterfactual scenarios on
aggregate firm dynamics. Since the top-ten host countries for US FDI in our sample include the
United Kingdom, Ireland, Germany, and France, we use as our counterfactual exercise the possibility
of the United Kingdom abandoning the European Union (EU), “Brexit”. Potential implementations
of Brexit have as a common element the increase in export costs between the United Kingdom and
other countries in the EU. In the model, this increase can be captured either as an increase in
the iceberg trade cost, τU K,j , an increase in the fixed export cost, fUe K,j , or an increase in the
sunk export cost, FUe K,j , for j = France, Germany, Ireland. We can think about “shallow Brexit”
scenarios, where only one type of friction is affected, or “deep Brexit” scenarios, where all the export


                                                   29
               Table 5: Calibrated MNE costs: by type, destination, and host country.

                                              Fjh /Fje    fjh /fje    e /F e
                                                                     Fjk  j,U S
                                                                                    e /f e
                                                                                   fjk  j,U S

                       Brazil                  558.2      10.04        0.174         3.945
                       Canada                  1.352      5.121        NaN           1.572
                       China                   1.682      2.578        1.625         5.686
                       France                  2.055      6.695        0.002         10.33
                       United Kingdom          0.019      4.371        0.829         12.95
                       Germany                 0.997      5.512        0.026         7.998
                       Ireland                 0.667      0.669        0.000         12.94
                       Japan                   350.2      17.65        0.021         4.644
                       Mexico                  3.007      3.438        20.18         3.068
                       Singapore               0.048      0.489        0.136         9.901

Note: Calibrated costs are converted into thousands of US dollars using sales values for the median affiliate in each
of the top-ten host countries included in the calibration. In column 1 (column 2), the denominator is an average of
the sunk (fixed) costs of exporting to the United States and to any other destination k, from country j. In column 3
(column 4), the ratio is between the sunk (fixed) export cost from j to any other destination k, relative to the costs
of exporting to the United States. “NaN” are ratios in which the denominator is zero.


barriers increase simultaneously. Additionally, in the Brexit context, we evaluate the importance of
including the endogenous price response to the various shocks by comparing the aggregate dynamics
of the model with and without endogenous prices. In our model, the magnitude of the price change
is also informative about changes in the real wage—i.e., our welfare measure.

In a second counterfactual, we raise the cost of MNE activities in the United Kingdom, captured
in our model by the per-period cost of MNE operations, fUh K , or alternately, by the sunk entry
cost, FUhK . We use this exercise to evaluate quantitatively the role played by the compound option
structure of our model. To such end, we evaluate the response to a cost shock in a calibrated model
with and without export platforms.

Overall, our quantitative exercises point to the importance of including dynamics, together with a
rich spatial structure, when evaluating the response of MNE expansion to shocks.

For each counterfactual exercise, we simulate the model for 30 periods and impose a permanent
change in one or more of parameters at t = 15.


5.1    Brexit

First we increase, one at a time, the barriers to export from (to) the United Kingdom to (from) the
EU countries in our sample (“shallow Brexit”): τU K,j , fUe K,j , and FUe K,j , for j = Ireland, Germany,
and France. In order to make the results of the three exercises comparable, we increase each trade

                                                         30
friction by an amount that results in a 20 percent increase in the total per-period cost of FDI,
                   
  fUe K,j + ρFUe K,j τUη−1
                        K,j . For “deep Brexit”, we increase all export barriers at once. Each barrier
is increased by the same amount as in the “shallow Brexit” exercises.

Intuitively, increasing trade barriers between the United Kingdom and other EU countries has
three main effects. First, exporting from the United Kingdom to the EU becomes more costly, so
that export sales from UK-based affiliates to countries in the EU decline, decreasing the incentive
to open affiliates in the United Kingdom due to the smaller, and more costly, available network
of export destinations. Analogously, exporting from the EU to the United Kingdom also becomes
more costly, so that export sales from affiliates in EU countries to the United Kingdom also decline,
decreasing the incentive to open affiliates in those countries. These are static, partial equilibrium
effects. In addition, increases in trade costs affect the affiliate export band of inaction, which in
turn affects affiliate export entry and exit —an effect only present in dynamic models. Finally,
increases in trade frictions have the effect of raising the price index in the destination countries,
encouraging more export entry. Our quantitative results combine the effects of these three forces.

Figure 4 shows the effects of “shallow Brexit” on affiliates of US MNEs in the United Kingdom.
Results are presented as deviations from the baseline scenario—the calibrated model. Before the
shock, about half of US MNEs had affiliates located in the United Kingdom, as shown in Appendix
Table D.6. All three “shallow Brexit” shocks cause a permanent decrease in the share of US MNE
affiliates in the United Kingdom of around three percent (Figure 4b). The cumulative increase of
all frictions (“deep Brexit”) drives a decrease in the share of US affiliates located in the United
Kingdom of five percent. Naturally, the affiliates that exit are the smallest and account for only a
few percentages of US affiliate sales in the United Kingdom. This observation, together with the
contemporaneous increase in the price index in the United Kingdom, shown in Figure 7, explains the
somewhat counterintuitive result of Figure 4a, where affiliates sales to the United Kingdom increase
when variable trade costs increase. The effects of changing trade costs on horizontal activities in
the United Kingdom are small, since trade frictions affect those activities only indirectly through
the compound option.

The lower panels of Figure 4 show the effect of “shallow Brexit” on the export sales and export
participation rates of UK-based affiliates of US MNEs to Ireland, Germany, and France. These plots
illustrate how different frictions to MNE activities have very different quantitative effects on affiliate
exports and participation rates, even if the changes in those frictions are associated with the same
increase in the per-period cost of FDI. More precisely, the observed decline in export sales, when
either fUe K,j or τUe K,j increase, comes from affiliates that stop exporting. The decline in export sales



                                                   31
                                                                        Figure 4: Brexit: US MNEs’ affiliates in the United Kingdom.

                                                                    (a) Affiliate sales to UK                                                                                                    (b) Share of affiliates in UK
                                   1.15                                                                                                                    1.15



                                                  1.1                                                                                                                     1.1



                                   1.05                                                                                                                    1.05




                                                                                                                        Share (relative to baseline)
Sales (relative to baseline)




                                                   1                                                                                                                       1



                                   0.95                                                                                                                    0.95



                                                  0.9                                                                                                                     0.9



                                   0.85                                                                                                                    0.85

                                                                                                       high tau
                                                                                                       high fe
                                                  0.8                                                                                                                     0.8
                                                                                                       high Fe
                                                                                                       all
                                   0.75                                                                                                                    0.75
                                                            5          10       15        20     25               30                                                                     5            10       15        20      25    30
                                                                                  t                                                                                                                              t


                                                                     (c) Affiliate sales to EU                                                                                      (d) Share of affiliates in UK that export to EU
                                                  1.15                                                                                                                    1.15



                                                   1.1                                                                                                                     1.1



                                                  1.05                                                                                                                    1.05
                                                                                                                                           Share (relative to baseline)
                   Sales (relative to baseline)




                                                        1                                                                                                                       1



                                                  0.95                                                                                                                    0.95



                                                   0.9                                                                                                                     0.9



                                                  0.85                                                                                                                    0.85



                                                   0.8                                                                                                                     0.8



                                                  0.75                                                                                                                    0.75
                                                                5       10       15        20     25               30                                                                        5         10       15        20      25    30
                                                                                      t                                                                                                                              t



Note: “high X” refers to an increase in the barrier X from/to the United Kingdom to/from country j (“shallow
Brexit”). “All” refers to increasing all three export barriers from/to the United Kingdom to/from country j at once
(“deep Brexit”). Country j refers to Ireland, Germany, and France.


also includes an intensive-margin decline for the case of a shock to τU K,j . Consequently, the change
that has the highest impact on affiliate export sales is the increase in the per-period iceberg trade
cost. An increase in τU K,j corresponding to a 20 percent increase in the cost of FDI produces a 15
percent decline in UK-based affiliates’ export sales, a much larger decline than the one produced
by increases in fixed export costs. Conversely, an increase in the sunk export cost, FUe K,j , produces
a small increase in affiliate export sales. As Appendix Figure E.5 shows, an increase in the sunk
export cost increases the export band of inaction, driving a decline in both affiliate export entry


                                                                                                                       32
and exit rates. The decline in the exit rate is the most pronounced, giving rise to the increase
in affiliate export sales observed in Figure 4c, and in the share of exporting affiliates observed in
Figure 4d. Except for the case of an increase in the sunk export cost, the Brexit shock has the
effect of reducing the share of affiliates that export. The increase in the fixed export cost produces
the largest decline in the export participation rate because this cost is intimately related to the
affiliates’ decision to exit a market. The difference in the magnitude and direction of the effects
when either sunk, fixed, or variable costs change highlights the importance of including dynamics
in models of MNE behavior. Static models cannot distinguish between sunk and fixed costs, yet
MNEs respond very differently to changes in these types of costs.

The case of “deep Brexit” highlights the differences between the aggregate dynamics after a shock
in the short and in the long run. In particular, in the short run the effect of the increase in
sunk export costs dominates and the share of affiliates in the United Kingdom that export to EU
increases. Fifteen periods after the shock, this share decreases by around seven percentage points
relative to the pre-shock levels.

The results for US affiliates located in France, Ireland, and Germany are qualitatively similar to
the results for US affiliates located in the United Kingdom. There are, however, some important
quantitative differences. Figure 5 shows the results for affiliates of US MNEs located in France.
We relegate to Appendix Figures E.3 and E.4 the results for Ireland and Germany.

As expected, higher trade costs between France and the United Kingdom reduce the incentives to
locate in France, and the share of affiliates of US MNEs located in France declines. As already
seen for the United Kingdom, this decline in the extensive margin is accompanied by an increase in
the intensive margin of horizontal sales in France for the scenario in which τU K,F R increases. This
increase is driven by the corresponding increase in the price index in France. Naturally, the share
of US affiliates in France that export to the United Kingdom, as well as their export sales, drop
after the Brexit shock in almost all specifications. An increase in the sunk export cost generates a
non-monotonic response of the share of exporting affiliates, which first increases (due to a decline
in exit rates) and then decreases.

Summing up, the results in Figures 4 and 5 show that increasing a variable, fixed, or sunk cost of
exporting has different quantitative effects on aggregate firm dynamics. Even though the increase
in the per-period cost of FDI is the same in all cases, the type of trade barrier that changes matters
for both the extensive and intensive margins of MNEs’ decisions, and in turn, for aggregate dynamic
responses.

Due to the tractability of the model, we can solve numerically for the aggregate price index in each

                                                 33
                                                               Figure 5: Brexit: US affiliates in France.
                                           (a) Affiliate sales to France                                                                    (b) Share of affiliates in France
                                1.15                                                                                           1.15



                                 1.1                                                                                            1.1



                                1.05                                                                                           1.05




                                                                                                Share (relative to baseline)
 Sales (relative to baseline)




                                  1                                                                                              1



                                0.95                                                                                           0.95



                                 0.9                                                                                            0.9



                                0.85                                                                                           0.85

                                                                                high tau
                                                                                high fe
                                 0.8                                                                                            0.8
                                                                                high Fe
                                                                                all
                                0.75                                                                                           0.75
                                       5        10       15        20      25              30                                           5          10       15        20        25    30
                                                           t                                                                                                  t


                                            (c) Affiliate sales to UK                                                           (d) Share of affiliates in France that export to UK
                                1.15                                                                                           1.15



                                 1.1                                                                                            1.1



                                1.05                                                                                           1.05
                                                                                                Share (relative to baseline)
 Sales (relative to baseline)




                                  1                                                                                              1



                                0.95                                                                                           0.95



                                 0.9                                                                                            0.9



                                0.85                                                                                           0.85



                                 0.8                                                                                            0.8



                                0.75                                                                                           0.75
                                       5        10       15        20      25              30                                           5          10       15        20        25    30
                                                           t                                                                                                  t


Note: “high X” refers to an increase in the barrier X from/to the United Kingdom to/from country j (“shallow
Brexit”). “All” refers to increasing all three export barriers from/to the United Kingdom to/from country j at once
(“deep Brexit”). Country j refers to Ireland, Germany, and France.


period, for each country. In this way, the results of our counterfactual exercises incorporate the
effects of changes in the price indexes on firms’ decisions. How important are these price effects
quantitatively? Are they strong enough to affect the aggregate dynamics of MNEs? In Figure 6,
we show the dynamics of aggregate outcomes after the “deep Brexit” shock, under endogenous and
exogenous prices. It is clear that the endogenous response of prices acts as a buffer to the decrease
in affiliate sales, both horizontal and exports, as well as to the decrease in the share of US MNEs
operating in the United Kingdom. In the case of horizontal sales, shown in Figure 6a, the effect is
strong enough to reverse the pattern from a two-percent decrease to a three-percent increase.


                                                                                            34
Appendix Figure E.1 shows results with exogenous prices for US MNE affiliates in the United
Kingdom, for each of the Brexit counterfactual exercises.

                                       Figure 6: Brexit: US affiliates in the United Kingdom. Endogenous vs exogenous prices.
                                                (a) Affiliate sales to UK                                                                           (b) Share of affiliates in UK
                                1.15                                                                                               1.15



                                 1.1                                                                                                1.1



                                1.05                                                                                               1.05




                                                                                                    Share (relative to baseline)
 Sales (relative to baseline)




                                  1                                                                                                  1



                                0.95                                                                                               0.95



                                 0.9                                                                                                0.9



                                0.85                                                                                               0.85



                                 0.8                                                                                                0.8
                                                                           endogenous prices
                                                                           exogenous prices
                                0.75                                                                                               0.75
                                            5      10       15        20             25        30                                               5        10       15       20       25      30
                                                              t                                                                                                     t


                                                (c) Affiliate sales to EU                                                                 (d) Share of affiliates in UK that export to EU
                                1.15                                                                                               1.15



                                 1.1                                                                                                1.1



                                1.05                                                                                               1.05
                                                                                                    Share (relative to baseline)
 Sales (relative to baseline)




                                  1                                                                                                  1



                                0.95                                                                                               0.95



                                 0.9                                                                                                0.9



                                0.85                                                                                               0.85



                                 0.8                                                                                                0.8



                                0.75                                                                                               0.75
                                            5      10       15        20             25        30                                               5        10       15       20       25      30
                                                              t                                                                                                     t


Note: The shock refers to increasing all three export barriers from/to the United Kingdom to/from country j at once
(“deep Brexit”). Country j refers to Ireland, Germany, and France.


It is straightforward to evaluate the welfare losses from the different Brexit scenarios using the
counterfactual price changes. Figure 7 shows that, as expected, the largest welfare loss is experienced
under “deep Brexit,” with a decrease in real income that goes from 0.7 percent in the short run to
more than 0.8 percent after fifteen years. In the context of “shallow Brexit,” an increase in variable
trade costs produces the highest loss, while an increase in sunk export costs produces the smallest
loss. These magnitudes are not small given that our model is restricted to the behavior of MNEs

                                                                                                35
from the United States. The increase in trade barriers would presumably affect also local exporters
and other non-US MNE exporters. Appendix Figure E.2 shows the change in prices after each
Brexit shock, for each of the countries involved. As expected, changes in prices–and corresponding
welfare losses–are highest for Ireland, whose economy is deeply connected to the UK economy.

When interpreting our results, two remarks are in order. On the one hand, the compound option
structure, together with Assumption 1, implies that increases in bilateral frictions only affect the
incentives to operate affiliates in continental Europe through changes in the cost of accessing the
export network available from a given host country. The model does not produce reallocations
across host countries, and this feature may have the effect of overstating the losses from increasing
MNE frictions. On the other hand, since we assume that wages are exogenous, the aggregate price
effects are stronger than in the case of endogenous wages, and this may understate the losses from
increasing MNE frictions.

                                                     Figure 7: Brexit: Price changes in the United Kingdom.
                                                   1.012

                                                                                                        high fe
                                                                                                        high Fe
                                                    1.01
                                                                                                        high tau
                                                                                                        all
                    Price (relative to baseline)




                                                   1.008




                                                   1.006




                                                   1.004




                                                   1.002




                                                      1
                                                              5        10       15        20       25              30
                                                                                     t
Note: “high X” refers to an increase in the barrier X from/to the United Kingdom to/from country j (“shallow
Brexit”). “All” refers to increasing all three export barriers from/to the United Kingdom to/from country j at once
(“deep Brexit”). Country j refers to Ireland, Germany, and France.


Our Brexit counterfactual illustrates the importance of considering the global structure of the
MNE in time and space for accurately assessing the consequences of shocks to the costs of MNE
expansion. In a static model, one would obviously not be able to distinguish between short and
long run outcomes, but more importantly between the effects of one-time versus per-period costs.
Additionally, in a dynamic model in which MNEs could only serve the host market of operation, one

                                                                              36
would erroneously conclude that Brexit, in the form of higher trade barriers, would not have any
impact on the behavior of MNEs. We explore in more detail the role played by export platforms in
the next counterfactual, where we evaluate the role of the compound option structure of the model.


5.2                                  The role of the compound option

We now evaluate quantitatively the role played by the compound option structure of our model. To
such end, we analyze the effects of an increase in the barriers to MNE activities in a model with and
without the compound option—or analogously, a model with and without MNE affiliate exports.
We increase, alternately, the per-period fixed cost and the one-time sunk cost of MNE activities in
the United Kingdom, fUh K and FUhK , in an amount such that, in either case, fUh K + ρFUhK increases
by 20 percent.

In our counterfactual model, MNE affiliates only sell in their host country. We calibrate this
alternative model by targeting the moments which are common to the full model with exports
(moments 1.1, 2.1, and 3.1 in Table 3).28

                                  Figure 8: The role of the compound option: US MNE affiliates in the United Kingdom.
                                              (a) Affiliate sales to UK                                                            (b) Share of affiliates in UK

                                  1.05                                                                                  1.05



                                    1                                                                                     1
                                                                                         Share (relative to baseline)
   Sales (relative to baseline)




                                  0.95                                                                                  0.95



                                   0.9   high fh, export                                                                 0.9
                                         high Fh, export
                                         high fh, no export
                                         high Fh, no export
                                  0.85                                                                                  0.85       high fh, export
                                                                                                                                   high Fh, export
                                                                                                                                   high fh, no export
                                   0.8                                                                                   0.8       high Fh, no export




                                  0.75                                                                                  0.75
                                         5           10       15     20   25   30                                              5              10        15     20   25   30
                                                              time                                                                                      time


Note: At t = 15, the per-period fixed cost (one-time sunk cost) of MNE activities in the UK, fUh K (FUhK ), increases
by an amount such that fUh K + ρFUhK increases by 20 percent. “Exports” refers to the full model where MNE affiliates
can export, while “no exports” refers to the calibrated model where MNE affiliates cannot export. Results are shown
as deviations from the calibrated models with and without export platforms.
  28
     The calibrated model without export platforms does not fit the relevant data moments as well as the baseline
model. While the share of US MNEs with affiliates in the United Kingdom is 53.7 (55.4) percent in the model without
exports (data), the share of MNEs opening affiliates the United Kingdom is 2.2 (6.9) percent in the model (data),
and the share of UK affiliates shutting down is 8.8 (4.5) percent in the model (data).




                                                                                    37
Figure 8 shows the dynamics of horizontal affiliate sales and the share of US affiliates in the United
Kingdom after the increase in fUh K and FUhK , alternately. Results are shown as deviations from
the respective calibrated models with and without the compound option. In the model with only
horizontal sales (dashed lines), MNE affiliates do not have the option of exporting part of their
output. Hence, the incentives to open an affiliate in a country coming from the possibility of using
that host country as an export platform are precluded. Without the possibility of exporting from
the United Kingdom to other markets, an increase in per-period costs to MNE activities in the
United Kingdom would decrease the presence of US affiliates in the country by 25 percent more
(in the short run) than in the case in which exports are possible. In the case of an increase in
sunk MNE costs, while differences between both models are not large in the short run, the models
have different predictions for the long run. While not having the possibility of exporting from the
United Kingdom steadily decreases the share of US MNEs there, the inclusion of the possibility of
exporting reverses the initial decrease in the share of US MNEs in the United Kingdom—after 15
periods from the shock, this share is even higher than in the baseline.

The results in Figure 8 point not only to the importance of including a rich dynamic spatial
structure when evaluating the response of MNE expansion to shocks, but also to the importance
of distinguishing between per-period and one-time costs, which cannot be done in static models.



6    Conclusions

This paper studies the expansion patterns of the multinational enterprise (MNE) in time and space.
Using a long panel of US MNEs, we document stylized facts which guide us in the development of
a dynamic model of the MNE that is tractable and, at the same time, rich enough to capture the
spatial complexity of MNE activities observed in the data.

The model features heterogeneity in firm productivity, persistent aggregate shocks, and a realistic
structure of MNE costs. Importantly, MNE affiliates can decouple their locations of production
and sales, and endogenously choose to enter or exit both the host and the export markets. We
introduce a compound option formulation for the dynamic problem of the MNE, which is novel to
the literature. Our counterfactual exercises reveal that the compound option structure is important
for understanding the reallocation of MNE activity in time and space after a shock. These exercises
also reveal that the nature of the frictions to MNE activities (variable, fixed, or sunk) is important
for understanding aggregate firm dynamics after a shock.

The application of the compound option structure to the complex decisions of the MNE appears a



                                                 38
natural starting point, since MNE location and export choices happen over time and they are likely
to be affected by uncertainty in demand and other market characteristics. The compound option
formulation, however, can also prove useful for problems in other contexts. For instance, problems
related to global sourcing decisions, which are likely to occur over time and under uncertainty, are
good candidates. It is sensible to imagine a set up in which making an investment to source an
input from a given country opens up the possibility of sourcing other, more upstream, inputs from
a different location. This is an avenue of research worth exploring in the future.




                                                 39
References
Alessandria, G. and H. Choi (2007). Do sunk costs of exporting matter for net exports dynamics?
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (1), 289–336.

Alessandria, G., H. Choi, and K. Ruhl (2018). Trade adjustment dynamics and the welfare gains
  from trade. NBER Working Paper #20663.

Alviarez, V. (2019). Multinational production and comparative advantage. Journal of International
  Economics 119, 1–54.

Antrás, P. and S. R. Yeaple (2014). Multinational firms and the structure of international trade.
  Handbook of International Economics 4, 55–130.

Arkolakis, C. (2016).    A unified theory of firm selection and growth.      Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 131 (1), 89–155.

Arkolakis, C., N. Ramondo, A. Rodrı́guez-Clare, and S. Yeaple (2018). Innovation and production
  in the global economy. American Economic Review 108 (8), 2128–2173.

Armington, P. S. (1969). A theory of demand for products distinguished by place of production.
  IMF Staff Papers 16 (1), 159–178.

Baldwin, R. and P. Krugman (1989).       Persistent trade effects of large exchange rate shocks.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 104 (4), 635–654.

Brainard, S. L. (1997). An empirical assessment of the proximity-concentration trade-off between
  multinational sales and trade. The American Economic Review 87 (4), 520–544.

Broda, C. and D. E. Weinstein (2006). Globalization and the gains from variety. Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 121 (2), 541–585.

Conconi, P., A. Sapir, and M. Zanardi (2016). The internationalization process of firms: from
  exports to FDI. Journal of International Economics 99, 16–30.

Cravino, J. and A. Levchenko (2017).       Multinational firms and international business cycle
  transmission. Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (2), 921–962.

Das, S., M. J. Roberts, and J. R. Tybout (2007). Market entry costs, producer heterogeneity, and
  export dynamics. Econometrica 75 (3), 837–873.

Davis, S. J., J. Haltiwanger, and S. Schuh (1996). Small business and job creation: Dissecting the
  myth and reassessing the facts. Small Business Economics 8 (4), 297–315.

                                               40
Decker, R., J. Haltiwanger, R. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2014). The role of entrepreneurship in US
  job creation and economic dynamism. Journal of Economic Perspectives 28 (3), 3–24.

Decker, R., J. Haltiwanger, R. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2016). Where has all the skewness gone?
  the decline in high-growth (young) firms in the US. European Economic Review 86, 4–23.

Dixit, A. K. and R. S. Pindyck (1994). Investment under Uncertainty. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
  University Press.

Eaton, J., M. Eslava, M. Kugler, and J. Tybout (2008). The margins of entry into export markets:
  Evidence from Colombia. In E. Helpman, D. Marin, and T. Verdier (eds.), The Organization of
  Firms in a Global Economy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Eaton, J., S. Kortum, and F. Kramarz (2011). An anatomy of international trade: Evidence from
  french firms. Econometrica 79 (5), 1453–1498.

Egger, P., M. Fahn, V. Merlo, and G. Wamser (2014). On the genesis of multinational foreign
  affiliate networks. European Economic Review 65, 136–163.

Fan, J. (2017). Talent, geography, and offshore R&D. Mimeo, Penn State University.

Fillat, J. L. and S. Garetto (2015). Risk, returns, and multinational production. Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 130 (4), 2027–2073.

Fillat, J. L., S. Garetto, and L. Oldenski (2015). Diversification, cost structure, and the risk
  premium of multinational corporations. Journal of International Economics 96 (1), 37–54.

Fitzgerald, D., S. Haller, and Y. Yedid-Levi (2017). How exporters grow. Mimeo, Federal Reserve
  Bank of Minneapolis.

Ghironi, F. and M. J. Melitz (2005). International trade and macroeconomic dynamics with
  heterogeneous firms. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (3), 865–915.

Gravelle, J. (2015). Tax havens: International tax avoidance and evasion. Congressional Research
  Service 7 (5700), 1–55.

Gumpert, A., A. Moxnes, N. Ramondo, and F. Tintelnot (2018). The life-cycle dynamics of
  exporters and multinational firms. NBER Working Paper (24013).

Head, K. and T. Mayer (2019). Brands in motion: How frictions shape multinational production.
  American Economic Review 109 (9), 3073–3124.



                                                41
Helpman, E., M. J. Melitz, and S. R. Yeaple (2004). Exports versus fdi with heterogeneous firms.
  American Economic Review 94 (1), 300–316.

Impullitti, G., A. A. Irarrazabal, and L. D. Opromolla (2013). A theory of entry and exit into
  exports markets. Journal of International Economics 90 (1), 75–90.

Irarrazabal, A., A. Moxnes, and L. D. Opromolla (2013). The margins of multinational production
  and the role of intra-firm trade. Journal of Political Economy 121 (1), 74–126.

Kueng, L., M.-J. Yang, and B. Hong (2017). Sources of firm life-cycle dynamics: Differentiating
  size vs. age effects. Mimeo, University of Washington.

Leahy, J. V. (1993). Investment in competitive equilibrium: the optimality of myopic behavior.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 108 (4), 1105–1133.

Luttmer, E. G. J. (2007). Selection, growth, and the size distribution of firms. Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 122 (3), 1103–1144.

Melitz, M. J. (2003). The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate industry
  productivity. Econometrica 71 (6), 1695–1725.

Morales, E., G. Sheu, and A. Zahler (2018). Extended gravity. Review of Economic Studies,
  Forthcoming.

Ramondo, N., V. Rappoport, and K. J. Ruhl (2013). The proximity-concentration tradeoff under
  uncertainty. Review of Economic Studies 80 (4), 1582–1621.

Ramondo, N. and A. Rodrı́guez-Clare (2013). Trade, multinational production, and the gains from
  openness. Journal of Political Economy 121 (2), 273–322.

Roberts, M. J. and J. R. Tybout (1997). The decision to export in Colombia: An empirical model
  of entry with sunk costs. The American Economic Review 87 (4), 545–564.

Ruhl, K. J. and J. Willis (2017). New exporter dynamics. International Economics Review 58 (3).

Simonovska, I. and M. Waugh (2014). The elasticity of trade: Estimates and evidence. Journal of
  International Economics 92 (1), 34–50.

Tintelnot, F. (2017).     Global production with export platforms.         Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 132 (1), 157–209.

Yeaple, S. R. (2013). The multinational firm. Annual Review of Economics 5, 193–217.


                                               42
Appendix

A     Data Description

Reporting thresholds. The BEA collects firm-level data on the operations of US multinational
enterprises (MNEs) in its annual surveys of US direct investment abroad. All US-located firms
that have at least one foreign affiliate and that meet a minimum size threshold are required by
law to respond to these surveys. These minimum size thresholds are in terms of affiliate sales
and differ over time. In general, reporting thresholds increased in recent years, reaching US$60
million by 2011. Additionally, benchmark survey years (i.e., years in which the survey is more
comprehensive), which occur every 5 years, have lower reporting thresholds. Table A.1 shows the
reporting thresholds for the years in our sample.

                          Table A.1: BEA minimum survey exemptions levels.


       survey year      Minimum exemption levels            survey year    Minimum exemption levels
                            (in US$ millions)                                  (in US$ millions)

       1987-88                        10                    2000-03                      30
       1989                           3                     2004                         25
       1990 -93                       15                    2005-07                      40
       1994                           3                     2008                         60
       1995-98                        20                    2009                         25
       1999                           7                     2010-11                      60

Note: Exemption levels are for majority-owned foreign affiliates. Benchmark survey years are in bold.


Tax havens. Our sample contains affiliates that do not operate in tax haven countries. Affiliates
in tax haven countries are likely to open for different reasons than production purposes, and to
be subject to different cost structures than affiliates in non-tax haven countries. We exclude
countries defined as tax havens by Gravelle (2015), except for Ireland, Switzerland, Hong Kong, and
Singapore, countries that meet some of the criteria for tax haven status but also have a substantial
amount of US MNE production. Table A.2 reports the list of countries that we exclude from our
sample.

Industry classification. Each foreign affiliate is assigned an industry classification based on its
primary activity according to the BEA International Surveys Industry (ISI) system, which closely


                                                        1
                       Table A.2: Tax haven countries excluded from our sample.


                   Anguilla                     Turks and Caicos    Monaco
                   Antigua and Barbuda          US Virgin Islands   San Marino
                   Aruba                        Belize              Maldives
                   Bahamas                      Costa Rica          Mauritius
                   Barbados                     Panama              Seychelles
                   British Virgin Islands       Bermuda             Bahrain
                   Cayman Islands               Macau               Cook Islands
                   Dominica                     Andorra             Marshall Islands
                   Grenada                      Channel Islands     Samoa
                   Montserrat                   Cyprus              Nauru
                   Netherlands Antilles         Gibraltar           Niue
                   St. Kitts and Nevis          Isle of Man         Tonga
                   St Lucia                     Liechtenstein       Vanuatu
                   St Vincent and Grenadines    Malta               Liberia

                  Note: From Gravelle (2015).




follows the 3-digit Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) system. The BEA uses 3-digit SIC-
based ISI codes for years prior to 1999. From 1999 onward, they use 4-digit NAICS-based ISI
codes. For consistency, we convert the NAICS-based codes to 3-digit SIC-based ISI codes for the
relevant years.

Unit of observation. According to the BEA definition, an affiliate is a business enterprise
operating in a given host country; it thus can operate several plants in different locations within
the host country. The BEA rules permit consolidated reporting for distinct plants located in the
same country that operate in the same narrowly defined industry or otherwise are integral parts
of the same business operation. We consolidate observations of enterprises belonging to the same
parent company and operating in the same country and 3-digit industry. We group these enterprises’
activities together and refer to them as a single affiliate.




                                                   2
B   Additional Facts




                       3
Figure B.1: Intensive and extensive margins of sales, by activity type. Pure-type affiliates at birth.
                    (a) Affiliate sales shares (intensive margin)                                                               (b) Share of affiliates (extensive margin)
       1




                                                                                                              1
       .8




                                                                                                                       .8
                                                                                                   share of affiliates
  sales share
       .6




                                                                                                          .6
       .4




                                                                                                              .4
       .2




                                                                                                              .2
                1       2     3      4            5         6    7         8        9     10                                1     2     3        4        5         6    7         8        9   10
                                                 Affiliate age                                                                                           Affiliate age

                                  horizontal sales                   export sales                                                           horizontal sales                 export sales



Notes: Sample of new majority-owned affiliates that survive for at least ten consecutive years, in manufacturing.
Horizontal and export sales refer to sales to the market where the affiliate is located, and to sales to markets outside
the local market. (B.1a): average sales, as a share of total affiliate sales, include affiliates with positive horizontal and
export sales, respectively, for the subset of affiliates with only horizontal and only export sales at birth, respectively).
(B.1b): number of affiliates, as a share of the total number of affiliates, include affiliates with positive horizontal and
export sales, respectively.


                                      Figure B.2: Sales and affiliate entry age, by activity type.
                                         .8
                                         .6
                                   sales share
                                        .4
                                         .2
                                         0




                                                 1           2         3          4        5         6        7                         8            9         10
                                                                               Affiliate age at entry into activity

                                                                               horizontal sales                                   export sales

Notes: Sample of new majority-owned affiliates that survive for at least ten consecutive years, in manufacturing.
Average horizontal (export) sales shares, by affiliate first age with positive horizontal (export) sales.




                                                                                               4
                                                 Table B.1: Affiliate-to-parent sales ratio by sales type, robustness. OLS.

                                                                       Dependent variable: affiliate-to-parent sales ratio
                                     First affiliate    Subsequent affiliate Non-GVC affiliate       GVC affiliate Greenfield affiliate                    M&A affiliate
                                           (1)                    (2)                        (3)                    (4)                   (5)                    (6)
     D(age=2)                           -0.0014                 0.0016                     -0.004                 0.0019
                                       (0.0055)                (0.0012)                  (0.0056)               (0.0019)
     D(age=3)                           0.0001                  0.0016*                   -0.0142              0.0039***                 0.0044               0.0050*
                                       (0.0066)                (0.0009)                  (0.0141)               (0.0014)               (0.0029)               (0.0028)
     D(age=4)                           0.0003                 0.0022**                   -0.0157              0.0045***               0.0079**                0.0038
                                       (0.0067)                (0.0009)                  (0.0147)               (0.0014)               (0.0031)               (0.0031)
     D(age=5)                           0.0033                0.0026***                    0.0111               0.0032**                0.0069*                0.0034
                                       (0.0027)                (0.0009)                  (0.0122)               (0.0013)               (0.0039)               (0.0031)
     D(age=6)                           0.0065                 0.0030**                   -0.0020              0.0057***                0.0066*               0.0053*
                                       (0.0040)                (0.0013)                  (0.0053)               (0.0019)               (0.0037)               (0.0029)




5
     D(age=7)                            0.0018                0.0029**                   -0.0009               0.0035**                0.0046                0.0047*
                                       (0.0032)                (0.0013)                  (0.0040)               (0.0014)               (0.0028)               (0.0024)
     D(age=8)                            0.0013                0.0029**                   -0.0064              0.0039***                0.0056*              0.0049**
                                       (0.0036)                (0.0013)                  (0.0077)               (0.0012)               (0.0029)               (0.0022)
     D(age=9)                            0.0034               0.0042***                   -0.0050              0.0051***                 0.0089              0.0060***
                                       (0.0027)                (0.0015)                  (0.0053)               (0.0014)               (0.0054)               (0.0021)
     D(age=10)                           0.0119                0.0039**                    0.0279              0.0043***                 0.0082              0.0056***
                                       (0.0094)                (0.0016)                  (0.0291)               (0.0014)               (0.0058)               (0.0019)
     log global employment              -0.0254                 -0.0089                   -0.0418                -0.0078                 0.0133                0.0089
                                       (0.0208)                (0.0073)                  (0.0347)               (0.0074)               (0.0158)               (0.0150)
     Observations                        17,360                 20,720                     10,320                 27,760                  2,214                 3,564
     R2 (overall)                         0.01                   0.027                      0.01                   0.02                   0.01                  0.02

    Note: Observations at the affiliate-year level, for new majority-owned affiliates that survive for at least ten consecutive years, in manufacturing. The dependent variable affiliate to parent sales
    ratio refers to affiliate sales relative to the domestic sales of the US parent. First affiliate refers to the first foreign affiliate opened by the parent, while subsequent affiliate refers to second or
    higher. GVC affiliate refers to affiliates with positive intra-firm trade, while non-GVC affiliate refers to affiliates with zero intra-firm trade. M&A affiliate refers to affiliates created through a
    merger or acquisition of an existing firm, while greenfield affiliate refers to a new firm. All specifications include affiliate and country-year fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered at the parent
    level, are in parenthesis. Levels of significance are denoted ∗∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, and ∗ p < 0.1.
                         Table B.2: Intensive and extensive margins of sales. OLS.


 Dependent variable                  Intensive margin of sale shares                              Extensive margin of sale shares
                               horizontal sales                  export sales                  horizontal sales                   export sales

                               (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)             (8)
 affiliate age                -0.002     -0.012***       -0.005**         0.005***         0.00003         -0.001         0.014***         0.029***
                             (0.002)      (0.001)         (0.002)          (0.001)         (0.001)        (0.0006)         (0.003)          (0.002)
 country-year fe               yes              yes            yes              yes             yes            yes              yes             yes
 industry fe                   yes              no             yes              no              yes            no               yes             no
 affiliate fe                  no               yes            no               yes             no             yes              no              yes
 Observations                36,135        36,135          25,958          25,958          38,080          38,080              38,080          38,080
 R-square                     0.079        0.013           0.092           0.000           0.042           0.0001              0.081           0.036

Note: Observations at the affiliate-year level, for new majority-owned affiliates that survive for at least ten consecutive years,
in manufacturing. In columns (1)-(4), the dependent variable is horizontal (export) sales, as a share of total affiliate’s sales, for
affiliates with positive horizontal (export) sales; in columns (5)-(8), the dependent variable is the share of affiliates with positive
horizontal (export) sales. Standard errors, clustered at the parent level, are in parenthesis. Levels of significance are denoted
∗∗∗
    p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, and ∗ p < 0.1.

       Table B.3: Intensive and extensive margins of sales, pure-type affiliates at birth. OLS.


 Dependent variable                Intensive margin of sale shares                             Extensive margin of sale shares
                            horizontal sales              export sales                   horizontal sales                 export sales

                            (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)             (8)
 affiliate age           -0.014***     -0.096***      -0.036***       -0.021***       -0.046***       -0.044***       -0.059***       -0.038***
                          (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.004)         (0.003)         (0.004)         (0.002)         (0.005)         (0.004)
 country-year fe            yes           yes            yes             yes             yes             yes             yes             yes
 industry fe                yes           no             yes             no              yes             no              yes             no
 affiliate fe               no            yes            no              yes             no              yes             no              yes
 Observations             19,910         19,910         3,590           3,590          19,910          19,910           3,590           3,590
 R-square                 0.147           0.020         0.288           0.133          0.245            0.099           0.268           0.125


Note: Observations at the affiliate-year level, for new majority-owned affiliates that survive for at least ten consecutive years,
in manufacturing. In columns (1)-(4), the dependent variable is horizontal (export) sales, as a share of total affiliate’s sales,
for affiliates born with only horizontal (export) sales; in columns (5)-(8), the dependent variable is the share of affiliates
born with only horizontal (export) sales. Standard errors, clustered at the parent level, are in parenthesis. Levels of
significance are denoted ∗∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, and ∗ p < 0.1.


C      Model Solution

C.1     Dynamic firm problem

The compound option structure of the model implies that it can be solved backwards. We start
                                               6
from the problem of a firm that already has an affiliate in country j and has to decide whether to
           Table B.4: Unconditional and conditional probability of affiliate entry.


                         Unconditional       Continent       Border      Language       Income        All

                               (1)               (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)         (6)
 Canada                       0.021            0.021            –          0.023        0.021          –
                                               (0.525)          –         (0.000)       (0.553)        –
 United Kingdom               0.025             0.027        0.030        0.026          0.026      0.030
                                               (0.000)       (0.143)      (0.292)       (0.008)     (0.143)
 Germany                      0.023             0.026         0.029        0.028         0.024       0.028
                                               (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.010)       (0.000)     (0.010)
 Ireland                      0.010             0.010         0.011        0.010         0.010       0.011
                                               (0.001)       (0.010)      (0.000)       (0.005)     (0.011)
 China                        0.027             0.037         0.050        0.048         0.051       0.057
                                               (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)     (0.000)
 France                       0.021             0.024         0.028       0.023          0.022       0.029
                                               (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.018)       (0.000)     (0.000)
 Brazil                       0.016             0.022         0.027       0.025          0.023      0.019
                                               (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.063)       (0.000)     (0.614)
 Singapore                    0.016             0.023         0.044        0.017        0.016        0.045
                                               (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.300)     (0.000)
 Mexico                       0.024             0.029        0.028         0.034         0.031      0.024
                                               (0.000)       (0.620)      (0.000)       (0.000)     (0.961)
 Japan                        0.016             0.021           –            –          0.016          –
                                               (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.224)     (0.000)
Note: Probabilities of affiliates’ entry into the top-ten most popular destinations of US MNEs. Conditional
probabilities refer to the probability of observing a MNE opening an affiliate in country i given that the
parent already has an affiliate in a “similar” country. Column 6 refers to similarity in all the dimensions in
columns 2-5. The sample is restricted to parents with at least two affiliates worldwide. P-values from tests
of equality of the conditional and unconditional probabilities are in parentheses. Conditional probabilities
in bold are not significantly different from the relevant unconditional probability.




                                                      7
   Figure B.3: Export competition by sibling affiliates and horizontal sales of existing affiliates.




                                           1
                       Horizontal sales of existing affiliates
                            −.5         0  −1        .5




                                                                 −5   −4     −3    −2      −1     0     1        2      3     4    5
                                                                                  Years from export−competition entry

                                                                                                   95% CI

Notes: t = 0 is the year in which another affiliate of the same parent starts exporting to the market of an existing
affiliate. Sample of affiliates located in Canada, the United Kingdom, and Japan. Exports are to unaffiliated parties
only. OLS coefficients from regressing the log of horizontal sales for affiliate a in market j = CAN, U K, JP N
belonging to parent p at time t ∈ {−5, ...5} on a set of dummies indicating time from export entry of a sibling located
in market k 6= j belonging to the same parent p. We include the log of the MNE global sales, the log of the US parent
sales, affiliate fixed effects and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the affiliate level.


export to any country k 6= j. Once this problem is solved, the value of an affiliate in j is determined.
Then we can solve the problem of a firm that has to decide whether to open an affiliate in each
country j. For each step of the solution, we follow the method outlined in Dixit and Pindyck (1994).
                                                                                     o (z, X, Q) and
To solve the affiliate export problem, we start by solving for the value functions Vjk
  e (z, X, Q) in their continuation region. Writing the Bellman equation in (14) that describes the
Vjk
value of the option to export to country k for a firm with an affiliate in country j in the continuation
region, taking the limit as ∆t → 0, and applying Ito’s Lemma, yields the no-arbitrage condition

                                                                                           o                σ̃k2 2 00 o
                                                                    o
                                                                 ρVjk (z, Yk ) = µ̃k Yk V 0 jk (z, Yk ) +       Y V jk (z, Yk ),       (C.1)
                                                                                                             2 k

where we acknowledge that the option value of exporting to k only depends on the realization
of the composite shock Yk . Guessing a solution for the value function and applying the method
of undetermined coefficients, the value of the option of exporting to country k for an affiliate in
country j has general solution given by

                                                                          o
                                                                        Vjk (z, Yk ) = Aojk (z)Ykαk + Bjk
                                                                                                       o
                                                                                                          (z)Ykβk ,                    (C.2)



                                                                                               8
                                Table B.5: MNE shock structure, OLS.


                   Dependent variable                            log of horizontal affiliate sales

                   Country-industry fixed effect                 yes     yes          yes       yes
                   US GDP                                        yes     yes          yes       yes
                   Host country GDP                              yes     yes          yes       yes
                   Parent fixed effect                           no      yes          yes       no
                   Parent sales                                  no      no           yes       yes
                   Affiliate fixed effect                        no      no           no        yes
                   Adjusted R-squared                            0.24    0.27         0.29      0.79

                 Notes: Sample of all affiliates born during the sample period. Number of
                 observations: 153,773.



                                                                          σ̃k2
                                                                                
where αk < 0 and βk > 1 are the roots of 12 σ̃k2 ξ 2 + µ̃k −               2         ξ − ρ = 0. As Yk → 0, the option of
exporting becomes worthless, so it must be that               Aojk (z)   = 0. Conversely, the option of exporting
                                                             o (z) > 0.
becomes more attractive as Yk increases, so it must be that Bjk

Similarly, writing the Bellman equation in (15) that describes the value of exporting to country k
from an affiliate in country j in the continuation region, taking the limit as ∆t → 0, and applying
Ito’s Lemma, yields the no-arbitrage condition

                                                                    e                  σ̃k2 2 00 e
                    e
                 ρVjk                            e
                      (z, Yk ) = πjk (z, Yk ) − fjk + µ̃k V 0 jk (z, Yk ) +                Y V jk (z, Yk ).       (C.3)
                                                                                        2 k

Guessing a solution for the value function and applying the method of undetermined coefficients,
the value of the option of exporting to country k for an affiliate in country j has general solution
given by
                                                                                          e
                                                                            πjk (z, Yk ) fjk
                        e
                      Vjk (z, Yk )   =   Aejk (z)Ykαk   +    e
                                                            Bjk (z)Ykβk   +             −    .                    (C.4)
                                                                             ρ − µ̃k      ρ
Notice that, as Yk → 0, there is value from the possibility of endogenously stopping to export, so
it must be that Aejk (z) > 0. Also, as Yk increases, the value of exports converges to the discounted
                                                                              e (z) = 0.
profit flow (i.e., there is no further expansion option), so it must be that Bjk

To completely solve the affiliate export problem, we need to solve for the policy functions, which
are thresholds for the realizations of the composite shock that induce the affiliate to start and
stop exporting. For each country pair (j, k) and for each firm with productivity z, the parameters
 o (z) > 0, Ae (z) > 0, and the export entry and exit thresholds, denoted by Y OE and Y EO ,
Bjk          jk                                                               jk       jk




                                                             9
respectively, can be recovered from the following system of value-matching conditions,

                   o       OE       e       OE      e                      o       EO       e       EO
                 Vjk (z, Yjk  ) = Vjk (z, Yjk  ) − Fjk               and Vjk (z, Yjk  ) = Vjk (z, Yjk  ),                             (C.5)

and smooth-pasting conditions,

                     o                         e                            o                        e
                  V 0 jk (z, Yjk
                               OE
                                  ) = V 0 jk (z, Yjk
                                                   OE
                                                      )          and V 0 jk (z, Yjk
                                                                                  EO
                                                                                     ) = V 0 jk (z, Yjk
                                                                                                      EO
                                                                                                         ),                           (C.6)

where V 0 (·) denotes the derivative of a value function with respect to the composite shock.

To determine the value of an affiliate in j, we still need to solve for the value of horizontal sales.
Writing the Bellman equation in (13) that describes the value of horizontal sales for an affiliate in
country j in the continuation region, taking the limit as ∆t → 0, and applying Ito’s Lemma, yields
the no-arbitrage condition

                                                                                h              σ̃k2 2 00 h
                         ρVjh (z, Yj ) = πjj (z, Yj ) − fjh + µ̃j Yj V 0 j (z, Yj ) +              Y V j (z, Yj ).                    (C.7)
                                                                                                2 j

Guessing a solution for the value function and applying the method of undetermined coefficients,
the value of horizontal sales for an affiliate in country j has general solution given by

                                                            α                 β       πjj (z, Yj ) fjh
                                Vjh (z, Yj )   =   Ahj (z)Yj j   +   Bjh (z)Yj j    +             −    .                              (C.8)
                                                                                       ρ − µ̃j      ρ

Notice that, as Yj → 0, there is value from the possibility of shutting down the affiliate, so it must
be that Ahj (z) > 0. As Yj increases, the value of horizontal sales converges to the discounted profit
flow, so it must be that Bjh (z) = 0.

The value of an affiliate in country j, Vja (z, Y) is completely characterized up to the option value
parameter Ahj (z):

                                           h                                              e
                                                                                         fjk
                         αj πjj (z, Yj ) fj
                                               X  πjk (z, Yk )                                                          X h                i
Vja (z, Y)   =    h
                 Aj (z)Yj +             − +                                          −         +   Aejk (z)Ykαk       +            o
                                                                                                                                  Bjk (z)Ykβk ,
                             ρ − µ̃j      ρ           ρ − µ̃k                            ρ
                                             k∈Aj (z)                                                                 k6∈Aj (z)
                                                                                                                                      (C.9)
where Aj (z) denotes the set of export markets in which an affiliate of a firm with productivity z
located in country j exports.

To solve the affiliate opening problem, we still need to solve for the option value of opening an
affiliate, and for the policy functions. Writing the Bellman equation in (12) that describes the
value of the option to open an affiliate in country j in the continuation region, taking the limit for



                                                                     10
∆t → 0, and applying Ito’s Lemma, yields the no-arbitrage condition

                                                        o               σ̃j2 2 00 o
                              ρVjo (z, Yj ) = µ̃j Yj V 0 j (z, Yj ) +       Y V j (z, Yj ).                         (C.10)
                                                                         2 j

Guessing a solution for the value function and applying the method of undetermined coefficients,
the value of the option of opening an affiliate in country j has general solution given by

                                                                 αj                β
                                     Vjo (z, Yj ) = Aoj (z)Yj         + Bjo (z)Yj j .                               (C.11)

As Yj → 0, the option of opening an affiliate becomes worthless, so it must be that Aoj (z) = 0.
Conversely, the option of opening an affiliate becomes more attractive as Yj increases, so it must
be that Bjo (z) > 0.

Let YjOH and YjHO denote the thresholds for the realization of the composite shock that induce a
firm to open or shut down an affiliate in country j, respectively. It is important to point out that,
when a firm decides to open an affiliate in a country, it considers not only the value of its horizontal
sales, but also the option value of potential exports to any destination country. For this reason,
the value-matching and smooth-pasting conditions that deliver the parameters Ahj (z), Bjo (z), and
the policy functions YjOH and YjHO entail tangency conditions linking the option value function
Vjo (z, Yj ) and the total value of the affiliate Vja (z, Y),

         Vjo (z, YjOH ) = Vja (z, YjOH , Y−j ) − Fjh             ,      Vjo (z, YjHO ) = Vja (z, YjHO , Y−j ),      (C.12)
                  o                  a                                     o                          a
               V 0 j (z, YjOH ) = V 0 j (z, YjOH , Y−j )         ,      V 0 j (z, YjHO , Y−j ) = V 0 j (z, Y−j
                                                                                                            HO
                                                                                                               ),   (C.13)

where , Y−j denotes the vector of composite shocks in countries other than j.


C.2     Price indexes

We now show how to solve for the vector of price indexes Pk , for k = 1, ...N , and for the laws
of motion governing the evolution of affiliate operations over time across countries. As we only
consider MNEs from the United States, we compute the price index as an aggregate of the prices
associated with transactions of US MNEs and of domestic firms:


                          Pk1−η = λkkk Pkkk
                                        1−η
                                            + λU S,kk PU1−η                       λU S,jk PU1−η
                                                                           X
                                                         S,kk +                              S,jk ,                 (C.14)
                                                                           j6=k




                                                            11
where Pkkk denotes the aggregate price of domestic varieties, PU S,kk denotes the aggregate price
of varieties produced via the horizontal operations of US affiliates in k, and PU S,jk denotes the
aggregate price of varieties produced by US affiliates in j and exported to k:

                                                    η wk 1−η
                                          Z               
                               1−η
                              Pkkk     =                        dGk (z),                             (C.15)
                                          Ωkkk    η−1 z
                                                      η wk 1−η
                                         Z                  
                             PU1−η
                                S,kk   =                         dGU S (z),                          (C.16)
                                          ΩU S,kk   η − 1 zZ
                                                      η τjk wj 1−η
                                         Z                    
                             PU1−η
                                S,jk   =                            dGU S (z)                        (C.17)
                                          ΩU S,jk   η − 1 zZ

and Ωkkk , ΩU S,kk , ΩU S,jk , denote the corresponding sets of varieties produced. Gk (z) denotes the
exogenous distribution of productivity of firms from country k.

The price indexes depend directly on the US productivity shock Z = eX and indirectly —via
the integration sets— on the demand shocks Qk . Moreover, as shown below, the integration sets
themselves depend on the entry and exit thresholds, which in turn depend on the price indexes. To
solve the aggregation problem, we appeal to the equivalence result shown in Leahy (1993): when
solving the entry and exit problem, each firm takes aggregate prices and the sets of firms operating
in each country as given, and does not take into account the effect of its own entry and exit decisions
on these variables.

We assume that the mass of firms in each country k, Mk , is constant. The endogenous mass of
affiliates of US firms located in j, MU S,j , is given by continuing plus new affiliates,

             MU0 S,j   = MU S,j · (1 − GU S (zUHO                                       OH
                                                S,j )) + (MU S − MU S,j ) · (1 − GU S (zU S,j )),    (C.18)

where zUOH     HO
         S,j (zU S,j ) is the productivity threshold that induces a US firm to open (shut down) an
affiliate in j. Notice that zUOH           HO
                               S,j (Yj ) (zU S,j (Yj )) is the inverse of the threshold in the realization of
the shock YjOH (z) (YjHO (z)), whose existence is guaranteed by the monotonicity property of the
thresholds shown in Proposition 1.

Similarly, the mass of affiliates of US firms located in j that export to k is given by continuing plus
new exporters to k,

         MU0 S,jk = MU S,jk · (1 − GU S (zUEO                                           OE
                                            S,jk )) + (MU S,j − MU S,jk ) · (1 − GU S (zU S,jk )),   (C.19)

where zUOE      EO
         S,jk (zU S,jk ) is the productivity threshold that induces an affiliate of a US firm in j to
start (stop) exporting to k.


                                                      12
C.3    Proofs

In this section, we provide proofs for Propositions 1 and 2. To this end, notice that, when Aej (z) =
Aejk (z) = 0, the systems of value-matching and smooth pasting conditions (C.5)-(C.6) and (C.12)-
(C.13) only identify the entry thresholds YjOH , Yjk
                                                   OE and can be solved in closed form, delivering

the expressions in (22) and (23). Additionally, the option value parameters Bjo (z), Bjk
                                                                                      o (z) can be

characterized in closed form,
                                                                   !1−βj 
                                            h + ρF h
                                          f                                  κjj (z) βj
                                                                                     
            o           −β     βj −1       j      j      E
          Bj (z) =     βj j (βj
                           − 1)       ·              − Vj (z, Y−j )       ·             ,                 (C.20)
                                               ρ                             ρ − µ̃j
                                          e        e 1−βk 
                                          fjk + ρFjk           κjk (z) βk
                                                                       
           o         −βk        βk −1
          Bjk (z) = βk (βk − 1)        ·                   ·               ,                              (C.21)
                                                ρ              ρ − µ̃k

                                                                    X  κjk (z)Yk    e 
                                                                                    fjk   X h           i
where κjk (z) ≡ H(τjk wj /z)1−η Pkη λjk and VjE (z, Y−j ) =                       −     +     o
                                                                                             Bjk (z)Ykβk .
                                                                         ρ − µ̃k     ρ
                                                                  k∈Aj (z)                    k6∈Aj (z)

Equations (C.20) and (C.21) reveal that the option value of opening an affiliate (exporting from an
affiliate) is decreasing in both the fixed and sunk costs of affiliate opening (exporting). In addition,
the option value of opening an affiliate is increasing in the value of the potential export network of
the affiliate, highlighting the effects of the compound option mechanism. Finally, both the option
values of opening and exporting from an affiliate are increasing in firm productivity z.

Proof of Proposition 1. Affiliate’s variable profits and the value of an affiliate’s export network
are increasing in firm productivity,

                                                    ∂κjk (z)
                                                               > 0,                                       (C.22)
                                                       ∂z
                                                 E
                                               ∂Vj (z, Y−j )
                                                               > 0.                                       (C.23)
                                                   ∂z

Given (C.22) and (C.23), the proof for the affiliate export entry threshold is immediate from taking
derivatives in (23),

              OE (z)
           ∂Yjk
                                         e      e 
                                           fjk + ρFjk
                                                                                  
                                 βk                                        1           ∂κjk (z)
                       =                 ·             · (ρ − µ̃k ) ·            2
                                                                                     ·          ≤ 0.
               ∂z              βk − 1           ρ                       −κjk (z)       | ∂z
                                                                                         {z   }
                           |                  {z                 } |      {z       }
                                                ≥0                           <0          >0



We compute the derivative in the scenario in which (fjh + ρFjh )/ρ − VjE (z, Y−j ) > 0, so that




                                                         13
YjOH (z) > 0 and the entry problem is well-defined. Taking derivative in (23) yields
                                                                                                   
                     
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                    
   OH                   E                       h     h
                                                                        !                          
∂Yj (z)                −∂Vj (z, Y−j ) ρ − µ̃j    fj + ρFj
                                                                                                 
              βj     
                                                             E               ρ − µ̃ j      ∂κjj (z) 
        =          ·                 ·         +          − Vj (z, Y−j ) ·               ·            ≤ 0.
   ∂z       βj − 1       ∂z          κjj (z)       ρ                      −κjj (z)2        ∂z    
          | {z }    |
                               {z           } |          {z            } |           {z          }
              >0                <0                                                    <0
                                                                                                    
                                                                                           ≥0


Corollary 1. More productive firms enter more export markets.

         ∂ [prob{y≥YjOH (z)},∀j ]       ∂ [prob{y≥YjOH (z)},∀j ]         ∂YjOH (z)
Proof.             ∂z               =           ∂YjOH (z)
                                                                     ·      ∂z       where the first term is negative and
                                                                                            ∂ [prob{y≥YjOH (z)},∀j ]
Proposition 1 implies that the second term is weakly negative, so                                     ∂z               ≥ 0.

Corollary 2. The mass of firms having affiliates in n host markets is decreasing in n.


Proof. Without loss of generality, let us assume that all firms only sell in the US and are considering
whether and where to open affiliates (t = 1). Let us order the productivity thresholds needed to
open an affiliate in a market in ascending order, and let Z̄nOH (Z̄n−1
                                                                   OH ) denote the maximum among

the first n (n − 1) productivity thresholds, so that Z̄nOH ≥ Z̄n−1
                                                               OH . Let M denote the mass of firms
                                                                         j
                                                  R∞               ∂Mj
that at t = 1 open affiliates in country j: Mj = Z OH dG(z), so ∂Z OH ≤ 0. Let M̄n (M̄n−1 ) denote
                                                                 j                          j
the mass of firms that at t = 1 open affiliates in the n (n − 1) countries with the lowest productivity
                                              ∂Mj
thresholds. Then Z̄nOH ≥ Z̄n−1
                           OH and
                                             ∂ZjOH
                                                     ≤ 0 implies that M̄n ≤ M̄n−1 , ∀n.

Proof of Proposition 2. Affiliate’s variable profits are increasing in the taste shifter,

                                                     ∂κjj (z)
                                                                     > 0.                                                     (C.24)
                                                      ∂λj


We compute the derivative in the scenario in which (fjh + ρFjh )/ρ − VjE (z, Y−j ) > 0, so that
YjOH (z) > 0 and the entry problem is well-defined. Given (C.24), the proof is immediate from
taking derivatives in (22),
                                                                   ! 
           ∂YjOH (z)                      fjh + ρFjh
                                                                                   
                         βj                             E                ρ − µ̃j       ∂κjj (z)
                     =        ·                      − Vj (z, Y−j ) ·            2
                                                                                     ·          ≤ 0.
             ∂λj       βj − 1                  ρ                        −κjj (z)         ∂λj
                       |                         {z                }  |    {z      }   |  {z  }
                                                  ≥0                                        <0            >0



Additionally, taking derivatives with respect to Fjh in (22) yields

                                        ∂YjOH (z)
                                                                                    
                                                         βj               ρ − µ̃j
                                                     =        ·                          > 0.
                                          ∂Fjh         βj − 1             κjj (z)

                                                            14
D   Calibration: Additional Results

             Table D.1: Calibrated parameters: shock processes and wages.


                                          µ̃j      σ̃j      γj      Qj (0)     wj
                 Brazil                 0.051    0.130     0.032    0.096     0.711
                 Canada                 0.030    0.136     0.661    0.073     0.831
                 China                  0.064    0.122     0.035    1.162     0.307
                 France                 0.025    0.127     0.370    0.125     0.981
                 United Kingdom         0.025    0.136     0.314    0.128     0.930
                 Germany                0.026    0.128     0.648    0.222     0.825
                 Ireland                0.048    0.144     0.560    0.003     1.188
                 Japan                  0.027    0.133     0.383    0.354     0.719
                 Mexico                 0.036    0.127     0.083    0.078     0.699
                 Singapore              0.080    0.137     0.213    0.003     0.950
                 United States          0.028    0.116     1.000    1.000     1.000
          Note: µ̃j and σ˜j refer to the drift and standard deviation of the composite shock
          Yj . γj refers to the correlation between the US aggregate productivity shock and
          country j’s aggregate demand shock. Qj (0) denotes the initial value of the demand
          shock process in country j. wj refers to country j’s wage relative to the US.




E   Quantitative Analysis: Additional Results




                                                 15
     Table D.2: Calibrated parameters: fixed costs, sunk costs, and taste shifters.

                              fjh         Fjh         e
                                                     fj,U S
                                                                   e
                                                                  Fj,U S
                                                                              e
                                                                             fjk         e
                                                                                        Fjk          λj
   Brazil                   0.0113     0.0023       0.0028        0.0000   0.0023     0.00002       0.051
   Canada                   0.0121     0.0002       0.0040        0.0008   0.0024     0.0000        0.161
   China                    0.0016     0.0000       0.0012        0.0000   0.0009      0.0000       0.013
   France                   0.0165     0.0007       0.0023        0.0000   0.0053     0.0022        0.097
   United Kingdom           0.0122     0.0000       0.0023        0.0003   0.0044     0.0003        0.104
   Germany                  0.0167     0.0004       0.0025        0.0001   0.0060     0.0024        0.088
   Ireland                  0.0027     0.0003       0.0015        0.0000   0.0014      0.0007       0.010
   Japan                    0.0327     0.0024       0.0042        0.0000   0.0051      0.0001       0.097
   Mexico                   0.0047     0.0001       0.0014        0.0001   0.0010     0.00001       0.020
   Singapore                0.0029     0.00002      0.0033        0.0002   0.0028     0.0009        0.013
                                                                                 e
Note: fjh (Fjh ) is the fixed (sunk) cost of opening an affiliate in country j. fj,U     e
                                                                                     S (Fj,U S ) is the fixed
                                                           e     e
(sunk) cost of exporting from j to the United States. fjk (Fjk ) is the fixed (sunk) cost of exporting
from j to a destination k other than the United States. λj is the taste shifter associated with goods
produced by US MNEs in country j.




             Table D.3: Calibrated parameters: bilateral iceberg trade costs.

           BRA      CAN      CHN     FRA         GBR      GER       IRL    JPN      MEX     SGP      USA
  BRA      1.000    2.579    1.000   2.470      3.467     2.419    2.360   2.551    1.825   2.684    5.415
  CAN      1.675    1.000    1.000   1.828       2.516    1.780    1.684   1.821    1.221   2.204    3.230
  CHN      7.933    9.552    1.000   7.663      11.446    7.301    7.338   6.313    6.747   6.125    16.55
  FRA      2.265    1.773    1.000   1.000      1.409     1.138    1.311   1.544    2.102   2.625    3.638
  GBR      2.569    1.620    1.000   1.244      1.000     1.328    1.286   1.375    2.359   2.976    3.369
  GER      2.829    2.199    1.059   1.450      1.573     1.000    1.691   1.815    2.608   3.205    4.090
  IRL      3.404    2.009    1.312   2.060      1.737     2.085    1.000   1.745    3.090   3.989    4.120
  JPN      2.174    2.565    1.000   2.166      2.984     2.070    2.062   1.000    1.776   1.733    5.236
  MEX      2.411    3.171    1.105   3.030      3.659     2.946    2.832   2.753    1.000   3.345    5.685
  SGP      1.863    2.170    1.000   1.985      2.093     1.903    1.919   1.545    1.758   1.000    4.145
  USA      2.359    2.481    1.264   2.002      2.057     2.079    2.231   2.162    2.056   2.578    1.000

 Note: Trade costs from country j (rows) to destination k (columns).




                                                     16
                   Table D.4: Static moments: intensive margin. Model versus data.

   Share of:           Affiliate sales to host market   Affiliate sales to the US   Affiliate sales to third countries
                       data             model           data           model        data               model
   Brazil              0.018           0.018            0.072         0.072         0.142             0.140
   Canada              0.048           0.048            0.261         0.261         0.113             0.111
   China               0.003           0.003            0.099         0.099         0.219             0.219
   France              0.038           0.039            0.075         0.075         0.364             0.364
   United Kingdom      0.052           0.053            0.111         0.111         0.371             0.366
   Germany             0.047           0.048            0.092         0.092         0.413             0.413
   Ireland             0.002           0.002            0.242         0.242         0.515             0.605
   Japan               0.034           0.034            0.047         0.047         0.130             0.130
   Mexico              0.011           0.011            0.173         0.173         0.128             0.128
   Singapore           0.003           0.003            0.222         0.222         0.488             0.488
   Average             0.026           0.026            0.139         0.139         0.288             0.296

Note: Affiliate sales to the host market are expressed as a share of the parent’s US sales. Affiliate sales to the US
and to third countries are expressed as a share of affiliate sales in the host market. Calculations are conditional on
affiliate entry, but unconditional on affiliate exports. Averages across years.




     Table D.5: Static moments: intensive margin. Selected destinations. Model versus data.

  Share of:           Affiliate sales to Canada    Affiliate sales to the United Kingdom     Affiliate sales to Japan
                      data           model         data                  model               data          model
  Brazil              0.008         0.015          0.008                0.005                0.004         0.005
  Canada               n.a.          n.a.          0.006                0.005                0.003         0.005
  China               0.008         0.004          0.002                0.003                0.037         0.046
  France              0.010         0.006          0.091                0.122                0.006         0.005
  United Kingdom      0.012         0.011           n.a.                 n.a.                0.009         0.010
  Germany             0.009         0.003          0.079                0.136                0.010         0.003
  Ireland             0.053         0.042          0.386                0.395                0.082         0.037
  Japan               0.006         0.006          0.001                0.005                 n.a.          n.a.
  Mexico              0.007         0.011          0.001                0.010                0.002         0.009
  Singapore           0.024         0.024          0.047                0.106                0.147         0.116
  Average             0.015         0.014          0.069                0.087                0.033         0.026

Note: Affiliate sales to destination j are expressed as share of sales in the affiliate host market. Calculations are
conditional on affiliate entry, but unconditional on affiliate exports. Averages across (benchmark) years.




                                                           17
                  Table D.6: Static moments: extensive margin. Model versus data.

 Share of:           MNEs with affiliates in j   Affiliates in j exporting to the US   Affiliates in j exporting to third countries
                     data       model            data               model              data                    model
 Brazil              0.198         0.189         0.515              0.515              0.674                  0.668
 Canada              0.544         0.539         0.725              0.722              0.478                  0.478
 China               0.184         0.181         0.382              0.382              0.548                  0.545
 France              0.312         0.310         0.539              0.542              0.747                  0.746
 United Kingdom      0.554         0.560         0.605              0.605              0.739                  0.748
 Germany             0.367         0.364         0.608              0.608              0.760                  0.760
 Ireland             0.122         0.122         0.575              0.574              0.760                  0.751
 Japan               0.155         0.150         0.468              0.468              0.578                  0.541
 Mexico              0.302         0.305         0.647              0.649              0.494                  0.498
 Singapore           0.129         0.113         0.597              0.596              0.724                  0.721
 Average             0.287         0.283         0.566              0.566              0.650                  0.646

Note: MNEs with affiliates in j are expressed as shares of the total number of US MNEs. Exporting affiliates are expressed as
shares of the total number of affiliates in j. Calculations are conditional on affiliate entry. Averages across years.




                         Table D.7: Dynamic moments: entry. Model versus data.

             Share of:           MNEs opening affiliates in j    Affiliates in j that start exporting to:
                                                                 the United States       third countries
                                 data            model           data       model       data     model
             Brazil              0.021           0.012           0.032      0.023      0.037     0.028
             Canada              0.060           0.031           0.024      0.018      0.036     0.028
             China               0.029           0.017           0.027      0.019      0.040     0.031
             France              0.038           0.022           0.033      0.032      0.025     0.020
             United Kingdom      0.069           0.048           0.029      0.021      0.027     0.027
             Germany             0.046           0.026           0.030      0.030      0.025     0.019
             Ireland             0.015           0.006           0.037      0.030      0.030     0.043
             Japan               0.020           0.014           0.032      0.023      0.030     0.028
             Mexico              0.036           0.024           0.029      0.025      0.033     0.022
             Singapore           0.019           0.005           0.026      0.019      0.028     0.022
             Average             0.035           0.021           0.030      0.024      0.031     0.027

Note: MNEs opening affiliates in j are expressed as shares of the total number of US MNEs in the period before entry.
Affiliates that start exporting are expressed as shares of the total number of affiliates in j in the period before entry.
Calculations are conditional on affiliate entry. Averages across years.




                                                         18
                                                        Table D.8: Dynamic moments: exit. Model versus data.

                             Share of:                                   MNEs shutting down affiliates in j                                            Affiliates in j that stop exporting to
                                                                                                                                                       the United States      third countries
                                                                           data                                     model                              data       model       data    model
                             Brazil                                      0.102                                      0.074                              0.027                   0.043                   0.032                       0.037
                             Canada                                      0.125                                      0.083                              0.021                   0.022                   0.028                       0.058
                             China                                       0.082                                      0.105                              0.020                   0.054                   0.031                       0.051
                             France                                      0.117                                      0.088                              0.029                   0.058                   0.021                       0.018
                             United Kingdom                              0.128                                      0.126                              0.026                   0.031                   0.023                       0.037
                             Germany                                     0.122                                      0.088                              0.029                   0.048                   0.024                       0.017
                             Ireland                                     0.119                                      0.046                              0.030                   0.055                   0.030                       0.053
                             Japan                                       0.111                                      0.084                              0.029                   0.048                   0.029                       0.046
                             Mexico                                      0.114                                      0.088                              0.021                   0.032                   0.026                       0.038
                             Singapore                                   0.115                                      0.044                              0.023                   0.029                   0.026                       0.014
                             Average                                     0.113                                      0.083                              0.025                   0.042                   0.027                       0.037

Note: MNEs shutting down affiliates in j are expressed as shares of the total number of affiliates in j in the period before
exit. Affiliates that stop exporting are expressed as shares of the total number of affiliates in j that export in the period
before entry. Calculations are conditional on affiliate entry. Averages across years.




                                                        Figure D.1: Exporter and early-exporter size advantage.
                                       (a) Exporters vs non-exporters                                                                                                        (b) Early vs late exporters
      .3




                                                                                                                                       .3
      .25




                                                                                                                                       .25
      .2




                                                                                                                                       .2
   Density




                                                                                                                                    Density
    .15




                                                                                                                                     .15
      .1




                                                                                                                                       .1
      .05




                                                                                                                                       .05
      0




                                                                                                                                       0




              0                               5                                                10                      15                     0                                   5                                           10               15
                                                         log of affiliate’s horizontal sales                                                                                               lof of affiliate’s horizontal sales

                                                  non−exporters at birth                       exporters at birth                                                                     exporter at age 1                   exporter at age >1

  kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.2205                                                                                      kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.2153




Notes: Sample of new majority-owned affiliates that survive for at least ten consecutive years, in manufacturing. Kernel
density of log horizontal sales for affiliates that: are born with exclusively horizontal sales (non-exporters) and those with
exports (exporters), in (D.1a); start exporting in their first year of life and those that start after their first year of life, in
(D.1b).




                                                                                                                            19
              Table D.9: Exporter and early-exporter size advantage. Model versus data.


                                       Exporter size advantage           Early exporter size advantage
                                       data         model                data           model
              Brazil                   6.31             7.43             3.49                 5.55
              Canada                    3.39            6.81             2.52                 5.56
              China                     7.84            7.57             3.08                 5.71
              France                    4.46            7.08             1.95                 5.81
              United Kingdom            1.93            6.91             1.52                 5.56
              Germany                   5.47            6.97             4.24                 5.56
              Ireland                   8.02            6.09             8.57                 5.22
              Japan                    12.49            7.06             2.31                 5.39
              Mexico                   4.21             7.00             2.08                 5.67
              Singapore                 8.59            6.78             7.04                 5.38
              Average                  6.27             6.97             3.68                 5.54

Note: Observations at the affiliate-year level, for new majority-owned affiliates that survive for at least ten consecutive
years, in manufacturing. Exporter size advantage refers to the average size of exporting MNE affiliates relative to the
average size of non-exporting MNE affiliates, an average across countries and years. Early-exporter size advantage
refers to the average size of exporting MNE affiliates that start exports in their first year of life relative to the average
size of exporting MNE affiliates that start exports after their first year of life. Size refers to horizontal affiliate sales;
early versus late exporters refers to affiliates that are born with exports versus the ones that start exporting later.
Calculations in the calibrated model trim the upper and lower 10th decile of the simulated firm-level data.


                          Table D.10: First-affiliate size and cost advantage, OLS.


           Dependent variable                         probability of being the first affiliate of a MNE
                                                          (1)           (2)             (3)              (4)
           Log of horizontal sales                    0.013***       0.012***       0.012***         0.011***
                                                       (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.003)           (0.003)
           Number of business procedures                            -0.006***                        -0.008***
                                                                      (0.001)                          (0.002)
           Cost of starting business                                               -0.006***          -0.0004*
           (% of GDP p.c.)                                                          (0.0002)          (0.0002)

           Obs                                         36,127         36,127         36,127           36,127
           R-squared                                    0.291         0.295           0.293            0.297

Note: Observations at the affiliate-year level, for new majority-owned affiliates that survive for at least ten consecutive
years, in manufacturing. The variables “Number of business procedures” and “Cost of starting a business” are from
the World Bank’s Doing Business dataset. All specifications include host country GDP (from Penn World Tables,
9.0), year fixed effects, and parent fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered at the parent level, are in parenthesis.
Levels of significance are denoted ∗∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, and ∗ p < 0.1.



                                                             20
                                               Figure D.2: Parent size in the United States and MNE entry
                                     (a) Number of markets penetrated                                                       (b) Number of firms penetrating multiple markets
                 25




                                                                                                                      25
                                                                                                                                      10
                 20




                                                                                                                      20
  Average sales in US, in logs




                                                                                                       Average sales in US, in logs
                            15




                                                                                                                                 15
                                                                                                                                                   9



                                                                                                                                                                8
                 10




                                                                                                                      10
                                                                                                                                                                       7


                                                                                                                                                                              6

                                                                                                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                                                                                                         4
                                                                                                                                                                                                   3
                 5




                                                                                                                      5
                                                                                                                                                                                                       2


                                                                                                                                                                                                              1

                                 1             2           3       4       5      6   7   8   9 10                                                                                          500        1000 1500
                                        Minimum number of markets penetrated, in logs                                                              # firms selling to k or more markets, in logs



Notes: Observations at the country-year level. Parent-level sales are averaged across MNEs selling to the same number of
countries. Slopes are: (D.2a) 0.736 (s.e. 0.121); (D.2b) -0.424 (s.e. 0.008).




                                            Table D.11: Calibrated MNE costs, as share of sales, by country.

                                                                               Sunk costs Fjh                                                 Fixed costs fjh
                                                                           (% of US parent sales)                                          (% of horizontal sales)
                                          Sales percentiles                  5th          50th        95th                                 5th         50th            95th

                                          Brazil                           0.189          0.068       0.007                                16.25       9.960           1.530
                                          Canada                           0.023          0.014       0.002                                22.74       14.36           2.402
                                          China                            2.e-04         1.e-04      0.000                                11.82       7.013           2.778
                                          France                           0.075          0.035       0.005                                22.46       15.81           2.547
                                          United Kingdom                   2.e-04         1.e-04      0.000                                23.93       14.90           2.386
                                          Germany                          0.037          0.021       0.003                                22.60       15.52           2.483
                                          Ireland                          0.009          0.006       0.001                                18.92       10.85           1.822
                                          Japan                            0.163          0.066       0.009                                22.63       16.30           2.388
                                          Mexico                           0.010          0.003       4.e-04                               17.86       12.68           2.269
                                          Singapore                        0.001          3.e-04      0.000                                7.740       4.432           2.849
                                          Average                          0.051          0.021       0.003                                18.69       12.18           2.345
                                         Note: US parent sales in the year of affiliate entry. Horizontal sales are averages
                                         across years.




                                                                                                 21
                               Table D.12: Calibrated MNE export costs, as share of sales, by country.

                                            Sunk export costs Fjk  e                                  Fixed export costs fjke

                                        (% of horizontal affiliate sales)                         (% of average affiliate exports)
                                 to United States              to other countries            to United States           to other countries
      Sales percentiles        5th      50th       95th       5th      50th      95th      5th      50th     95th       5th     50th      95th
      Brazil                  0.009    0.003      0.001      0.049     0.017    0.002     11.89    9.569     1.695     12.07    11.85    3.365
      Canada                  1.499    0.765      0.121      0.000     0.000    0.000     11.84    9.822     1.604     14.45    12.52    3.657
      China                   0.027    0.013      0.003      0.020     0.008    0.001     12.96    9.511     1.751     12.67    11.39    3.371




22
      France                  0.008    0.003      4e-04     4.7667     1.667    0.206     12.13    9.901     1.466     12.17    11.69    3.024
      United Kingdom          0.423    0.203      0.029      0.660     0.245    0.036     12.06    10.11     1.614     12.74    10.31    3.708
      Germany                 0.139    0.046      0.006      6.587     1.782    0.252     12.88    10.09     1.433     12.35    11.75    2.214
      Ireland                 0.000    0.000      0.000      11.28     3.706    0.634     13.92    10.88     1.894     11.68    10.01    3.527
      Japan                   0.002    4.e-04     1.e-04     0.102     0.019    0.003     13.71    11.09      1.99     13.74    13.14     4.12
      Mexico                  0.596    0.222      0.029      0.031     0.011    0.002     12.95    10.60     1.493     14.03    11.35    2.892
      Singapore               0.580    0.328      0.086      6.059     2.404    0.705     12.16    9.653     1.708     12.39    12.02    3.207
      Average                 0.328     0.158     0.028      2.956     0.986    0.184     12.65    10.13     1.666     12.83    11.60    3.309

     Note: Horizontal sales in the year the affiliate first exports to the destination. Export sales to a destination are averages across years.
                            Table D.13: MNE sales distribution, in thousands of dollars, by country. BEA data.

                                Parent sales                   Affiliate horizontal sales              Affiliate export sales, avg across years
                           at age 1 of the affiliate    avg across years at age of first export        total                 to US
      Brazil                       1,194,252                 17,013                  14,404            2,814                   576
      Canada                        475,426                  14,085                  12,871            4,916                  2,453
      China                         887,290                  10,329                   5,024            5,025                   738
      France                        709,151                  17,443                  14,468            7,586                   622




23
      Germany                       657,868                  19,761                  15,358            12,370                  937
      United Kingdom                442,758                  12,505                  10,202            6,203                   666
      Ireland                       974,741                  5,892                   4,731             16,317                 1,371
      Japan                         575,766                  15,017                  11,187            2,058                   374
      Mexico                        757,420                  8,042                   6,486             4,221                  1,285
      Singapore                     859,366                  5,097                   3,927             8,692                   705
      Average                       753,404                  12,518                   9,866            7,020                   973
     Note: Sales refer to the median firm and are in thousands of US dollars. For confidentiality purposes, magnitudes are averages across the nine
     observations around the median.
                                       Figure E.1: Brexit: US affiliates in the United Kingdom. Exogenous price indexes.
                                             (a) Affiliate sales to UK                                                                        (b) Share of affiliates in UK
                                1.15                                                                                         1.15



                                 1.1                                                                                          1.1



                                1.05                                                                                         1.05




                                                                                              Share (relative to baseline)
 Sales (relative to baseline)




                                  1                                                                                            1



                                0.95                                                                                         0.95



                                 0.9                                                                                          0.9



                                0.85                                                                                         0.85

                                                                              high tau
                                                                              high fe
                                 0.8                                                                                          0.8
                                                                              high Fe
                                                                              all
                                0.75                                                                                         0.75
                                         5      10       15        20    25              30                                               5        10       15       20       25      30
                                                           t                                                                                                  t


                                             (c) Affiliate sales to EU                                                              (d) Share of affiliates in UK that export to EU
                                1.15                                                                                         1.15



                                 1.1                                                                                          1.1



                                1.05                                                                                         1.05
                                                                                              Share (relative to baseline)
 Sales (relative to baseline)




                                  1                                                                                            1



                                0.95                                                                                         0.95



                                 0.9                                                                                          0.9



                                0.85                                                                                         0.85



                                 0.8                                                                                          0.8



                                0.75                                                                                         0.75
                                         5      10       15        20    25              30                                               5        10       15       20       25      30
                                                           t                                                                                                  t


Note: “high X” refers to an increase in the barrier X from/to United Kingdom to/from country j (“shallow Brexit”).
“All” refers to increasing all three export barriers from/to the United Kingdom to/from j at once (“deep Brexit”).
Country j refers to Ireland, Germany, and France.




                                                                                          24
                                                                 Figure E.2: Brexit: Price changes.
                                            (a) United Kingdom                                                                               (b) Ireland
                                1.012                                                                                       1.012

                                                                             high fe
                                                                             high Fe
                                 1.01
                                                                             high tau                                        1.01
                                                                             all
 Price (relative to baseline)




                                                                                             Price (relative to baseline)
                                1.008                                                                                       1.008




                                1.006                                                                                       1.006




                                1.004                                                                                       1.004




                                1.002                                                                                       1.002




                                   1                                                                                           1
                                        5     10        15       20     25              30                                          5   10         15       20   25   30
                                                             t                                                                                          t


                                                   (c) France                                                                                (d) Germany
                                1.012                                                                                       1.012

                                                                             high fe
                                                                             high Fe
                                 1.01
                                                                             high tau                                        1.01
                                                                             all
 Price (relative to baseline)




                                                                                             Price (relative to baseline)




                                1.008                                                                                       1.008




                                1.006                                                                                       1.006




                                1.004                                                                                       1.004




                                1.002                                                                                       1.002




                                   1                                                                                           1
                                        5     10        15       20     25              30                                          5   10         15       20   25   30
                                                             t                                                                                          t


Note: “high X” refers to an increase in the barrier X from/to United Kingdom to/from country j (“shallow Brexit”).
“All” refers to increasing all three export barriers from/to the United Kingdom to/from j at once (“deep Brexit”).
Country j refers to Ireland, Germany, and France.




                                                                                         25
                                                               Figure E.3: Brexit: US affiliates in Ireland.
                                           (a) Affiliate sales to Ireland                                                                    (b) Share of affiliates in Ireland
                                1.15                                                                                            1.15



                                 1.1                                                                                             1.1



                                1.05                                                                                            1.05




                                                                                                 Share (relative to baseline)
 Sales (relative to baseline)




                                  1                                                                                               1



                                0.95                                                                                            0.95



                                 0.9                                                                                             0.9



                                0.85                                                                                            0.85

                                                                                 high tau
                                                                                 high fe
                                 0.8                                                                                             0.8
                                                                                 high Fe
                                                                                 all
                                0.75                                                                                            0.75
                                       5        10        15        20      25              30                                           5          10        15       20         25    30
                                                           t                                                                                                   t


                                             (c) Affiliate sales to UK                                                           (d) Share of affiliates in Ireland that export to UK
                                1.15                                                                                            1.15



                                 1.1                                                                                             1.1



                                1.05                                                                                            1.05
                                                                                                 Share (relative to baseline)
 Sales (relative to baseline)




                                  1                                                                                               1



                                0.95                                                                                            0.95



                                 0.9                                                                                             0.9



                                0.85                                                                                            0.85



                                 0.8                                                                                             0.8



                                0.75                                                                                            0.75
                                       5        10        15        20      25              30                                           5          10        15       20         25    30
                                                           t                                                                                                   t


Note: “high X” refers to an increase in the barrier X from/to United Kingdom to/from country j (“shallow Brexit”).
“All” refers to increasing all three export barriers from/to the United Kingdom to/from j at once (“deep Brexit”).
Country j refers to Ireland, Germany, and France.




                                                                                             26
                                                               Figure E.4: Brexit: US affiliates in Germany.
                                           (a) Affiliate sales to Germany                                                                (b) Share of affiliates in Germany
                                1.15                                                                                            1.15



                                 1.1                                                                                             1.1



                                1.05                                                                                            1.05




                                                                                                 Share (relative to baseline)
 Sales (relative to baseline)




                                  1                                                                                               1



                                0.95                                                                                            0.95



                                 0.9                                                                                             0.9



                                0.85                                                                                            0.85

                                                                                 high tau
                                                                                 high fe
                                 0.8                                                                                             0.8
                                                                                 high Fe
                                                                                 all
                                0.75                                                                                            0.75
                                       5         10       15        20      25              30                                           5       10       15       20         25       30
                                                           t                                                                                               t


                                             (c) Affiliate sales to UK                                                          (d) Share of affiliates in Germany that export to UK
                                1.15                                                                                            1.15



                                 1.1                                                                                             1.1



                                1.05                                                                                            1.05
                                                                                                 Share (relative to baseline)
 Sales (relative to baseline)




                                  1                                                                                               1



                                0.95                                                                                            0.95



                                 0.9                                                                                             0.9



                                0.85                                                                                            0.85



                                 0.8                                                                                             0.8



                                0.75                                                                                            0.75
                                       5         10       15        20      25              30                                           5       10       15       20         25       30
                                                           t                                                                                               t


Note: “high X” refers to an increase in the barrier X from/to United Kingdom to/from country j (“shallow Brexit”).
“All” refers to increasing all three export barriers from/to the United Kingdom to/from j at once (“deep Brexit”).
Country j refers to Ireland, Germany, and France.




                                                                                             27
                      Figure E.5: Brexit: Entry and exit from the United Kingdom into EU.
                                (a) Baseline                                               (b) High iceberg trade costs, τ
       0.08                                                                     0.08
                                                            entry                                                                 entry
                                                            exit                                                                  exit
       0.07                                                                     0.07



       0.06                                                                     0.06



       0.05                                                                     0.05
Rate




                                                                         Rate
       0.04                                                                     0.04



       0.03                                                                     0.03



       0.02                                                                     0.02



       0.01                                                                     0.01



         0                                                                        0
                5          10         15       20      25           30                 5          10      15       20        25           30
                                           t                                                                   t


                    (c) High fixed export costs, f e                                       (d) High sunk export costs, F e
       0.08                                                                     0.08
                                                            entry                                                                 entry
                                                            exit                                                                  exit
       0.07                                                                     0.07



       0.06                                                                     0.06



       0.05                                                                     0.05
Rate




                                                                         Rate




       0.04                                                                     0.04



       0.03                                                                     0.03



       0.02                                                                     0.02



       0.01                                                                     0.01



         0                                                                        0
                5          10         15       20      25           30                 5          10      15       20        25           30
                                           t                                                                   t


          Note: Price indexes are endogenous.




                                                                     28
